Part I: Administrative Legislation
:1

Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 14-05]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1601(d) of the Second Class Township Code [53 P.S. § 66601(d)],
the codification of a complete body of legislation for the Township of Middletown,
County of Bucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated
into chapters, articles and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1
through 500, together with an Appendix, is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Middletown, which shall be known and
is hereby designated as the "Code of the Township of Middletown," hereinafter referred
to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of
ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the enactment of this ordinance,
are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and resolutions and not as new
enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in full
force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Middletown, and it is the intention of said Board of
Supervisors that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reenacted and
reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are
omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3
below, and only new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed
to be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent legislation repealed.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this
A. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances. Except as provided in § 1-4, Legislation saved
from repeal; matters not affected by repeal, below, all ordinances or parts of
ordinances inconsistent with the provisions contained in the Code adopted by this
ordinance are hereby repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-15; provided,
however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any
valid legislation of the Township of Middletown which is not in conflict with the
provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and effect.
B. Repeal of specific ordinances. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Middletown has determined that the following ordinances are no longer in effect
and hereby specifically repeals the following legislation:
(1) Former Chapter 386, Sewers and Sewage Disposal, of the 2009 Code.
(2) Former Chapter 485, Water, of the 2009 Code.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and obligations, which are
hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided, however, that the repeal of ordinances
pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall
not be construed so as to revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no
longer of any effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to May, 19, 2014.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative
provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any action
or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or liability or any cause of
action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this ordinance in
violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any penalty, punishment
or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any
judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance, brought pursuant to
any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred
by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any
bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence of the Township's
indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special taxes,
assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property or
acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or exercise of eminent
domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or reconstruction or
opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening, altering,
widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road,
highway, sidewalk, park or other public place or property or designating various
streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose districts and
designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system of sewers or water
supply lines; or providing for the construction, extension, dedication, acceptance or
abandonment of any part of a system of sewers or water supply lines.
§ 1-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent to the date given
in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance are hereby deemed to be
a part of the Code and shall, upon being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of
all such ordinances shall be temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are
included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort,
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers and
employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or employee.
P. Any ordinance concerrling changes and amendments to the Zoning Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund for
municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee amount for any
license, permit or service obtained from the Township.
S. Any currently effective ordinance providing for intergovernmental cooperation or
establishing an intermunicipal agreement.
A. Nonsubstantive changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances and resolutions
of the Township for adoption and revision as part of the Code, certain
nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances and resolutions. It is the intention of the Board of Supervisors that all
such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so
changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and revisions
described above, changes and revisions of a substantive nature, as set forth in
Schedule A1 attached hereto and made a part hereof, are hereby made to various
ordinances and resolutions included in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring
provisions into conformity with the desired policies of the Board of Supervisors,
and it is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had been previously formally
amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in
effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in § 1-15.
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were added, amended, adopted or
repealed by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I. During routine supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced
with the following history: "Amended (added, repealed) 9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 14-05." Schedule A, which contains a
complete description of all changes, is on file in the Township offices.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the Code impose greater
restrictions or requirements than those of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation, the provisions of the Code shall control. Where the provisions of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the
provisions of such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the Ordinance
Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy or copies shall be certified to by
the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such certified copy or copies shall
remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary, available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when passed
and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Supervisors to
be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that reference
to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they
shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the post-bound book
containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and directed by
him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in the office of the Township Secretary for the use of the
public. All changes in said Code and all legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors
subsequent to the effective date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall
adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as supplements to said Code
books, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the manner
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other divisions in the
Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted in the Code and may be
inserted in supplements to the Code for the convenience of persons using the Code
and are not part of the legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information or referring
to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in the Code and may be
inserted in supplements to the Code for the convenience of persons using the Code
and are not part of the legislation.
§ 1-7 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 1-12
1:6
required a notice of the introduction of the Code in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Township. The enactment and application of this ordinance, coupled with the
publication of the notice of introduction, the availability of a copy or copies of the Code
for inspection by the public and the filing of an attested copy of this ordinance with the
county, as required by law, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions or deletions,
or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion thereof in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township to be misrepresented thereby.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this section of this ordinance shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, pay a fine of not
more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
Township in the enforcement of this chapter. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek
equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are severable, and
if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof shall be
adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional,
such judgment or decision shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof
but shall be confined in its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection,
section, article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional. It
is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this ordinance and
the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause,
sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof had not been included
therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and
effect on and after September 22, 2014,
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7

Chapter 7
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
§ 1-15 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 1-15
7:1

ARTICLE I
Municipal Authority
[Adopted 3-14-1952 by Ord. No. 14 (Ch. 1, Part 11, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 7-100. Intention of Township.
It is the desire and intention of the municipal authorities of the Township of Middletown,
Bucks County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, being the municipal authorities of said
Township, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the authority of the same as follows:
It is the desire and intention of the municipal authorities of the Township of Middletown,
Bucks County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to organize an Authority under the
Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and
supplemented.2
§ 7-101. Name of authority.
The name of the proposed authority is "Middletown Township, Bucks County,
Municipal Authority."
§ 7-102. Articles of Incorporation.
The proposed Articles of Incorporation of the proposed Authority are as follows:
Middletown Township, Bucks County, Municipal Authority
Articles of Incorporation
To the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
In compliance with the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and
supplemented, the Township of Middletown, Bucks County, a municipality of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, pursuant to an ordinance duly enacted by the
municipal authorities of said Township signifying such Township's desire and intention
to form an Authority, hereby certifies:
A. The name of the Authority shall be "Middletown Township, Bucks County,
Municipal Authority."
B. The Authority is formed under the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, approved
May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented.
C. No other Authority has been organized under the Municipality Authorities Act of
1945, as amended and supplemented, or under the Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 463,
as amended, and is in existence in or for the said Township of Middletown. The
School District of the Township of Middletown has or is about to form an Authority
under the said Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 jointly with five other school
districts to be known as "Lower Bucks County School Authority."
D. The name of the incorporating municipality is the Township of Middletown, and
the names and addresses of its municipal authorities are as follows: [Names and
addresses may be obtained from Ord. No. 14].
2. Editor's Note: Repealed 6-19-2001, P.L. 287, No. 22; see now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 7-100 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 7-102
7:3
E. The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the Board of the
Authority are: [Names and addresses may be obtained from Ord. No. 14].
§ 7-103. Members appointed.
The persons designated as the first members of the Board of the proposed Authority in
the foregoing Articles of Incorporation are hereby specifically appointed as such for the
respective terms of office specified in said Articles of Incorporation.
§ 7-104. Execution of articles.
The Articles of Incorporation of the proposed Authority in substantially the form set
forth in § 7-102 of this article shall be executed on behalf of the Township of
Middletown by the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors of said Township and under its
municipal seal, attested by the Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of said Township,
and such officers are hereby authorized and empowered and directed to do all things
necessary and appropriate to effect and establish said proposed Authority in conformity
with the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and
supplemented.
§ 7-105. Projects to be undertaken.
The first projects to be undertaken by the Authority shall be the acquiring, holding,
constructing, improving, maintaining and operating, owning, leasing, either in the
capacity of lessor or lessee, of sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof, sewage treatment
works, including works for treatment and disposing of industrial wastes, incinerator
plants, waterworks, water supply works, and water distribution systems in the Township
of Middletown or parts thereof and for such other territory as it may be authorized to
serve.
§ 7-106. Purpose.
The adoption of this article is deemed necessary for the benefit and preservation of the
public health, peace, comfort and general welfare and will increase the general welfare
of the people of the Township of Middletown and of the territories adjacent thereto.
§ 7-102 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 7-106
7:4
Chapter 15
BOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building codes — See Ch. 190.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 337.
Property maintenance code — See Ch. 363.
§ 7-106 BOARDS § 7-106
15:1

ARTICLE I
Technical Code Review Board
[Adopted 8-7-1975 by Ord. No. 75-22 (Ch. 1, Part 4A, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 15-100. Creation.
There is hereby created a Technical Code Review Board, whose members shall be five
in number, over the age of 18 years and residents of Middletown Township, Bucks
County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, each of whom shall be appointed by the Board
of Supervisors to a five-year term; provided, however, said term shall expire at such
staggered intervals that no more than one term shall expire in any one calendar year. Of
the initial five appointments made subsequent and pursuant to this article, one member
shall be appointed for one year, one member for two years, one member for three years,
one member for four years, and one member for five years, and thereafter one member
shall in like manner be appointed each year to serve for five years. The members of
said Board shall include at least one civil engineer (P.E.P.), one individual versed in fire
protection, and one individual engaged in the construction or building business.
§ 15-101. Duties. [Amended 3-20-1984 by Ord. No. 84-6; 12-1-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
The duties of the said Technical Code Review Board shall be as follows:
A. Any person aggrieved by the issuance, transfer, renewal, refusal, suspension,
revocation or cancellation of any permit, or by any notice, order or action, by the
Housing Inspector, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Mechanical Inspector
or Fire Inspector may appeal to the Technical Code Review Board of Appeals
within 30 days after being given notice of the decision, action or order of the
Inspector. The appeal shall be taken by filing with the Township Manager in
triplicate a letter addressed to the Board describing the action appealed from and
stating the reason why the applicant considers this action improper.
Within 30 days after the filing of the appeal, the Technical Code Review Board
shall hold a hearing on the appeal. Notice shall be mailed by regular mail to all
persons known to have an interest in the matter and to the Inspector whose order,
notice, decision or action is being appealed.
B. To serve as an advisory arm of the Board of Supervisors; to review, counsel and
recommend to the Board of Supervisors certain changes, additions, modifications
or repeals in the technical codes of Middletown Township.
C. The Board may authorize in writing a modification from the terms of the codes
established in Chapter 190, Construction Standards, and Chapter 363, Property
Maintenance, when, because of special conditions, undue hardship would result
from the literal enforcement and the work authorized by the modification complies
substantially with the purposes of such code. Recommendation by the inspection
officials as to the modification and its terms shall be considered by the Board.
D. The Board shall meet upon notice of the Chairman within 30 days of the filing of
an appeal or at stated periodic meetings if warranted by the volume of work.
§ 15-100 BOARDS § 15-101
15:3
§ 15-102. Membership.
The members of the Technical Code Review Board shall elect annually for each calendar
year one of their members as Chairman of the within Board, promulgate bylaws and
procedures to guide its functions, and adopt rules and regulations governing appeals by
persons aggrieved as aforesaid.
E. All hearings shall be public, and the appellant and the appellant's representative, the
official of the jurisdiction or any other person whose interest may be affected by the
matter on appeal shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
F. Action of the Board shall occur when the Board affirms, modifies or reverses the
decision of the Township official by a concurring vote of three members.
G. Every action of the Board shall be by resolution, and certified copies shall be
furnished to the appellant and to the Township Official.
H. Failure to secure three concurring votes shall be deemed a confirmation of the
decision of the Township official.
I. The Township official shall take immediate action for the enforcement of the
decision in accordance with the decision of the Board.
§ 15-101 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 15-102
15:4
ARTICLE II
Park and Recreation Board
[Adopted 10-1-1985 by Ord. No. 85-20 (Ch. 1, Part 4B, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 15-200. Creation of Board.
The Middletown Township Park and Recreation Board is hereby established and created
to advise and make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors with respect to the
planning and administration of public recreation areas, facilities and programs within the
Township of Middletown.
§ 15-201. Membership and term of office.
The Park and Recreation Board shall be composed of seven members, and each member
shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors. Each member of said Board shall serve
for a term of five years, with the exception of the first members appointed to the Board,
who shall be appointed to serve terms so that the terms of not more than two members
shall expire annually thereafter. Members of the said Board shall serve without pay.
Each member appointed to said Board shall serve a full term unless that member resigns
or is removed by the Board of Supervisors due to dereliction or neglect of duty. Any
vacancy on the said Board caused by reasons other than by expiration of a term shall
be filled in the same manner as the original appointments and shall be for the remaining
unexpired term of the member.
§ 15-202. Election of officers.
The members of the Park and Recreation Board shall elect their own Chairman and
Secretary and select all other necessary officers to serve for a period of one year. The
Board shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its business
not inconsistent with the provisions of state laws. The Board shall hold regular meetings
at such time and place as it may designate.
§ 15-203. Annual report.
It shall be the duty of the Park and Recreation Board to submit an annual report to the
Board of Supervisors, including an analysis of community recreation areas, facilities,
programs and leadership, with particular reference to the extent and adequacy of the
programs and their effectiveness in view of the amount of public expenditure involved
and the public needs to be met. The Board shall also submit an annual budget to the
Township Manager, subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 15-204. Duties of the Board.
The Park and Recreation Board shall make recommendations with respect to policy and
the expenditure of Township funds on all matters related to the acquisition, maintenance,
development and operation of public parks, playfields and all other outdoor and indoor
recreation areas and facilities owned, leased or controlled by the Township of
Middletown. The Board shall also make recommendations with respect to all public
recreation programs and activities of the Township.
§ 15-200 BOARDS § 15-205
15:5
§ 15-205. Donations and gifts.
The Park and Recreation Board shall advise the Board of Supervisors and Planning
Commission on the acceptance of any gift, grant, bequest or donation of services,
equipment, real estate or money from any individual or group, to be used as specified by
the donor or by the terms of acceptance.
§ 15-206. Board restriction.
The Park and Recreation Board shall have no authority to enter into any contract or incur
any obligation binding upon the Township of Middletown.
§ 15-205 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 15-206
15:6
ARTICLE III
Community Recreation Board
[Adopted 9-27-1988 by Ord. No. 88-22 (Ch. 1, Part 4C, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 15-300. Establishment.
There is hereby established the Middletown Township Community Recreation Board,
whose membership shall consist of representatives from the Langhorne Athletic
Association, the Middletown Athletic Association, the Hulmeville Soccer Club, and
citizens of the community. All representatives shall be residents of the Township of
Middletown.
§ 15-301. Purpose; authority.
The purpose of the Community Recreation Board shall be to develop and recommend
procedures, methods and techniques to coordinate the delivery of youth recreation
programs not directly sponsored by the Township and to serve in an advisory capacity
to the Board of Supervisors for the purpose of making recommendations with respect
to community recreation program budgets, expenditures and policy-making decisions to
improve, wherever possible, youth recreation programs for the benefit of our citizens.
The Community Recreation Board shall have the authority to adopt rules, regulations
and procedures governing the planning and administration of community recreation
programs not directly sponsored by the Township. The rules, regulations and procedures
adopted by the Community Recreation Board shall not become effective until submitted
to and approved by the Board of Supervisors in the form of a resolution. Responsibility
for the planning and administration of public recreation areas, facilities and programs
shall remain with the Middletown Township Park and Recreation Board. The
Community Recreation Board shall not have authority to enter into any contract or to
incur any obligation binding upon the Township of Middletown.
§ 15-302. Meetings.
The Community Recreation Board shall conduct meetings on a regular basis at the
Middletown Township Building at a time to be determined by said Community
Recreation Board or its Chairman and to render to the Board of Supervisors current
reports and/or policy-making recommendations through its secretary.
§ 15-303. Membership.
The Community Recreation Board shall be composed of seven members, all of whom
shall be residents of the Township of Middletown, with four appointed directly by
the Board of Supervisors, one nominated by the Langhorne Athletic Association, one
nominated by the Middletown Athletic Association, and one nominated by the
Hulmeville Soccer Club. The individuals so nominated by the various organizations
shall be designated by each organization's board of directors; however, appointment
to the Community Recreation Board shall be the sole prerogative of the Board of
Supervisors, which shall have the right to reject any nominee so designated by the
organizations. The four members of said Board appointed directly by the Board of
Supervisors shall serve for terms of three years, with the exception of the first members
appointed to the Board, who shall be appointed to serve terms so that the terms of
§ 15-300 BOARDS § 15-303
15:7
not more than one member shall expire annually thereafter. The members of the Board
nominated by the Langhorne Athletic Association, the Middletown Athletic Association,
and the Hulmeville Soccer Club and appointed by the Board of Supervisors shall serve
terms of one year so that a new representative may be nominated by each community
recreation organization each year. The President of each association shall notify in
writing the Board of Supervisors of the name, address and telephone number of the
individual so nominated by January 1 of each year. Members of the Board shall serve
without pay. Each member appointed to said Board shall serve a full term unless that
member resigns or is removed by the Board of Supervisors due to dereliction or neglect
of duty. Any vacancy on said Board caused by reasons other than by expiration of the
term shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments and shall be for the
remaining unexpired term of the member. Each member shall serve until December 31
of the year in which the member's term is scheduled to expire or until a new appointment
has been made in accordance with the requirements of this section.
§ 15-304. Officers.
The members of the Community Recreation Board shall elect their own Chairman and
Secretary and select all other necessary officers to serve for a period of one year. The
Board shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its business
not inconsistent with the provisions of state and local laws.
§ 15-305. Annual report.
It shall be the duty of the Community Recreation Board to submit an annual report to the
Board of Supervisors not later than September 1 of each year. The report shall include
an analysis of community recreation programs with particular reference to the extent
and adequacy of the programs and their effectiveness in view of the amount of public
expenditure involved and the public needs being met.
§ 15-306. Annual budget.
The Board shall also submit an annual budget not later than September 1 of each
year to the Township Manager, who shall review said budget and submit same with
his/her recommendations to the Board of Supervisors. All Township expenditures for
community recreation programs not directly sponsored by the Township shall be capital
expenditures for the acquisition of capital assets of significant value that directly benefit
Middletown Township and its residents and have a useful life of several years. All
capital assets acquired by Township funds shall be titled in the name of Middletown
Township. No Township moneys shall be expended for the purpose of supporting annual
operating expenditures, with the exception of lighting and routine maintenance costs
at Township-owned park facilities. All Township expenditures shall be subject to the
public bidding and contract requirements set forth in the Second Class Township Code
and the purchasing procedures established by the Township.
§ 15-303 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 15-306
15:8
ARTICLE IV
Disabled Persons Advisory Board
[Adopted 9-8-2020 by Ord. No. 20-06]
§ 15-401. Definitions.
As defined herein, a "person with disabilities" or "citizen with disabilities" shall mean a
resident of the Township who has a disability as such would be defined in the Americans
with Disabilities Act, or as defined in any state or federal law dealing with the subject
of disability. At all times, the definition of a person or citizen with a disability shall be
interpreted in the broadest fashion possible, so as to provide the widest representation to
disabled citizens of Middletown Township.
§ 15-402. Establishment.
The Board of Supervisors previously established the Middletown Township Disabled
Persons Advisory Board by Resolution No. 00-12R, as amended by Resolution No.
01-06R. The Disabled Persons Advisory Board of Middletown Township (the "Advisory
Board") is hereby also established via this article.
§ 15-403. Membership.
The Advisory Board shall consist of seven members. It is highly encouraged, but not
required, that three members be disabled residents, as such term is further defined herein,
and that the members of the Board be representative of the persons that the Pennsylvania
Human Relations Act, 43 P.S. § 951, et. seq., and the United States Americans with
Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C.A. § 12101, et. seq., were designed to protect. The members
of the Board shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors. All members shall serve
for staggered terms of two years. No such member shall hold office in any political
party. Members shall serve without salary but may be paid expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties.
§ 15-404. Role of the Disabled Persons Advisory Board.
The Advisory Board created herein shall assist in public education with respect to
the Americans with Disabilities Act, and all other state, local, and federal statutes,
regulations, or requirements which may be appropriate for Township consideration and
action; educate the community as to the needs of those with disabilities; recommend to
the Township Manager and Board of Supervisors of Middletown Township such action
as would be necessary to comply with the mandates of law, and such further action as
would be beneficial to the general health, safety, and welfare of those with disabilities
and all citizens of the Township; and provide a forum for presentation of the problems
and concerns of citizens with disabilities and all citizens of Middletown Township on
issues relating to the disabilities.
§ 15-405. Powers of the Disabled Persons Advisory Board.
A. The appointed members of the Advisory Board shall have the authority to adopt
rules and regulations for the conduct of the Board's business not inconsistent with
the provisions of state, federal, and local laws.
§ 15-401 BOARDS § 15-405
15:9
B. The appointed members shall elect their own Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and
Secretary. The Secretary shall record and maintain minutes of all meetings and shall
be responsible for all written communications and notices.
C. The Advisory Board shall conduct public meetings on a regular basis at the
Middletown Township Municipal Building at a time to be determined by the
Advisory Board. All such meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the
Provisions of the Pennsylvania Sunshine Act, 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701, et seq. (1998,
Oct. 15, P.L., No. 93, § 1), as amended.
D. The Advisory Board shall not have authority to enter into any contract or to incur
any obligation binding upon the Township.
E. All actions of the Advisory Board shall require concurrence of a simple majority of
all voting members of the Advisory Board.
F. The Members of the Advisory Board shall also act as the Local Human Relations
Commission for Middletown Township, pursuant to separate authority provided by
Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission, Chapter 15, Boards, Article V, of the
Middletown Township Code of Ordinances.
§ 15-405 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 15-405
15:10
ARTICLE V
Human Relations Commission
[Adopted 9-8-2020 by Ord. No. 20-06]
§ 15-501. Policy and definitions.
A. It is hereby declared to be the public policy of Middletown Township to:
(1) Foster the employment of all individuals in accordance with their fullest
capabilities, regardless of actual or perceived race, color, sex, religion,
ancestry, genetic information, national origin, sexual orientation, gender
identity or expression, familial status, marital status, age, mental or physical
disability, use of guide or support animals and/or mechanical aids.
(2) Secure housing accommodations and commercial property without regard to
actual or perceived race, color, sex, religion, ancestry, genetic information,
national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, familial
status, marital status, age, mental or physical disability, use of guide or support
animals and/or mechanical aids.
(3) Assure equal opportunities to all individuals and to safeguard their rights to
public accommodations without regard to actual or perceived race, color, sex,
religion, ancestry, genetic information, national origin, sexual orientation,
gender identity or expression, familial status, marital status, mental or physical
disability, use of guide or support animals and/or mechanical aids.
B. The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings
given to them in this subsection:
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of Middletown
Township, Bucks County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
CONVERSION THERAPY — Any practices or treatments that seek to change an
individual's sexual orientation and/or gender identity or expression, including, but
not limited to, efforts to change behaviors or gender expressions, or to reduce or
eliminate sexual or romantic attractions or feelings towards individuals of the same
gender. Conversion therapy shall not include counseling that provides assistance
to a person undergoing gender transition; and/or provides acceptance, support,
and understanding of a person or facilitates a person's coping, social support,
and identity exploration and development, including sexual orientation-neutral and
gender identity or expression-neutral interventions to prevent or address unlawful
conduct or unsafe sexual practices, as long as such counseling does not seek to
change an individual's sexual orientation and/or gender identity or expression.
DISCRIMINATION — Any unlawful discriminatory act(s) taken by any person,
employer, employment agency, labor organization or public accommodation on the
basis of actual or perceived race, color, sex, religion, ancestry, genetic information,
national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, familial status,
marital status, age, mental or physical disability, use of guide or support animals
and/or mechanical aids.
DISCRIMINATORY ACTS — All acts defined in the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Act, 43 P.S. § 951, et seq., as unlawful discriminatory practices. The fact
§ 15-501 BOARDS § 15-501
15:11
that the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act would not define a practice as unlawful
when that practice is taken on the basis of actual or perceived sexual orientation,
gender identity or expression, genetic information or marital status shall not exempt
such practice from being considered a discriminatory act under this article.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION — Those postsecondary programs defined as
educational institutions pursuant to the Pennsylvania Fair Educational
Opportunities Act, 24 P.S. § 5001 et. seq.
EMPLOYEE — Does not include any individuals who, as a part of their
employment, reside in the personal residence of the employer.
EMPLOYER — Any person who employs one or more employees, including the
Township, its departments, boards and commissions, and any other government
agency within its jurisdiction.
GENDER IDENTITY OR EXPRESSION — Self-perception, or perception by
others, as male, female, nonbinary or another gender, and shall include an
individual's appearance, behavior, or physical characteristics, that may be in accord
with, or opposed to, one's physical anatomy, chromosomal sex, or sex assigned at
birth, and shall include, but shall not be limited to, persons who are undergoing or
have completed sex reassignment, are transgender, intersex, genderqueer, gender
fluid, or gender nonconforming.
GENETIC INFORMATION — That information which is defined as genetic
information in the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008, 42 U.S.C.
§ 2000ff.
HOUSING — Includes any building, structure, mobile home site or facility, or
portion thereof, which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged or designed
to be used or occupied as the home residence or sleeping place of one or more
individuals, groups or families whether or not living independently of each other;
and any vacant land offered for sale, lease or held for the purpose of constructing or
locating thereon any such building, structure, mobile home site or facility. The term
"housing" shall not include any personal residence offered for rent by the owner or
lessee thereof or by his or her broker, salesperson, agent or employee.
LIFESTYLE — Nothing in this article shall be construed as supporting or
advocating any particular doctrine, position, point of view, lifestyle or religious
view. To the contrary, it is the intention of this article that all persons be treated
fairly and equally, and it is the express intent of this article to guarantee fair and
equal treatment under the law to all people of the Township.
MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL — A person who is licensed to provide
professional mental health care or counseling under Pennsylvania law, or a person
who performs mental health care or counseling as part of the person's professional
training for any of such licensed profession.
ORDINANCE — This article, which shall also be known as the "Middletown
Township Anti-Discrimination Ordinance."
PERSON—Any natural person, fraternal, civic or other membership organization,
corporation, general or limited partnership, proprietorship, limited liability
company, or similar business organization, including the Township, its
departments, boards and commissions, and other for-profit and nonprofit
§ 15-501 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 15-501
15:12
§ 15-502. Unlawful practices.
§ 15-503. Exceptions.
organizations.
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION — Any accommodation, resort, or amusement
which is open to, accepts or solicits the patronage of the general public or offers
goods or services, including loans, to the general public or is listed in Section 4(1)
of the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act, 43 P.S. § 954(1), but shall not include
any accommodations which are in their nature distinctly private.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION — Actual or perceived sexual and/or romantic
attraction and/or feelings toward other individuals. The term includes, but is not
limited to, individuals who are heterosexual, homosexual, gay, lesbian, bisexual,
queer, asexual, aromantic, and/or questioning.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middletown, Bucks County, the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
C. To the extent words and phrases appearing in this article are not expressly defined
herein, the meaning of this section shall be construed consistently with the
Pennsylvania Human Relations Act.
A. Discrimination in housing, employment, public accommodations, or access to
educational institutions is prohibited under this article.
B. Retaliation against any individual because such individual has opposed any practice
forbidden by this article, or because such individual has made a charge, testified, or
assisted in any manner in any investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this
article, is prohibited under this article.
C. Aiding, abetting, inciting, compelling, or coercing the doing of any act declared by
this article to be an unlawful practice, or obstructing or preventing any person from
complying with the provisions of this article, is prohibited under this article.
D. It is a prohibited form of discrimination under this article for a mental health
professional to engage in conversion therapy with a person under 18 years of age.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, it shall not be an unlawful
employment practice for a religious corporation or association, not supported in
whole or in part by governmental appropriations, to refuse to hire or employ an
individual on the basis of religion.
B. Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to prohibit a religious organization,
religious denomination, or association of religious organizations or denominations
that is exempt from federal taxation under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code, or any organization affiliated with that religious organization, religious
denomination, or association of religious organizations or denominations, from
engaging in any conduct or activity that is required by, or that implements or
expresses its religious beliefs or tenets of faith. Nor shall anything in this article be
interpreted to require any such religious organization, religious denomination, or
association of religious organizations or denominations, or any organization
§ 15-501 BOARDS § 15-503
15:13
§ 15-504. Establishment of Human Relations Commission.
§ 15-505. Procedures; expanded procedures.
affiliated with that religious organization, religious denomination, or association of
religious organizations or denominations to engage in any conduct or activity that
is prohibited by its religious beliefs or tenets of faith.
A. Pursuant to 43 P.S. § 962.1(a) of the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act, there is
hereby established a Human Relations Commission in and for Middletown
Township (hereinafter referred to as the "Middletown Township Human Relations
Commission" or the "Commission").
B. The Middletown Township Human Relations Commission shall consist of the same
members as the Middletown Township Disabled Persons Advisory Board, as set
forth at Chapter 15, Boards, Article IV, Disabled Persons Advisory Board, which
provides as follows:
(1) The Board shall consist of seven members. It is highly encouraged, but not
required, that three members be disabled residents, as such term is further
defined herein, and that the members of the Board be representative of the
persons that the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act, 43 P.S. § 951, et. seq.,
and the United States enacted the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42
U.S.C.A. § 12101, et. seq., were designed to protect. The members of the
Board shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors. All members shall serve
for staggered terms of two years. No such member shall hold office in any
political party. Members shall serve without salary but may be paid expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties.
C. One of the Commission's members shall be appointed as the Chairperson of the
Commission by the members of the Commission. The Chairperson will be
responsible for setting Commission meetings, coordinating with the Middletown
Township Manager regarding received complaints and answers, and generally
ensuring that the duties of the Commission are fulfilled. The Chairperson may
delegate responsibility for Commission duties to specific Commissioners or to paid
staff, if applicable.
D. The Board of Supervisors hereby grants to the Middletown Township Human
Relations Commission all of the powers necessary for the execution of its duties, as
set forth below, provided that those powers shall not exceed those exercised by the
Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission under the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Act. Such powers shall include the ability to conduct public trainings,
educational sessions, informational seminars, and community activities related to
the purpose and provisions of the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act.
E. The Middletown Township Human Relations Commission shall operate within the
scope of funds which may be annually allocated by the Board of Supervisors and
shall not exceed the annual allocation in any year, except upon prior approval by
the Board of Supervisors. It is the intention of the Board of Supervisors that the
Commission's actions shall be supported by volunteers and unpaid staff and shall
be as close to "zero-cost" to Middletown Township as reasonably feasible.
§ 15-503 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 15-505
15:14
A. Filing a complaint.
(1) Any person(s) claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful practice may make,
sign, and file a verified complaint alleging violations of this article, which
shall include the following information:
(a) The name and address of the aggrieved person(s);
(b) The name and address of the person(s) alleged to have committed the
prohibited practice;
(c) A statement of the relevant facts, including pertinent dates, constituting
the alleged discriminatory practice;
(d) If applicable, the address and a description of the dwelling unit or
business which is involved; and
(e) Such other information as may be required by the Township.
(2) Complaints may be filed in person at the Middletown Township Municipal
Building, 3 Municipal Way, Langhorne, PA 19047 or by mailing such
complaints to the Chairperson of the Commission, Generally, all complaints
must be received by the Middletown Township Manager or by the
Commission within 180 days of the alleged act of discrimination to be
considered timely. Equitable principles such as waiver, estoppel, and equitable
tolling shall apply to the time limitations for the filing of any complaint or
other pleading under this article.
(3) The Middletown Township Manager shall convey all original complaints
received by that office to the Chairperson of the Commission within 10 days
of the office's receipt of such complaints.
(4) Upon receipt of any complaint, the Middletown Township Human Relations
Commission shall contact the person filing the complaint and recommend that
they immediately dual file with the Pennsylvania Human Relations
Commission.
B. Notification and answer.
(1) Within 30 days of its receipt of a complaint, the Commission shall:
(a) Send a copy of the complaint to the person(s) charged with a
discriminatory practice [the "respondent(s)"]; and
(b) Send a notice to the person(s) aggrieved, informing them that the
complaint has been received. If the complaint alleges discrimination on a
basis prescribed under federal or state law, the notice sent to the person(s)
aggrieved shall also inform them of the right to file with the Pennsylvania
Human Relations Commission and/or with the United States Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission or the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development.
(2) The respondent(s) shall file a written verified answer to the complaint within
60 days of service of the complaint. An answer to a complaint may be filed in
§ 15-505 BOARDS § 15-505
15:15
the same manner as an original complaint. If the answer is filed at the
Middletown Township Municipal Building, it shall be conveyed by the
Middletown Township Manager to the Chairperson of the Commission within
10 days of the Township's receipt thereof. The Commission shall promptly
send a copy of the answer to the person(s) aggrieved.
C. Mediation.
(1) Thirty days after an answer has been received, or 60 days after the filing of the
complaint if no answer is received, the Commission shall invite the parties to
voluntarily participate in mediation with the Middletown Township Human
Relations Commission. The parties shall respond to the invitation to
participate in the mediation within 30 days of being invited to participate.
(2) If all parties agree to participate in the mediation, the following procedures
shall apply:
(a) The mediation shall be conducted by a minimum of two members of the
Middletown Township Human Relations Commission.
(b) The mediation sessions shall remain private and not otherwise subject to
public attendance.
(c) When mediation has resulted in an amicable resolution of the complaint,
the Commission shall notify the parties that the complaint has been
dismissed and shall record the result of the mediation in a notice of
dismissal.
(3) In the event that the complaint has not been resolved through mediation or the
mediation has been declined by either party, the Commission may:
(a) Elect to proceed with the expanded procedures outlined herein, or if
expanded procedures are not elected and the case alleges discrimination
not covered by the PHRA, inform the aggrieved party that he/she is
entitled to proceed with filing a complaint in the applicable Pennsylvania
Court of Common Pleas of Bucks County; or
(b) If the matter is covered by the PHRA, and the Commission does not elect
to proceed with the expanded procedures, inform the aggrieved party that
he/she may not file a complaint in the Pennsylvania Court of Common
Pleas of Bucks County until the administrative remedies outlined in the
PHRA are exhausted by filing with and proceeding before the
Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission. If the matter was already
dual filed with the Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission, the
Commission shall refer the matter to the Pennsylvania Human Relations
Commission for further action consistent with the administrative
remedies outlined in the PHRA.
D. Option of the Commission to elect for expanded procedures.
(1) The Commission shall have the authority to elect to adopt expanded
procedures as set forth in Subsections E through K of this section, subject to
approval by the Board of Supervisors and appropriation of funding for such
§ 15-505 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 15-505
15:16
procedures. A simple majority of the Commission members must vote in
favor of adopting expanded procedures in order for such procedures to be
adopted. In the event that such procedures are adopted, they must, while in
effect, be applied to all complaints that are not resolved through a fact-finding
conference. If the Commission has adopted expanded procedures, it may also,
by majority vote and in its sole discretion, eliminate such procedures.
E. Expanded procedures; dismissal or nondismissal of the complaint.
(1) If the fact-finding conference was successful in resolving the complaint, the
Commission shall follow the procedures set forth in Subsection C of this
section for dismissing the complaint. If the fact-finding conference was not
successful in resolving the complaint, the Commission shall not dismiss the
complaint but shall instead undertake the procedures set out in Subsections G
through L of this section.
F. Expanded procedures; investigation.
(1) The Commission shall, in a timely fashion, investigate the allegations of
discrimination set forth in the complaint. The Commission may, in the conduct
of such investigation, issue subpoenas to any person to furnish information,
records or other documents, or to give sworn testimony, as necessary to assist
in its investigation.
G. Expanded procedures, finding of no cause.
(1) If it shall be determined after the Commission's investigation that there is no
basis for the allegations in the complaint, the Commission shall cause to be
issued and served upon the parties written notice of such determination. This
notice shall inform the person aggrieved that he/she has the right to pursue the
matter in court by filing a lawsuit.
H. Expanded procedures, conciliation.
(1) If the Commission, after investigation, determines that probable cause exists
for the allegations of the complaint, the Commission shall immediately
endeavor to eliminate the unlawful practice complained of by persuasion,
conference, and conciliation.
I. Expanded procedures; public hearing.
(1) If the Commission, in its discretion, finds it is not possible to eliminate the
unlawful practices by persuasion, conference, or conciliation, the Commission
shall cause to be issued and served a written notice, together with a copy of the
complaint, which informs the respondent that the respondent must answer the
charges of such complaint at a hearing before the Commission at a time and
place to be specified in such notice.
(2) The Commission may designate one or more of its members to preside at such
a hearing.
(3) At the public hearing, the case in support of the complaint shall be presented
to the Commission by pro bono counsel, by Commission staff, or by the
§ 15-505 BOARDS § 15-505
15:17
§ 15-506. Private right of action and nonlimitation of remedies.
Township Solicitor's office. The case in support of the complaint may instead
be presented by the complainant's attorney, if the complainant is represented.
Both the complainant and the respondent may appear at the hearing with or
without counsel and provide testimony. In addition, both the complainant and
the respondent may introduce the testimony of additional witnesses and may
submit documentary evidence. The Commission and the parties shall not be
bound by the strict rules of evidence set in forth in the Pennsylvania Rules of
Evidence at the hearing.
J. Expanded procedures; findings.
(1) If upon all the evidence at the hearing the Commission shall find that a
respondent has engaged in or is engaging in any unlawful discriminatory
practice, as defined in this subpart, the Commission shall state its findings of
fact and shall issue and cause to be served on such respondent an order
requiring such respondent to cease and desist from such unlawful
discriminatory practice and to take such additional action as the Commission
deems appropriate. The Commission shall have the authority to order any
remedies available to the Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission under
the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act.
K. Expanded procedures, finding of no discrimination.
(1) If upon all the evidence the Commission shall find that a respondent has not
engaged in any unlawful discriminatory practice, the Commission shall state
its findings of fact and shall issue and cause to be served on the parties an order
dismissing the complaint as to such respondent.
A. Any person(s) aggrieved by a violation of this article shall have a right of action in
the Bucks County Court of Common Pleas or any other court of competent
jurisdiction and may recover for each violation the following remedies:
(1) Back pay, front pay and other actual damages, as those remedies are defined
in the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act and case law interpreting the same;
(2) Emotional distress damages;
(3) Exemplary damages;
(4) Reasonable attorney's fees and court costs; and
(5) Such other relief, including injunctive relief, as the court may deem
appropriate.
B. The right of action created by this article may be brought upon receipt by the
aggrieved person(s) of notice that the Commission has dismissed the complaint or,
if no such notice is received, after two years after the Commission closes the
complaint. If the person aggrieved has received notice that the Commission has
dismissed the complaint, an action under this article must be brought by the
aggrieved person within two years from the date of receipt of said notice or it will
be barred.
§ 15-505 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 15-506
15:18
C. Nothing in this article limits the right of an aggrieved person to recover under any
other applicable law or legal theory.
§ 15-506 BOARDS § 15-506
15:19

Chapter 20
CITIZEN SERVICE CORPS ADVISORY COUNCIL
§ 20-1. Establishment.
There is hereby created and established the Middletown Citizen Service Corps Advisory
Council.
§ 20-2. Purpose.
The Citizen Service Corps Advisory Council shall establish partnerships with and among
various community groups and organizations located and/or operating within the
Township in order to obtain, coordinate and provide volunteers who will periodically
provide certain categories of services and/or assistance to senior citizens and disabled
persons who reside within the Township, which such services and assistance are
intended to enhance the ability of such senior citizens and disabled persons to otherwise
continue to live independently in their own homes and to remain connected to their
neighborhoods within the Township.
§ 20-3. Authority.
A. The Citizen Service Corps Advisory Council shall have the following authority and
powers:
(1) To adopt policies, rules and procedures for the operation of the Middletown
Citizen Service Corps, including, but not limited to, policies, rules and
procedures relating to:
(a) Establishment of the categories and types of services and/or assistance to
be provided by the Citizen Service Corps, together with the manner in
which such services and/or assistance may be provided.
(b) Identification and qualification of senior citizens and disabled persons
residing within the Township who are eligible for services and/or
assistance to be provided by the Citizen Service Corps.
(c) Identification and qualification of volunteers who are eligible and able to
perform the services and/or assistance to be provided by the Citizen
Service Corps.
(2) To identify, and partner with, community groups and organizations located
and/or operating within the Township that can provide volunteers, materials
and equipment necessary to provide the services and/or assistance to be
provided by the Citizen Service Corps.
(3) To advise and coordinate with various Township officials and Township
boards, including, but not limited to, the Township Manager, the Director of
Community Services, the Disabled Persons Advisory Board and the
Middletown Senior Citizens' Association, in regard to the activities of the
Citizen Service Corps Advisory Council and the Middletown Citizen Service
Corps.
§ 15-506 CITIZEN SERVICE CORPS ADVISORY COUNCIL § 20-3
20:1
§ 20-4. Membership.
§ 20-5. Annual report.
The Citizen Service Corps Advisory Council shall submit an annual report of its
activities, and the activities of the Middletown Citizen Service Corps, to the Board of
Supervisors not later than September 1 of each year.
B. The Citizen Service Corps Advisory Council shall conduct meetings on a regular
basis at the Middletown Township Municipal Building. The Council shall take
minutes of its meetings and provide copies of the minutes to the Board of
Supervisors and the Township Manager.
C. All policies, rules and procedures of the Citizen Service Corps Advisory Council
for the operation of the Middletown Citizen Service Corps shall not become
effective until such times as they are submitted to and approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
D. The Citizen Service Corps Advisory Council shall not have the authority to enter
into any contract or to otherwise incur any obligation that may be binding upon the
Township.
A. The Citizen Service Corps Advisory Council shall be composed of seven members.
Membership of the Council shall be constituted as follows:
(1) The Township Director of Community Services.
(2) The Director of Middletown Senior Citizens' Association.
(3) The Chairman of the Township Disabled Persons Advisory Board.
(4) Two residents of the Township who are 50 years of age or older.
(5) Two residents of the Township who are 18 years of age or older.
B. The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors shall be an ex officio member of the
Council.
C. The four resident members shall each be appointed by the Board of Supervisors to
a term not to exceed one year, and in all cases each such term shall expire on the
first Monday of January of the calendar year following the calendar year of that
appointment. Any vacancy of a resident member seat on the Council occurring at
any time prior to the expiration of a term shall be filled by the Board of Supervisors.
D. Members of the Council shall serve without pay.
§ 20-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 20-5
20:2
Chapter 23
CONDUCT, CODE OF
§ 23-100. Responsibilities of elected and appointed officials and Township
employees. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
§ 23-101. Conflict of interest.
In order that all elected and appointed Township officials and employees may clearly
understand the areas of possible conflict of interest, the following rules of conduct are
set forth:
§ 23-102. Gifts and favors.
Township officials and employees and the immediate families of Township officials and
employees shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit, accept or agree to accept any gift of
money or goods, loans or services for personal benefit under any circumstances which
could influence the manner in which the appointed officials or Township employees
perform their work, make their decisions, or otherwise perform their duties.
A. Elected and appointed officials and Township employees are agents for the people
of Middletown Township and, while performing their duties in the interest of all of
the residents of Middletown Township, are bound to uphold, support and defend
the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the Commonwealth, the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as well as all ordinances passed by the
Board of Supervisors of Middletown Township.
B. The duty of elected and appointed Township officials and employees to work in the
public interest entails responsibility for the proper, efficient and economical
management of all public funds, property and other resources. All Township
officials and employees shall faithfully discharge their duties to the best of their
abilities.
C. No elected or appointed Township official or employee shall discriminate against
any resident of this Township on the basis of age, sex, race, creed, national origin,
political belief, or handicap.
A. No member of the Middletown Township Board of Supervisors, nor member of any
other Township Board, whether such a member is appointed or elected, nor any
Township officer or employee, shall be financially interested in any award,
contract, decision, decree or judgment made by him in his official capacity or by
any board or body of which he is a member.
B. Should such a conflict arise, or should the same involve any immediate family
member or business associate, then said member of the Board of Supervisors or
member of any other Township board or Township officer or employee shall
abstain from any voting and shall publicly state at all public meetings in which said
award, contract, decision, decree or judgment is discussed the nature of his conflict.
Mere abstention, without public disclosure as to its reason, shall not be sufficient.
§ 20-5 CONDUCT, CODE OF § 23-103
23:1
§ 23-103. Misuse of information.
No Township official or employee shall for his or her own personal gain or for the
gain of others use any information not available to the public at large or divulge
confidential information in advance of the time prescribed for its authorized release. Nor
shall any Township official or employee receive compensation for consultation which
substantially draws upon official ideas or data which have not been disclosed to the
public.
§ 23-104. Temporary suspension.
In the event that any Township official or employee is indicted for any offense by either
the state or federal government, the Board of Supervisors shall review and consider the
circumstances underlying such indictment and may, upon majority vote, recommend the
voluntary withdrawal of such official or employee from his official post or employment
until such time as the matter has been resolved in favor of such official or employee.
Any Township employee who does so voluntarily withdraw from his employment
shall receive all back pay upon his resumption of employment after such favorable
disposition.
§ 23-105. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13;
6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each section of this chapter
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 23-106. Preemption by state action.
In the event that any of the provisions of this chapter conflict with those of the Second
Class Township Code or any other statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or
in the event that violations hereof constitute violations of such code or other statutes,
the terms of said code or statute shall prevail and any such violation shall be prosecuted
under the terms of such code or statute and not under the terms hereof.
§ 23-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 23-106
23:2
Chapter 34
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION
§ 34-100. Definitions. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them in this section:
DISASTER — A man-made disaster, natural disaster or war-caused disaster.
DISASTER EMERGENCY — Those conditions which may by investigation be found,
actually or likely, to:
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT — The judicious planning, assignment and
coordination of all available resources in an integrated program of prevention,
mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery for emergencies of any kind, whether
from attack, man-made or natural sources.
EMERGENCY SERVICES — The preparation for and the carrying out of functions
other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent,
minimize and provide emergency repair of injury and damage resulting from disasters,
together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and
carrying out of those functions. The functions include, without limitation, firefighting
services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, disaster
warning services, communications, radiological, shelter, chemical and other special
weapons defense, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare
services, emergency transportation, emergency resources management, existing or
properly assigned functions of plan protection, temporary restoration of public utility
services and other functions related to civilian protection.
LOCAL EMERGENCY—The condition declared by the local governing body when in
its judgment the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster is or threatens to be of sufficient
severity and magnitude to warrant coordinated local government action to prevent or
alleviate the damage, loss, hardship or suffering threatened or caused thereby. A local
emergency arising wholly or substantially out of a resource shortage may be declared
only by the Governor, upon petition of the local governing body, when he deems the
threat or actual occurrence of a disaster to be of sufficient severity and magnitude to
warrant coordinated local government action to prevent or alleviate the damage, loss,
hardship or suffering threatened or caused thereby.
LOCAL ORGANIZATION — A local emergency management organization.
Affect seriously the safety, health or welfare of a substantial number of citizens of
this Township or preclude the operation or use of essential public facilities;
A.
Be of such magnitude or severity as to render essential state supplementation of
county and local efforts or resources exerted or utilized in alleviating the danger,
damage, suffering or hardship faced; and
B.
Have been caused by forces beyond the control of man, by reason of civil disorder,
riot or disturbance, or by factors not foreseen and not known to exist when
appropriation bills were enacted.
C.
§ 23-106 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION § 34-100
34:1
MAN-MADE DISASTER — Any industrial, nuclear or transportation accident,
explosion, conflagration, power failure, natural resource shortage or other condition
except enemy action, resulting from man-made causes, such as oil spills and other
injurious environmental contamination, which threatens or causes substantial damage to
property, human suffering, hardship or loss of life.
NATURAL DISASTER — Any hurricane, tornado, storm, flood, high water, winddriven
water, tidal wave, earthquake, landslide, mudslide, snowstorm, drought, fire,
explosion or other catastrophe which results in substantial damage to property, hardship,
suffering or possible loss of life.
WAR-CAUSED DISASTER — Any condition following an attack upon the United
States resulting in substantial damage to property or injury to persons in the United
States caused by use of bombs, missiles, shellfire, nuclear, radiological, chemical or
biological means, or other weapons or overt paramilitary actions, or other conditions
such as sabotage.
§ 34-101. Establishment.
A local emergency management organization is hereby established and shall be known
as the "Middletown Township Emergency Management Organization."
§ 34-102. Authority.
The Middletown Township Emergency Management Organization is established
pursuant to the provisions of the Emergency Management Services Code, 35 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 7501 et seq.
§ 34-103. General duties and responsibilities.
The Middletown Township Emergency Management Organization shall have the
responsibility for emergency management and disaster response and recovery within
the Township of Middletown. The Middletown Township Emergency Management
Organization shall also provide emergency management and disaster response and
recovery services outside the Township of Middletown as required by the terms and
conditions of this chapter.
§ 34-104. Declaration of disaster emergency.
A. A local disaster emergency may be declared by the Township of Middletown Board
of Supervisors upon finding a disaster has occurred or is imminent. The Township
of Middletown Board of Supervisors hereby authorizes one or more officials of the
Township, as set forth hereafter, to declare a local disaster emergency subject to
ratification by the Township of Middletown Board of Supervisors. Such
authorization to declare a local disaster may be granted in descending order of rank,
depending upon the availability of said officers. The declaration of a local disaster
emergency shall be ratified by the Board of Supervisors except where it is
determined a duly authorized official has grossly abused his/her discretion in
declaring a local emergency or the circumstances warranting the declaration of a
local disaster.
B. The succession of authority to declare a local disaster emergency shall be as
§ 34-100 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 34-104
34:2
§ 34-105. Temporary suspension of formal requirements.
Upon declaration of a disaster emergency, the Township of Middletown, pursuant
to § 7301(c) of the Emergency Management Services Code,3 shall be authorized to
exercise the powers granted in this chapter without regard to time-consuming procedures
and formalities prescribed by law (excepting mandatory constitutional requirements)
pertaining to the performance of public works, entering into contracts, the incurring of
obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase
of supplies and materials, the levying of taxes and the appropriation and expenditure of
public funds.
§ 34-106. Local coordinator of emergency management.
follows:
(1) Chairman of Board of Supervisors.
(2) Vice Chairman of Board of Supervisors.
(3) Secretary of Board of Supervisors.
(4) Most senior member of Board of Supervisors (excluding Chairman, Vice
Chairman and Secretary).
(5) Least senior member of Board of Supervisors (excluding Chairman, Vice
Chairman and Secretary).
(6) Township Manager.
(7) Emergency Management Coordinator.
(8) Deputy Emergency Management Coordinator(s).
A. The Middletown Township Emergency Management Organization shall have a
Coordinator and, at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, Deputy
Coordinators, who shall be responsible for the planning, administration and
operation of the organization, subject to the direction and control of the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Middletown.
B. The Coordinator of the Middletown Township Emergency Management
Organization shall be appointed by the Governor of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania upon recommendation of the Board of Supervisors of the Township
of Middletown. The Middletown Township Emergency Management Coordinator
shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Middletown.
C. The Coordinator of the Middletown Township Emergency Management
Organization shall:
(1) Be professionally competent and capable of planning, effecting and
coordinating operations among agencies of government and controlling
3. Editor's Note: See 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7301(c).
§ 34-104 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION § 34-106
34:3
§ 34-107. Powers and duties of the emergency management organization.
The Middletown Township Emergency Management Organization is hereby directed to:
coordinated operations by local emergency preparedness forces.
(2) Attend and successfully complete the first phase of the career development
program as prescribed by the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency
within one year after appointment.
(3) Attend and successfully complete the second phase of the career development
program as prescribed by the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency
within three years after appointment.
(4) Attend basic and advanced seminars, workshops and training conferences
called by the Director of the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency
and/or its Director of Training and Education.
D. The Township of Middletown will reimburse its Coordinator for actual expenses
incurred as the result of his or her attendance at scheduled meetings and training
programs.
A. Prepare, maintain and keep current a disaster emergency plan for the Township of
Middletown for the prevention and minimization of injury and damage caused by
disaster, for prompt and effective response to disaster and for disaster emergency
relief and recovery in consonance with the Pennsylvania Emergency Management
Plan and the Bucks County Emergency Management Plan.
B. Establish, equip and staff an emergency operations center for the Township of
Middletown.
C. Establish a warning and communications system for the Township of Middletown
that will support governmental operations in emergencies.
D. Provide essential facilities and equipment to those agencies and organizations that
have been assigned emergency functions under the provisions of this chapter.
E. Provide individual and organizational training programs to ensure prompt, efficient
and effective disaster emergency services.
F. Organize, prepare, administer and coordinate all available manpower, materials,
supplies, equipment and facilities necessary for disaster emergency readiness,
response and recovery.
G. Adopt and implement precautionary measures to mitigate the anticipated effects of
a disaster.
H. Execute and enforce such rules, regulations and orders as the Middletown
Township Emergency Management Organization may establish pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
I. Cooperate and coordinate with any public and private agencies or entities in
achieving any purpose of this chapter.
§ 34-106 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 34-107
34:4
§ 34-108. Municipal mutual aid agreements.
The local coordinators of emergency management shall develop mutual aid agreements
for reciprocal emergency assistance. Any mutual aid agreement shall be approved by the
Board of Supervisors prior to implementation.
§ 34-109. Approvals and ratification of agreements.
Except during local disaster emergencies, the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Middletown shall:
§ 34-110. Insignia and identifying marks.
The Middletown Township Emergency Management Organization may, with the
approval of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Middletown, adopt such
insignia and/or other identifying marks or markings as are necessary to ensure the
J. Have available for inspection at the Middletown Township Municipal Building all
emergency management plans, rules, regulations and orders of the Governor and
the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency.
K. Provide prompt and accurate information regarding local disaster emergencies to
appropriate commonwealth and local officials and agencies and the general public.
L. Provide prompt and general publicity to any order or proclamation declaring,
continuing or terminating a local disaster emergency. Notice of such orders or
proclamations shall be promptly filed with the Pennsylvania Emergency
Management Agency.
M. Execute and enforce such rules and orders as may be adopted by the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Agency.
N. Make timely recommendations to and secure the consent of the Township of
Middletown concerning the development of plans, the acquisition of materials,
supplies and equipment, and the development of a budget for the agency, except as
provided for in disaster emergencies.
O. Identify areas within the Township of Middletown that are particularly vulnerable
to disaster.
P. Assist the Township of Middletown and/or its police, fire, rescue or emergency
medical services in handling and coordinating special nondisaster emergencies and
situations if, in the judgment of Emergency Management Coordinator, such
assistance is required.
Q. Generally be responsible for the planning, administration and operation of the local
emergency management organization.
A. Approve all expenditures of the Middletown Township Emergency Management
Organization in advance.
B. Approve attendance and participation of personnel of the Emergency Management
Organization at training sessions, seminars and meetings.
§ 34-107 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION § 34-110
34:5
correct, prompt identification of its personnel, equipment and facilities.
§ 34-111. Applicability of state statutes.
The provisions of the Emergency Management Services Code of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, Act 1978-323 (P.L. 1332) shall govern the emergency management
activities of the Township of Middletown and the Middletown Township Emergency
Management Organization except in circumstances where the Emergency Management
Services Code does not address local provisions or conditions provided for by this
chapter.
§ 34-110 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 34-111
34:6
Chapter 38
ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Park and Recreation Board — See Ch. 15, Art. II.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 76.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 440.
Zoning — See Ch. 500.
§ 38-100. Establishment of environmental advisory council.
An Environmental Advisory Council is hereby created pursuant to the Act of December
21, 1973, P.L. 425, No. 148, as amended, and shall have such powers as hereinafter set
forth.
§ 38-101. Membership; term of office; compensation.
§ 38-102. Powers.
A. The Environmental Advisory Council shall consist of seven members appointed by
the Board of Supervisors, one of whom may also be a member of the Township
Planning Commission, and all of whom shall be residents of the Township of
Middletown.
B. The term of office of each duly appointed Council member shall be three years or
until appointment and qualification of his successor, except that the initial members
shall be appointed for the following terms:
(1) Three members for terms expiring the first Monday of January 1982.
(2) Two members for terms expiring the first Monday of January 1983.
(3) Two members for terms expiring the first Monday of January 1984.
C. The Board of Supervisors may remove any member of the Council for cause, on
written charges served upon the member and after a hearing thereon at which the
member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel. A vacancy on the
Council occurring other than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired
term in the same manner as an original appointment.
D. Members of the Council shall receive no compensation for their services but shall
be reimbursed for expenses actually and necessarily incurred by them in the
performance of their duties.
A. The Environmental Advisory Council shall have the following powers:
(1) To identify environmental problems and recommend plans and programs to
the appropriate governmental agencies, including, but not limited to, the
Township Planning Commission, Park and Recreation Board, and the Board
§ 34-111 ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY COUNCIL § 38-102
38:1
§ 38-103. Records of meetings; annual report.
The Environmental Advisory Council shall keep records of its meetings and activities
and shall make an annual report on or before the first day of December of each year and
submit said report to the Board of Supervisors, who shall make said report available to
the public.
§ 38-104. Appropriations.
The Board of Supervisors may appropriate funds for the expenses incurred by the
Environmental Advisory Council for such administrative, clerical, printing and legal
services as may be required in the exercise of the aforesaid powers.
of Supervisors, for the promotion and conservation of natural resources and
for the protection and improvement of the quality of the environment within
the territorial limits of the Township.
(2) To make recommendations as to the possible use of open land areas of the
Township.
(3) To promote a community environmental program.
(4) To compile and keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned,
including but not limited to marshland, swamps, other wetlands, and other
unique natural areas, for the purpose of obtaining information on the proper
use of such areas.
(5) To advise the appropriate local governmental agencies, including, but not
limited to, the Township Planning Commission, the Park and Recreation
Board, and the Board of Supervisors, in the acquisition of property, both real
and personal, by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, easement, devise or lease in
matters dealing with the purposes of this chapter.
B. The Environmental Advisory Council shall not exercise its powers or perform any
duties which by law are conferred or imposed upon a state agency.
§ 38-102 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 38-104
38:2
Chapter 62
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of conduct — See Ch. 23.
§ 38-104 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 38-104
62:1

ARTICLE I
Township Manager
[Adopted 11-21-1955 by Ord. No. 56 (Ch. 1, Part 1B, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 62-100. Creation of office.
The office of Township Manager is hereby created by the Township Board of
Supervisors.
§ 62-101. Appointment and removal. [Amended 11-6-1975 by Ord. No. 75-29]
The Township Board of Supervisors shall elect, by a majority vote of all of its members,
one person to fill the office of Township Manager, who shall serve at the pleasure of the
Supervisors. In the case of a vacancy, the Board shall fill such office by a majority vote
of all of its members. The Township Manager shall, however, be subject to removal at
any time by a majority vote of all the members of the Board. At least 30 days before such
removal becomes effective, the Board shall furnish the Manager with a written statement
setting forth its intention to remove him and the reasons therefor.
§ 62-102. Qualifications.
The Township Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to his actual experience in or his
knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of his office as herein outlined.
The Manager need not be a resident of the Township or of the state at the time of his
appointment, but as soon as possible thereafter he shall become, and during his tenure
shall remain, a resident of the Township.
§ 62-103. Bond. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
Before entering upon his duties, the Township Manager may be required to give a bond
to the Township, at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, with a bonding company
as surety, in such sum established annually at the reorganization meeting, conditioned
for the faithful performance of his duties. The premium for such bond shall be paid by
the Township.
§ 62-104. Disability or absence of Manager.
If the Township Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the Township, the
Board of Supervisors shall designate one qualified member of the Township staff who
shall perform the duties of the Manager during his absence or disability.
§ 62-105. Powers and duties.
A. The Township Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Township
and shall be responsible to the Township Board of Supervisors as a whole for the
proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the Township. His powers and
duties shall relate to the general management of all Township business not
expressly by statute imposed or conferred upon other Township officers.
B. Subject to recall by ordinance, the powers and duties of the Township Manager
§ 62-100 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 62-105
62:3
shall include the following:
(1) He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all Township
departments, except such departments the supervision of which shall not have
been delegated to the Manager by the Board.
(2) He shall hire and, when necessary for the good of the service, shall suspend or
discharge all employees under his supervision, provided that all full-time
policemen shall be suspended or discharged in accordance with the laws of the
commonwealth. The Manager shall report any action taken by authority of this
subsection at the next regular meeting thereafter of the Board.
(3) He shall prepare and submit to the Board before the close of the fiscal year, or
on such alternate date as the Board shall determine, a budget for the next fiscal
year and an explanatory budget message. In preparing the budget, the Manager
or an officer designated by him shall obtain from the head of each department,
agency, board or officer estimates of revenues and expenditures and other
supporting data as he requests. The Manager shall review such estimates and
may revise them before submitting the budget to the Board.
(4) He shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after its adoption
by the Board.
(5) The Township Manager shall hold such other Township offices or head one or
more of the Township departments as the Board may from time to time direct.
(6) He shall attend all meetings of the Board and of its committees with the right
to take part in the discussion, and he shall receive notice of all special meetings
of the Board and of its committees.
(7) He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Board and supply facts
pertinent thereto.
(8) He shall keep the Board informed as to the conduct of Township affairs,
submit periodic reports on the condition of the Township's finances and such
other reports as the Board requests, and make such recommendations to the
Board as he deems necessary.
(9) He shall submit to the Board, as soon as possible after the close of the fiscal
year, a complete report on the financial and administrative activities of the
Township for the preceding year.
(10) He shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and privileges
granted by the Township are observed.
(11) He may employ, by and with the approval of the Board, experts and
consultants to perform work and to advise in connection with any of the
functions of the Board which are within his duties.
(12) He shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and he shall
supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same except insofar as
such duties are expressly imposed upon some other Township officer by
statute.
§ 62-105 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 62-105
62:4
(13) He shall see that all money owed the Township is promptly paid and that
proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all Township
claims.
(14) He shall be the purchasing officer of the Township and he shall purchase, in
accordance with the provisions of the Second Class Township Code, all
supplies and equipment for the various agencies, boards, departments and
other offices of the Township. He shall keep an account of all purchases and
shall, from time to time or when directed by the Board, make a full written
report thereof. He shall also issue rules and regulations, subject to the approval
of the Board, governing the requisition and purchasing of all municipal
supplies and equipment.
(15) All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Township shall be
referred to the office of the Township Manager. He, or an officer designated
by him, shall investigate and dispose of such complaints, and the Township
Manager shall report thereon to the Board.
§ 62-105 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 62-105
62:5

ARTICLE II
Fire Marshal
[Adopted 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13 (Ch. 7, Part 1, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 62-200. Office of Fire Marshal created.
The office of Fire Marshal is hereby created in the Township of Middletown; such
officer to be appointed by the Township Manager. The Fire Marshal shall report to the
Township Manager except on those matters of which he is required by law to report
directly to the Board of Supervisors.
§ 62-201. Appointment; compensation; powers and duties.
The person appointed to the office of Fire Marshal shall be appointed as soon as
practicable after the adoption of this article. The aforesaid appointment notwithstanding,
the Township Manager retains the right to remove the Fire Marshal at his or her pleasure.
Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment was made. If
for any reason this office is not separately filled by appointment of and with the approval
and consent of the Board of Supervisors, the Fire Chief shall be deemed the ex officio
Fire Marshal thereof and shall have all the powers and duties hereinafter given to or
imposed upon the Fire Marshal. Compensation of the Fire Marshal shall be fixed from
time to time by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to resolution. The Fire Marshal shall
perform all duties and shall have and exercise all powers prescribed by law.
§ 62-202. Interference with Fire Marshal unlawful.
No person shall in any way obstruct or prevent or attempt to obstruct or prevent the Fire
Marshal in the discharge of his duties by denying or attempting to deny him access to
any premises owned or occupied by such person, either by failing or refusing correct
information requested by him in the investigation into the cause, origin or circumstances
of any fire.
§ 62-203. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section of this article
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 62-200 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 62-203
62:7

ARTICLE III
School Crossing Guards
[Adopted 9-9-1980 by Ord. No. 80-16 (Ch. 1, Part 2B, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 62-300. Physical examination for present guards. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-13]
Those persons presently employed as school crossing guards shall submit to a physical
examination, which shall include an eyesight examination, at such times as may be
deemed necessary in the judgment of the Township Manager. The examining physician
shall certify to the Township whether the school crossing guard is or is not physically
able to perform the usual and customary duties of a school crossing guard. The
examining physician shall be selected by the Township, and the Township shall pay
for the costs of examination. No person found physically unable to perform the usual
and customary duties of a school crossing guard shall be permitted to continue in that
employment; provided, however, that they shall be entitled to a hearing before the
Township Supervisors, at which hearing they shall be permitted to introduce evidence
from qualified medical personnel of their own selection with regard to their ability to
perform the duties of school crossing guards.
§ 62-301. Physical examination for new guards.
Any person seeking employment as a school crossing guard shall first submit to a
physical examination which shall include an eyesight examination, and no such person
shall be hired as a school crossing guard unless the examining physician first certifies
that they are physically able to perform the usual and customary duties as a school
crossing guard. The examining physician shall be selected by the Township, and the
Township shall pay for the costs of the examination.
§ 62-302. Retirement age.
The usual retirement age of school crossing guards is hereby established at age 70.
Those persons presently employed as school crossing guards or hereafter hired as school
crossing guards shall be retired from service at the end of the school year during which
they become 70 years of age; provided, however, school crossing guards may, in the sole
discretion of the Township, continue to be employed as school crossing guards beyond
their 70th birthday, provided they are certified by a physician selected by the Township
as being physically able to perform the usual and customary duties required of school
crossing guards.
§ 62-303. Standards.
Whenever the requirements of this article are in conflict with other requirements of the
ordinances of Middletown Township, the most restrictive or those imposing the highest
standards shall govern.4
4. Editor's Note: Original Art. IV of this chapter of the 2009 Code, Public Safety Director, adopted 12-22-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-06, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04.
§ 62-300 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 62-303
62:9

Chapter 70
PENSIONS
§ 62-303 PENSIONS § 62-303
70:1

ARTICLE I
Retirement Plan
[Adopted 1-26-1988 by Ord. No. 88-1 (Ch. 1, Part 8, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 70-100. Title.
This amending restatement may be referred to as the "Middletown Township Retirement
Plan."
§ 70-101. Applicability.
The provisions of this restated plan shall apply only to an individual who meets the
definition of "employee" set forth herein and whose employment terminates on or after
the restatement date. The rights and benefits, if any, of the individual whose employment
terminated prior thereto shall be determined in accordance with the prior provisions in
the plan in effect on the date his employment terminated (subject to any modification set
forth herein which may affect the holding and/or distribution of previously accrued but
unpaid benefits).
§ 70-102. Continuation of existing plan.
The adoption of this plan by the Township constitutes the continuation of the existing
plan ("prior plan"). Notwithstanding any other plan provisions to the contrary, the
following shall be applicable:
§ 70-103. Definitions. [Amended 4-18-1989 by Ord. No. 89-4; 2-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-8; 1-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-03; 6-3-2003 by Ord. No. 03-12]
The following words and phrases as used in this plan shall have the meaning set forth in
this article, unless a different meaning is otherwise clearly required by the context:
ACCRUED BENEFIT —
A. Subject to the conditions and limitations of this plan, each person who was a
participant under the prior plan immediately prior to the restatement date shall
continue as a participant under this plan.
B. Amounts being paid to a former participant or beneficiary in accordance with the
provisions of the prior plan shall continue to be paid in accordance with such
provisions.
C. Any beneficiary designation in effect under the prior plan immediately before its
amendment and continuation in the form of this restated plan shall be deemed to be
a valid designation filed with the employer under this plan, to the extent consistent
with the provisions hereof, unless and until the participant revokes such designation
or makes a new designation under this plan.
The benefit to which a participant is entitled as of any given date of reference
and will be an allocable portion of the benefit to which he will be entitled at
normal retirement date. As of any given date, a participant's accrued benefit shall
be determined on the basis of (1), (2) or (3) below, whichever applies:
A.
§ 70-100 PENSIONS § 70-103
70:3
ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS — The total amount contributed by any
participant to this plan or its predecessor by way of payroll deduction or otherwise, plus
interest credited thereon at the rate of 6%, compounded annually.
ACT — The Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act, which was
enacted as Act 205 of 1984, 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT — Two forms of payment which each involve life
contingencies and which are of equal actuarial present value on a specified date. The
factors to be used in determining actuarial equivalents shall be 7.5% interest and the
1971 Group Annuity Mortality Table rates (male rates).
ACTUARY — The person, partnership, association or corporation which at any given
time is serving as actuary, provided that such actuary must be an "approved actuary" as
defined in the Act.
AUTHORIZED LEAVE OF ABSENCE — Any leave of absence granted in writing by
the employer for reasons, including, but not limited to, accident, sickness, pregnancy
or temporary disability, education, training, jury duty or such other reasons as may
necessitate authorized leave from active employment.
BENEFICIARY — Any person or legal entity designated by a participant to receive
death benefits under the plan.
CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER—The person designated by the Township who
has the primary responsibility for the execution of the administrative affairs for the
Township.
CODE — The Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended.
COMPENSATION — The basic regular nondeferred rate of taxable wages or salary
(base pay only) received by an employee, excluding therefrom any additional or extra
If the participant's benefit is determined under § 70-106A(1) [and
§ 70-106A(2), if applicable], the accrued benefit shall be the monthly annuity
equivalent payable at normal retirement date of the participant's account
balance (determined as of such date);
(1)
If the participant's benefit is determined under § 70-106A(3), it shall be the
monthly amount determined thereunder on the basis of the participant's years
of service as of such date; or
(2)
If the participant's benefit is determined under § 70-106A(4), it shall be the
monthly accrued benefit payable at normal retirement date, determined in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the prior plan as in effect on the day
preceding the restatement date;
(3)
And such accrued benefit shall be payable as a monthly annuity commencing at
normal retirement date, or the actuarial equivalent thereof, in accordance with the
provisions of § 70-106 hereof; provided, however, a participant's accrued benefit
shall be subject to any applicable offsets, adjustments or limitations set forth
hereunder prior to the payment thereof. The accrued benefit of any participant in
the plan on the day preceding the restatement date shall not be less, as of the
restatement date, than it was on the day preceding the restatement date due to the
terms of this amendment and restatement of the plan.
B.
§ 70-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 70-103
70:4
forms of remuneration such as bonuses, commissions or overtime payments.
CONTINUOUS EMPLOYMENT—An employee's period of continuous uninterrupted
employment with the employer beginning with such employee's service commencement
date and ending on the date when he terminates employment with the employer. For
purposes of this section, an employee's employment shall not be deemed to have been
interrupted by any periods of authorized leave of absence expressly granted by the
employer; nor shall it be deemed interrupted by any period of absence during which
he served in the armed forces of the United States of America, provided the employee
returns to his employment with the employer at the time and under the circumstances
required to give him reemployment rights under any federal or state law. In the event
an employee does not return to employment within the specified period or at the end of
an authorized leave of absence, he shall be deemed to have terminated his employment
when he originally left the service of the employer.
CONTRACT or POLICY — A retirement annuity or retirement income endowment
policy (or a combination of both), or any other form of insurance contract or policy
which shall be deemed appropriate in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
EARLY RETIREMENT DATE — The date when a participant retires or terminates
employment with the employer if such date is prior to the participant's normal retirement
date but on or after the later of:
EFFECTIVE DATE — The date upon which the provisions of this plan were first
effective, that is, September 1, 1964.
ELIGIBILITY DATE — The day which coincides with or immediately follows an
employee's completion of the eligibility requirements of § 70-104.
EMPLOYEE—Any person who is regularly employed as a nonuniformed employee by
the employer for at least 1,000 hours of service during each year of his employment with
the employer; such term shall exclude:
EMPLOYER — The Township of Middletown.
INSURER — The current insurer, Principal Mutual Life Insurance Company of Des
Moines, Iowa, or such other insurance company, if any, as may, from time to time
hereafter, be designated by the employer.
LATE RETIREMENT DATE — The first day of the month coincident with or next
following the date when a participant retires pursuant to the provisions of § 70-106E.
A. Attainment of age 60; and
B. Completion of 20 years of service.
Any person who is represented by a collective bargaining agent with whom the
matter of retirement benefits has been the subject of good faith bargaining with the
employer and with respect to whom inclusion in this plan has not been provided for
in such collective bargaining agreement.
A.
B. Any person covered by another plan maintained by the employer.
C. Any person employed on a temporary or seasonal basis.
D. Any person who works less than 35 hours per week.
§ 70-103 PENSIONS § 70-103
70:5
NORMAL FORM — A life annuity with a modified cash refund of the participant's
accumulated contributions.
NORMAL RETIREMENT AGE — The earlier of the following dates:
NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE — The first of the month coincident with or next
following the date when an employee attains normal retirement age.
PARTICIPANT — Any employee who has commenced participation in this plan in
accordance with § 70-104 and has not for any reason ceased to participate hereunder.
PENSION FUND — The assets of the pension plan, which shall be accounted for
separately from the assets of any other plans maintained by the employer and which shall
be administered under the supervision of the employer in accordance with the terms of
the plan.
PLAN — The Middletown Township Retirement Plan.
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR — The person or committee appointed by the employer to
supervise and administer the plan. In the event no such appointment is made, the Plan
Administrator shall be the employer.
PLAN YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning on January 1 and ending on the
following December 31.
PRIOR PLAN — The plan as it existed on the day preceding the restatement date.
PROBATIONARY PERIOD — The mandatory time period that the employer requires
to evaluate an employee in that position.
RESTATEMENT DATE — January 1, 1987, the effective date of this amended and
restated plan.
SERVICE COMMENCEMENT DATE — An employee's date of hire.
TOTALLY AND PERMANENTLY DISABLED — A participant that is subject to a
mental or physical incapacity of such severity that he is eligible to receive disability
benefits under the Federal Social Security System.
TRUST — A separate account maintained by a trustee for the purposes of receiving
contributions to the plan and for performing and providing to the Plan Administrator an
accounting of all such contributions and/or other activities of the account as the Plan
Administrator may direct.[Added 10-17-2011 by Ord. No. 11-07]
TRUSTEE — An individual or organization appointed by the Board of Supervisors,
including, but not limited to, a bank or trust company, who shall take ownership of
the assets contained in a trust account for the purposes of protecting such assets for
The date which is the later of:
(1) The date when an employee attains age 65; and
(2) The date when such employee completes five years of service; or
A.
The date which is the later of:
(1) The date when an employee attains age 62; and
(2) The date when such employee completes 30 years of service.
B.
§ 70-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 70-103
70:6
the sole benefit of the beneficiaries of the trust account, and who shall receive, invest,
disburse and/or otherwise dispose of contributions to, and/or assets of, the trust account
in accordance with the direction of the Plan Administrator.[Added 10-17-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-075]
YEAR OF SERVICE — Each completed twelve-month period of continuous
employment with the employer. Such twelve-month periods shall be measured
beginning on the employee's service commencement date and anniversaries thereof.
Years of service shall be calculated to fractional years on the basis of completed months.
§ 70-104. Eligibility for participation. [Amended 2-19-1991 by Ord. No. 91-8;
12-17-1991 by Ord. No. 91-34]
A. An employee shall become a participant in the plan if he is an employee of the
employer on his eligibility date, as provided in Subsection A(1) or (2) below:
(1) Each employee who was a participant in the plan on the day preceding the
restatement date shall continue to be a participant on and after the restatement
date, subject to the terms hereof governing continued participation in the plan.
(2) In all other cases, an employee shall become a participant in the plan after
completion of the employee's probationary period.
B. Each employee who was an employee on the day preceding the restatement date but
who had not yet elected to become a participant shall be given a onetime irrevocable
election as soon after the restatement date as administratively feasible, providing
that either Subsection B(1) or (2) shall apply, as follows:
(1) Such participant shall be covered as a noncontributory participant hereunder
and shall be eligible only for the benefit described in § 70-106A(3) hereof; or
(2) Such participant shall be covered as a contributory participant hereunder by
making contributions in accordance with § 70-106B and shall be eligible to
receive the benefit provided under § 70-106A(1) or (4).
C. Each other employee whose service commencement date occurs on or after the
restatement date shall, as a condition of his employment with the employer, be
required to participate hereunder and shall automatically become a participant in
the plan on his eligibility date.
D. The elections provided under § 70-104A, B and C shall be available on a onetime
basis only as of the aforesaid dates and shall not be subject to change, modification
or revocation thereafter.
E. Participation requirements. Each participant whose service commencement date
occurs on or after the restatement date, § 70-105B hereof, shall execute and
complete any enrollment application forms, as required by the Plan Administrator.
Each participant whose service commencement date occurred prior to the
restatement date and who is a contributory participant as of the restatement date
shall also be required to contribute to the plan in accordance with § 70-105B. Only
those participants who were employees as of December 31, 1986, but who had not
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 70-103 PENSIONS § 70-104
70:7
§ 70-105. Contributions. [Amended 2-19-1991 by Ord. No. 91-8; 12-17-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-34; 6-3-2003 by Ord. No. 03-12]
yet elected to participate in the plan shall be given the election to be covered as
"noncontributory participants" hereunder.
F. Change in status. In the event a participant who remains in the service of the
employer ceases to be an employee eligible for coverage hereunder, or who ceases
or fails to make any contributions which are required as a condition of his
participation hereunder, no further benefit accruals shall occur until the participant
again qualifies under such participation requirements of § 70-104A through D.
G. Leave of absence. During any leave of absence that is not an authorized leave of
absence, a participant shall be deemed an inactive participant and shall not be given
credit for years of service for vesting, nor shall he continue to accrue any years of
service for benefits hereunder. If the employee is not reemployed by the expiration
of his leave of absence, his participation in the plan shall cease on the date on which
his leave of absence commenced. During any authorized leave of absence, a
participant shall continue to receive credit for years of service for vesting, but years
of credited service shall not accrue unless expressly authorized by the employer as
part of the terms and conditions of such authorized leave of absence.
H. Recordkeeping. The employer shall furnish the Administrator with such
information as will aid the Administrator in the administration of the plan and trust.
Such information shall include all pertinent data on employees for purposes of
determining their eligibility to participate in this plan initially and subsequently.
I. Noneligible participant. The Township Manager shall not be eligible to participate
in the plan.
A. Employer contributions. The employer shall contribute to the plan the amount
determined by the plan's actuary and certified by the chief administrative officer as
the amount which, when combined with state aid and participants' contributions, is
necessary to adequately fund the benefits hereunder in accordance with the
requirements of the Act.
B. Mandatory employee contributions. As a condition of participation hereunder, each
participant shall be required to file a written designation with the Plan
Administrator authorizing that contributions be deducted from his monthly
compensation and contributed to the plan at a rate of 5% per month, with the sole
exception of those noncontributory participants described in § 70-104E who are
eligible to receive only the fixed benefit provided in § 70-106A(3). Such
contributions shall be maintained in an employee contribution account which sets
forth the amount of a contributory participant's accumulated contributions as of any
given date.
C. No reversion to the employer. At no time shall it be possible for the plan assets to
be used for, or diverted to, any purpose other than for the exclusive benefit of the
participants and their beneficiaries, except that contributions made by the employer
may be returned to the employer if:
(1) The contribution was made due to a mistake of fact and contribution is
§ 70-104 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 70-105
70:8
§ 70-106. Retirement benefits. [Amended 1-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-03; 6-3-2003
by Ord. No. 03-12]
returned within one year of the mistaken payment of the contribution; or
(2) The plan is terminated, as provided for in § 70-112.
A. Normal retirement pension. If a participant retires, on or after the restatement date,
on his normal retirement date, he shall be entitled to receive a monthly normal
retirement benefit, expressed in the normal form, commencing at normal retirement
date, equal to whichever of the following applies:
(1) The account balance formula. For any contributory participant who
participates in the plan on or after the restatement date, such participant's
benefit shall be expressed in the form of an account balance but shall be
payable in the form of a monthly annuity which is the actuarial equivalent of
such account balance. The monthly annuity equivalent shall be based upon the
factors used in determining actuarial equivalents. The participant's
hypothetical account balance shall be composed of two parts, as follows:
(a) An employee contribution account, which shall provide a benefit which
is the actuarial equivalent of the amount of the participant's accumulated
contributions made to the plan on and after the restatement date; and
(b) The employer contribution account, which shall provide a benefit which
is equivalent to the amount credited to the participant's employee
contribution account in Subsection A(1)(a) plus the additional amount
that would hypothetically accumulate in the employee contribution
account if the mandatory employee contribution rate of 5% as set forth in
§ 70-105B were increased to 7% effective January 1, 2003.
(2) Past service benefit for current participants. For participants who had entered
the plan on an eligibility date occurring prior to the restatement date, in
addition to the benefit described in Subsection A(1) above, a past service
benefit shall be established in the form of a beginning account balance
allocated to both the employee contribution account and the employer
contribution account. The beginning balance allocated to each of these
accounts shall be identical and shall be an amount equal to the participant's
accumulated contributions, determined as of the day preceding the restatement
date, with interest thereon as provided under the prior plan on the day
preceding the restatement date.
(3) Minimum benefit formula for noncontributory participants. For employees
employed by the employer on the day preceding the restatement date, who are
not participants as of the day preceding the restatement date and who file an
irrevocable election not to be covered as contributory participants under the
plan, such participants shall be covered as noncontributory participants
hereunder, as provided under § 70-104. The benefit payable to such
noncontributory participants, as of any given date of reference, shall be a
benefit expressed in the form of a single life annuity, payable at normal
retirement date and equal to $10 multiplied by any years of service earned by
§ 70-105 PENSIONS § 70-106
70:9
the participant subsequent to January 1, 1987.
(4) Minimum benefit for current participants. For participants who were
contributory participants covered by the plan on the day preceding the
restatement date, the minimum benefit payable under this plan on and after the
restatement date shall not be less than the benefit which would have accrued
under the formula contained in Section 1307(A) of the prior plan, as in effect
on the day preceding the restatement date, as if such formula had continued in
effect subsequent to the restatement date.
B. Account balance for bookkeeping purposes only. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this plan, the account balance formula described under § 70-106A(1)
and (2) shall be upon a hypothetical account balance maintained as a bookkeeping
entry only. Such amounts shall not be maintained as actual individual accounts, and
neither the Plan Administrator nor the trustee shall be under any obligation to
establish such accounts; moreover, there shall be no requirement that the credited
interest rate equal the actual earnings of the trust fund for any given period, nor
shall there be any requirement that the sum of individual accounts correspond to the
value of trust assets as of any given point of reference. The account balance formula
shall be solely a mathematical formula used to derive the amount of a participant's
accrued benefit under this defined benefit pension plan. Such accrued benefit shall
be payable only in the form of an annuity in the normal form, or an annuity which
is the actuarial equivalent thereof, unless other forms of payment are authorized
under other circumstances which are expressly permitted hereunder.
C. Normal form. The normal form of retirement benefit hereunder shall be a life
annuity with a modified cash refund of the participant's accumulated contributions.
D. Early retirement. If a participant shall retire on an early retirement date, he shall be
entitled to receive, upon making an election therefor, either:
(1) A deferred pension commencing at normal retirement date equal to the
participant's accrued benefit determined as of his early retirement date; or
(2) An immediate pension commencing on his early retirement (or on any date
intervening between his early retirement date and his normal retirement date)
equal to whichever of the following amounts is applicable:
(a) If the participant's benefit is determined under § 70-106A(3) or (4), such
benefit shall be equal to the benefit described in § 70-106D(1) above,
reduced, however, by 6 2/3% for each year by which the date of
commencement of benefit payments precedes the participant's normal
retirement date. (This reduction shall be straight-line interpolated to
completed months.)
(b) If the participant's benefit is determined under § 70-106A(1) [and
§ 70-106A(2), if applicable], such benefit shall be the participant's
account balance determined under the account balance formula of
§ 70-106 as of his early retirement date, converted to a monthly annuity
benefit payable as of the participant's early retirement date (or any date
prior to normal retirement date which is the date selected by the
participant as the commencement date for his early retirement benefit),
§ 70-106 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 70-106
70:10
on the basis of the factors used in determining actuarial equivalents.
E. Late retirement. If a participant remains in the employ of the employer subsequent
to his normal retirement date, he shall continue to be eligible to participate
hereunder. A participant who retires on a late retirement date shall be entitled to
receive a monthly pension determined in accordance with § 70-106, but based on
his account balance and/or years of service as of his late retirement date.
F. Preretirement death and disability benefit.
(1) If a contributory participant dies or becomes totally and permanently disabled
prior to the date when he is eligible to receive retirement benefits hereunder, a
benefit equal to the actuarial equivalent of the participant's entire account
balance (whether attributable to employer or employee contributions) as set
forth under § 70-106A(1) and (2) shall be payable to the participant, in the case
of disability, or to the participant's beneficiary, in the case of the participant's
death.
(2) If a noncontributory participant dies prior to becoming eligible to receive
retirement benefits hereunder, no benefit shall be payable hereunder.
(3) If a noncontributory participant becomes totally and permanently disabled
prior to the date when he is eligible to retire and receive benefits hereunder,
such participant shall be eligible to receive a deferred benefit payable at
normal retirement date equal to the participant's accrued benefit, determined
as of the date when his employment terminates due to his becoming totally and
permanently disabled.
G. Postretirement death benefits. If a participant dies subsequent to the date when his
retirement benefits commence, no death benefits shall be payable under this article,
and the death benefit payable, if any, from this plan shall be limited to that which is
payable pursuant to the form of benefit payment in force for such participant at the
time his death occurs.
H. Maximum benefit limitations.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this plan, no benefit provided under
this plan attributable to contributions of the employer shall exceed, as an
annual amount, the lesser of:
(a) Ninety thousand dollars, assuming a single life annuity or qualified joint
and survivor annuity (as defined for purposes of Code Section 415),
subject to cost-of-living adjustments made from time to time by plan
amendments or automatically in accordance with and in such amounts as
are prescribed in or pursuant to regulations promulgated under Section
415(d) of the Code (which adjustments shall not become effective prior
to January 1 of the year for which such adjustment is made); or
(b) One hundred percent of the participant's average compensation for the
three consecutive years of employment (or such lesser number as may
apply if the employee does not have three consecutive years) in which he
received the highest aggregate compensation while a participant, and the
§ 70-106 PENSIONS § 70-106
70:11
rate of benefit accrual shall be frozen or reduced accordingly, subject to
the provisions of Subsection H(2) below.
(2) The limitation provided in Subsection H(1) above shall be subject to the
following conditions:
(a) For purposes of the above limitations, "compensation" shall mean the
participant's wages, salaries, fees for professional services and other
amounts received for personal services actually rendered in the course of
employment with an employer maintaining the plan. The term
"compensation" as used in this section shall not include items such as the
following:
[1] Contributions made by the employer to a plan of deferred
compensation to the extent that, before the application of Code
Section 415 limitations to that plan, the contributions are not
includable in the gross income of the employee for the taxable year
in which contributed. In addition, employer contributions made on
behalf of an employee to a simplified employee pension described
in Code Section 408(k) are not considered as compensation for the
taxable year in which contributed to the extent such contributions
are deductible by the employee under Code Section 219(b)(7).
Additionally, any distributions from a plan of deferred compensation
are not considered as compensation for Code Section 415 purposes,
regardless of whether such amounts are includable in the gross
income of the employee when distributed. However, any amounts
received by an employee pursuant to an unfunded nonqualified plan
may be considered as compensation for Code Section 415 purposes
in the year such amounts are includable in the gross income of the
employee.
[2] Other amounts which receive special tax benefits, such as premiums
for group term life insurance (but only to the extent that the
premiums are not includable in the gross income of the employee),
or contributions made by an employer (whether or not under a salary
reduction agreement) towards the purchase of an annuity contract
described in Internal Revenue Code Section 403(b) (whether or not
the contributions are excludable from the gross income of the
employee).
(b) For purposes of the above limitations, if the benefit under the plan is
payable in any form other than in the forms described therein (without
regard to ancillary benefits) or if the employees contribute to the plan or
make rollover contributions, the determination as to whether the
limitations have been satisfied shall be made by adjusting the benefit so
that it is the actuarial equivalent of the benefit described in § 70-106H(1).
For the purpose of making the adjustment in the form of the benefit to an
actuarial equivalent, the interest rate shall not be less than the greater of
5% or the rate specified under the plan's definition of actuarial equivalent.
(c) If retirement income benefits commence prior to a participant's
§ 70-106 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 70-106
70:12
§ 70-107. Payment of benefits.
attainment of age 62, the limitation contained in § 70-106H(1)(a) shall
be adjusted to the actuarial equivalent of $90,000 annual benefit
commencing at age 62. The reduction under this paragraph shall not
reduce the limitation of § 70-106H(1)(a) below $75,000 if the benefit
begins at or after age 55 or, if the benefit begins before age 55, the
amount which is the equivalent of the $75,000 limitation for age 55. For
the purpose of making this adjustment, the interest rate used shall not be
less than the greater of 5% or the rate specified in the plan's definition of
actuarial equivalent.
(d) If retirement income benefits commence after the participant's attainment
of age 65, the limitation described in § 70-106H(1)(a) shall be adjusted
so that such limitation (as so increased) equals an annual benefit
(beginning when such retirement income benefit begins) which is the
actuarial equivalent of a ninety-thousand-dollar annual benefit
commencing at age 65; provided, however, that in no case shall such
benefit exceed the limitation contained in § 70-106H(1)(b). For the
purpose of making this adjustment, the interest rate assumption shall not
be greater than the lesser of 5% or the rate specified in the plan's
definition of actuarial equivalent.
(e) Benefits payable to a participant under this plan shall be deemed not to
exceed the limitations imposed by § 70-106H(1) if the annual benefit
payable to such participant does not exceed $10,000 (for this year or any
prior year), provided such participant has never participated in a defined
contribution plan maintained by the employer.
(f) In the event a participant has less than 10 years of service, the limitations
described in § 70-106H(1) and (2)(e) of this section shall be multiplied
by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of years of service
credited to the participant and the denominator of which is 10.
(g) For purposes of applying the limitations of this section, all defined benefit
plans of the employer shall be treated as one defined benefit plan, and all
defined contribution plans shall be treated as one defined contribution
plan.
(h) For purposes of the above limitations, the limitation year shall be the plan
year, unless such period is otherwise defined in a written resolution
adopted by the employer.
A. Forms of benefit payment.
(1) The normal form for payment of retirement benefits shall be a life annuity with
a modified cash refund of the participant's accumulated contributions.
(2) If a participant elects not to receive his benefits in the normal form, he shall
file a written election with the Plan Administrator indicating that he wishes to
receive payment of his benefit in such other annuity forms as may be approved
and authorized by the Plan Administrator at the time such payments
§ 70-106 PENSIONS § 70-107
70:13
commence. Any optional form authorized for payment of benefits hereunder
shall be the actuarial equivalent of the normal form. Payment of benefits in
the form of a single lump-sum cash payment shall also be permitted under this
plan.
B. Commencement of benefits.
(1) A participant may elect to commence receiving distribution of his retirement
benefits as of his normal retirement date. If a participant elects immediate
commencement of his retirement benefit, payments shall commence as of the
first of the month following his retirement date.
(2) Unless the participant otherwise elects, payment of his benefits under the plan
shall commence not later than 60 days following the close of the plan year in
which occurs the latest of the following dates:
(a) The date when the participant attains normal retirement age;
(b) The 10th anniversary of the year in which the participant commenced
participation in the plan; or
(c) The date when the participant terminates his service with the employer.
C. Required distributions.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan, the entire benefit of any
participant who becomes entitled to benefits prior to his death shall be
distributed either:
(a) Not later than the required beginning date; or
(b) Over a one-hundred-twenty-month period beginning not later than the
required beginning date and extending over the life of such participant or
over the lives of such participant and designated beneficiary (or over a
period not extending beyond the life expectancy of such participant or the
joint life expectancies of such participant and a designated beneficiary).
(2) If a participant who is entitled to benefits under this plan dies prior to the date
when his entire interest has been distributed to him after distribution of his
benefits has begun in accordance with § 70-107B above, the remaining portion
of such benefit shall be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of
distribution being used under § 70-107B as of the date of his death.
(3) If a participant who is entitled to benefits under this plan dies before
distribution of his benefits has begun, the entire interest of such employee shall
be distributed within five years of the death of such employee, unless the
following sentence is applicable. If any portion of the employee's interest is
payable to (or for the benefit of) a designated beneficiary, such portion shall
be distributed over the life of such designated beneficiary (or over a period not
extending beyond the life expectancy of such beneficiary), and such
distributions begin not later than one year after the date of the employee's
death or such later date as provided by regulations issued by the Secretary of
the Treasury, then for purposes of the five-year rule set forth in the preceding
§ 70-107 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 70-107
70:14
sentence, the benefit payable to the beneficiary shall be treated as distributed
on the date on which such distributions begin; provided, however, that
notwithstanding the preceding sentence if the designated beneficiary is the
surviving spouse of the participant, then the date on which distributions are
required to begin shall not be earlier than the date upon which the employee
would have attained age 70 1/2 and, further provided, if the surviving spouse
dies before the distributions to such spouse begin, this subparagraph shall be
applied as if the surviving spouse were the employee.
(4) For purposes of this section, the following definitions and procedures shall
apply:
(a) "Required beginning date" shall mean April 1 of the calendar year
following the later of:
[1] The calendar year in which the employee attains age 70 1/2; or
[2] The calendar year in which the employee retires.
(b) "Designated beneficiary" shall mean any individual designated by the
employee under this plan according to its rules.
(c) Any amount paid to a child shall be treated as if it had been paid to the
surviving spouse if such amount will become payable to the surviving
spouse upon such child's reaching majority (or other designated event
permitted under regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury).
(d) For purposes of this section, the life expectancy of an employee and/or
the employee's spouse (other than in the case of a life annuity) may be
redetermined but not more frequently than annually.
D. Small amounts. In its sole discretion, the employer may direct the Administrator to
distribute the vested benefit of a participant who is terminating his participation in
the plan in the form of a lump-sum payment if the actuarial present value of such
benefit is $3,500 or less and such participant is 100% vested in his accrued benefit
hereunder. Any distribution made pursuant to this section shall be made within one
year after a participant terminates service with the employer.
E. Designation of beneficiary. A participant may designate a beneficiary or
beneficiaries with respect to any benefits which may become payable upon his
death, and he may from time to time change such beneficiary or beneficiaries. All
such designations shall be made on forms provided by the Plan Administrator. In
the absence of such a designation, if applicable, the beneficiary of the participant
shall be his personal representative, if any, and if none, those persons entitled to his
estate under the intestate laws of the state in which the participant was domiciled at
the time of his death.
F. Nonduplication of benefits. To avoid any duplication of benefits, if any participant
ceases to be employed for any reason and is reemployed, any benefit payments then
being paid pursuant to the terms of this plan shall be suspended and future
retirement benefits shall be coordinated in such a manner as to preclude any
duplication hereunder.
§ 70-107 PENSIONS § 70-108
70:15
§ 70-108. Termination of employment. [Amended 6-3-2003 by Ord. No. 03-12]
A. Rights of terminated employees. If a participant shall cease to be an employee
except as otherwise hereinbefore provided, his interest and rights under the plan
shall be limited to those contained in the following sections of this article.
B. Refund of accumulated contributions. If a participant whose employment with the
employer has been terminated for any reason other than death or disability prior to
his normal retirement date, and he is neither eligible for a pension under the plan,
nor has he completed at least five years of service, such participant shall be entitled
to receive an amount equal to his accumulated contributions, if any. Upon receipt
of such amount, said participant and his or her beneficiary shall not be entitled to
any further payments from the plan. (Noncontributory participants shall not be
entitled to any benefit under this section.)
C. Vested benefits. If a participant's employment terminates for a reason other than
death or retirement after he has completed at least five years of service, such
participant shall be entitled to a deferred vested benefit equal to his accrued benefit
determined as of the date when his employment terminates.
D. Payment of vested benefits.
(1) Payment of vested benefits under § 70-108C shall be in lieu of a refund of a
participant's employee contribution account under § 70-108B. Payments of a
participant's vested benefit shall be made by the trustee, at the direction of the
Administrator and subject to the provisions of § 70-108C, at the date which
would have been such participant's normal retirement date had he continued
his employment (or such earlier date as may be authorized by the employer on
a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis with respect to all plan participants).
Notwithstanding the preceding, a participant with an entitlement to a vested
benefit may elect to commence receiving such benefit as of the date when he
would have been eligible for an early retirement benefit as provided in
§ 70-106D had he continued employment with the employer; provided,
however, that any payment of a vested accrued benefit as of a participant's
early retirement date shall be subject to the reduction factor for early payment
set forth in § 70-106D(2). A participant eligible to receive his vested benefit
may be permitted to receive such benefit in any form authorized for payment
of retirement benefits under the provisions of § 70-107A. The Plan
Administrator shall, after consulting with the participant, and subject to the
provisions of § 70-108C, determine the time and form of any distribution of
vested benefits hereunder in a nondiscriminatory manner and not contrary to
any laws or regulations which may govern such distributions.
(2) In the event a deferred vested participant elects to receive a refund of his
accumulated contributions in a single lump-sum payment at any time on or
after the date he ceases to be an employee and before the date when payment
of his vested benefit commences, such payment shall be deemed a voluntary
cash-out hereunder and shall be payable in lieu of the portion of the deferred
benefits otherwise payable hereunder which is attributable to his employee
contributions account. Thereafter, such employee's deferred vested benefit
shall be limited to the employer contribution account portion or his accrued
§ 70-108 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 70-108
70:16
§ 70-109. Administration.
benefit hereunder.
E. Vesting at normal retirement date. Notwithstanding the preceding, a participant
shall become 100% vested as of his normal retirement age.
F. Forfeiture upon death. A participant who terminates his employment with the
employer at a time when he is not vested in any portion of his accrued benefit
derived from employer contributions shall cease to be a participant hereunder and
shall not be entitled to any benefits under the plan derived from employer
contributions. Notwithstanding the preceding, in any case where a participant has
made employee contributions to the plan, the current value of the participant's
employee contribution account shall be refunded to the beneficiary of the
participant, as provided under § 70-106F, if the participant dies prior to receipt of
his vested benefit.
G. Application of forfeitures. Amounts forfeited by any participant may not be used to
increase the benefits which other participants would otherwise receive under the
plan; they shall be used only to reduce the employer's contributions to the plan.
A. Plan Administrator.
(1) The administration of the plan and the operation of the pension fund shall be
directed and supervised by the Board of Supervisors of the employer. The
Board of Supervisors shall have the power and authority, by a majority of its
members, either directly or through a designated representative, to do all acts
and to execute, acknowledge and deliver all instruments necessary to
implement and effectuate the purpose of this plan. The Board of Supervisors
may appoint a Plan Administrator, which shall have the power and duty to
operate and administer the provisions of the plan and to make and enforce such
rules and regulations as may be necessary and proper for the efficient
administration of the plan.
(2) If the Board of Supervisors does not appoint a Plan Administrator, the Board
of Supervisors shall be the Plan Administrator.
(3) The Plan Administrator may appoint such subcommittees with such powers as
it shall determine; may authorize one or more of its members to execute or
deliver any instrument or do any act on its behalf; and may employ counsel
and agents and such clerical, accounting and actuarial services as it may
require in carrying out the provisions of the plan.
B. Authority and duties of the Plan Administrator.
(1) The Plan Administrator shall have the power to determine the eligibility of any
employee to participate in or receive benefits under this plan, to settle any
disputes which may arise in the operation of the plan, and to determine the
interest of any participant in the plan.
(2) All discretionary acts which may be taken pursuant to this plan by the Plan
Administrator with respect to participants or their beneficiaries shall be
§ 70-108 PENSIONS § 70-109
70:17
§ 70-110. The pension fund.
uniform and nondiscriminatory in their nature and shall be applicable to all
participants and their beneficiaries in substantially identical situations.
A. Operation of the pension fund.
(1) The Township's Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to hold and
supervise the investment of the assets of the pension fund, subject to the
provisions of the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and of this plan
and any amendment thereto.
(2) The pension fund shall be used to pay benefits as provided in the plan and, to
the extent not paid directly by the employer, to pay the expenses of
administering the plan pursuant to authorization by the employer.
(3) The employer intends the plan to be permanent and for the exclusive benefit
of its employees. It expects to make the contributions to the trust required
under the plan. The employer shall not be liable in any manner for any
insufficiency in the pension fund; benefits are payable only from the pension
fund, and only to the extent that there are monies available therein.
(4) The pension fund will consist of all funds held by the employer under the plan,
including contributions made pursuant to the provisions hereof and the
investment, reinvestments and proceeds thereof. The pension fund shall be
held, managed, and administered by the insurer in accordance with the terms
of the plan and the group annuity contract.
B. Investment of contributions. [Amended 10-17-2011 by Ord. No. 11-07]
(1) All contributions made under the plan will be deposited with the trustee or
insurer and invested in accordance with the investment policy adopted by the
Board of Supervisors. The investment of contributions may include insurance
contracts, policies or group annuity contracts, as well as fixed income
securities, equity securities, mutual funds, bank collective funds, cash
equivalents and/or other investments as deemed appropriate by the Plan
Administrator.
(2) To the extent not prohibited by state law, the employer may specify whether
all or any portion of an employer contribution deposited under a group annuity
contract is to be invested in any of the separate accounts of the insurer in which
the group contract participates.
C. Actions of insurer. No insurer which may issue a contract or policy for the purpose
of this plan shall be required to take or permit any action contrary to the provisions
of said contract or policy nor shall the insurer be required to look into the terms of
this plan or question any action as authorized by the plan sponsor.
D. Insurer not a party to plan. The insurer shall not be deemed to be a party to this plan
for any purpose nor shall it be responsible for the validity of this plan.
E. Common investments. The insurer shall not be required to make separate
investments for individual participants or to maintain separate investments for each
§ 70-109 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 70-110
70:18
§ 70-111. Amendment.
§ 70-112. Plan termination.
participant's account but may invest contributions and any profits or gains
therefrom in common investments.
A. Right to amend. The employer shall have the right to amend the plan at any time,
by adoption of the appropriate resolution or ordinance, and with respect to any
provisions thereof, and all parties thereto or claiming any interest thereunder shall
be bound thereby; provided, however, that no amendment shall revise the accrued
benefit of a participant determined as of the later of the date such amendment is
adopted or the date such amendment becomes effective, if such revised vested
accrued benefit is less than that computed under the plan without regard to such
amendment.
B. No amendment to the pension plan which provides for a benefit modification shall
be made unless the cost estimate described in § 70-113C has been prepared and
presented to the employer in accordance with the Act.
A. Right to terminate. It is the present intention of the employer to maintain the plan
indefinitely. Nevertheless the employer reserves the right, at any time, to
permanently discontinue further contributions to the plan or to terminate the entire
plan.
B. Distribution upon termination.
(1) In the event of the termination or partial termination of the plan, all amounts
of benefits accrued by the affected participant to the date of such termination,
to the extent funded on such date, shall immediately become fully vested and
nonforfeitable. In the event of termination of the plan, the employer shall
direct either:
(a) That the accrued benefits of participants in the plan continue to be held in
the pension fund in accordance with the provisions of the plan (other than
those provisions related to forfeitures) without regard to such termination
until all funds have been distributed in accordance with such provisions;
or
(b) That distribution be made to each participant in an amount equal to his
accrued benefit as of such date in the form of a lump sum or such other
form as may be approved by the employer.
(2) If there are insufficient assets in the pension fund to provide for all vested
accrued benefits as of the date of plan termination, priority shall first be given
to the distribution of any amounts attributable to participant contributions
before assets are applied to the distribution of vested benefits attributable to
other sources hereunder.
C. Residual assets. If all liabilities under the plan to participants and others entitled to
receive a benefit have been satisfied and there remain any residual assets in the
pension fund, the residual assets shall be returned to the employer insofar as such
§ 70-110 PENSIONS § 70-112
70:19
§ 70-113. Provisions to comply with Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard
and Recovery Act of 1984.
return does not contravene any provision of law, and any remaining balance in
excess of employer contributions shall be returned to the commonwealth.
A. Actuarial valuations. The plan's actuary shall perform an actuarial valuation at least
biennially unless the employer is applying or has applied for supplemental state
assistance pursuant to Section 603 of the Act,6 whereupon actuarial valuation
reports shall be made annually.
(1) Such biennial actuarial valuation report shall be made as of the beginning of
each plan year occurring in an odd-numbered calendar year, beginning with
the year 1985.
(2) Such actuarial valuation shall be prepared and certified by an approved
actuary, as such term is defined in the Act.
(3) The expenses attributable to the preparation of any actuarial valuation report
or experience investigation required by the Act or any other expense which is
permissible under the terms of the Act and which are directly associated with
administering the plan shall be allowable administrative expenses payable
from the assets of the pension fund. Such allowable expenses shall include but
not be limited to the following:
(a) Investment cost associated with obtaining information, investments and
investment management fees.
(b) Accounting expenses.
(c) Premiums for insurance coverage on fund assets.
(d) Reasonable and necessary counsel fees incurred for advice or to defend
the fund.
(e) Legitimate travel and education expense for pension plan officials;
provided, however, that the municipal officials of the employer, in their
fiduciary role, shall monitor the services provided to the plan to ensure
that the expenses are necessary, reasonable and benefit the pension plan;
and, further, provided that the Plan Administrator shall document all such
expenses item by item and, where necessary, hour by hour.
B. Reporting requirements.
(1) Such actuarial reports shall be prepared and filed under the supervision of the
chief administrative officer of the Township.
(2) The chief administrative officer of the pension plan shall determine the
financial requirements of the pension plan on the basis of the most recent
actuarial report and shall determine the minimum obligation of the employer
with respect to funding the plan for any given plan year. The chief
6. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.603.
§ 70-112 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 70-113
70:20
§ 70-114. Miscellaneous. [Amended 10-4-1994 by Ord. No. 94-16]
administrative officer shall submit the financial requirements of the plan and
the minimum obligation of the employer to the Board of Supervisors of the
employer annually and shall certify the accuracy of such calculations and their
conformance with the Act.
C. Benefit modifications. Prior to the adoption of any benefit plan modification by the
employer, the chief administrative officer of the plan shall provide to the employer
a cost estimate of the proposed benefit plan modification. Such estimate shall be
prepared by an approved actuary, which estimate shall disclose to the employer the
impact of the proposed benefit plan modification on the future financial
requirements of the plan and the future minimum obligation of the employer with
respect to the plan.
A. Incapacity of pensioner. If any pensioner shall be physically or mentally incapable
of receiving or acknowledging receipt of any payment of pension benefits
hereunder, the employer, upon the receipt of satisfactory evidence that such
pensioner is so incapacitated and that another person or institution is maintaining
him and that no guardian or committee has been appointed for him, may provide
for such payment of pension benefits hereunder to such person or institution so
maintaining him, and any such payments so made shall be deemed for every
purpose to have been made to such pensioner.
B. Benefits for a deceased participant. If any benefit shall be payable under the plan to
or on behalf of a participant who has died, if the plan provides that the payment of
such benefits shall be made to the participant's estate, and if no administration of
such participant's estate is pending in the court of proper jurisdiction, then the
employer, at its sole option, may pay such benefits to the surviving spouse of such
deceased participant or, if there be no such surviving spouse, to such participant's
then living issue, per stirpes; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall
prevent the employer from insisting upon the commencement of estate
administration proceedings and delivery of any such benefits to a duly appointed
executor or administrator.
C. Liability of officers of the employer. Subject to the provisions of the Act, no past,
present or future officer of the employer shall be personally liable to any
participant, beneficiary or other person under any provision of the plan or any
policy issued pursuant thereto.
D. Assets in pension fund not property of individual participants. Nothing contained
herein shall be deemed to give any participant or his beneficiary any interest in any
specific property of the pension fund or any right except to receive such
distributions as are expressly provided for in this plan.
E. Employment rights not affected by the plan. Participation in this plan shall not give
any right to any employee to be retained in the employ of the employer nor shall it
interfere with the right of the employer to discharge any employee and to deal with
him without regard to the effect that such treatment might have upon him as a
participant in this plan.
§ 70-113 PENSIONS § 70-114
70:21
F. Pension fund for sole benefit of participants. The income and principal of the
pension fund are for the sole use and benefit of the participants of this plan and, to
the extent permitted by law, shall be free, clear and discharged of and from and are
not to be in any way liable for debts, contracts or agreements, now contracted or
which may hereafter be contracted, and from all claims and liabilities now or
hereafter incurred by any participant or beneficiary.
G. Meaning of certain words. As used herein, the masculine gender shall include the
feminine gender and the singular shall include the plural in all cases where such
meaning would be appropriate. Headings of sections are inserted only for
convenience of reference and are not to be considered in the construction of the
plan.
H. Information to be furnished by the employer. The employer shall furnish to the Plan
Administrator (and, where applicable, the trustee) information in the employer's
possession as the Plan Administrator and the trustee shall require from time to time
to perform their duties under the plan.
I. Spendthrift. To the extent permitted by law, no payments to any person under any
contract, nor the right to receive such payments, nor any interest in this plan and
pension fund, shall be subject to assignment, alienation, transfer of anticipation,
either by voluntary or involuntary act of any participant or beneficiary or by
operation of law, nor shall such payment right or interest be subject to the demand
or claims of any such person's debt, obligations or liabilities.
J. Tax-exempt status of pension fund. The employer intends that the plan and
accompanying pension fund herein created shall qualify under the provisions of
Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, as such provisions apply to qualified
government plans and as an "exempt organization" within the meaning of Section
501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, or under any comparable section of
any future legislation which amends, supplements or supersedes said section.
Nevertheless, all taxes of any and all kinds whatsoever that may be levied or
assessed under the existing or future laws upon the pension fund or the income
thereof and investment charges shall be paid from the pension fund.
K. Rollover of eligible distributions.
(1) A distributee may elect: at the time and in a manner consistent with the
requirements of Section 402(c) of the Internal Revenue Code (the "Code"),
governing rollover of distributions from qualified trusts, and associated
sections and subsections thereof as they shall be amended from time to time,
and at the time and in the manner prescribed by the Plan Administrator, to have
any portion of distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified
by the distributee in a direct rollover.
(2) Definitions.
(a) Eligible rollover distribution. Any distribution to a distributee of all or
any portion of the balance to the credit of the employee in a qualified
trust; except that such term shall not include:
[1] Any distribution which is one of a series of substantially equal
§ 70-114 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 70-114
70:22
periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made:
[a] For the life (or life expectancy) of the employee or the joint
lives (or joint life expectancies) of the employee and the
employee's designated beneficiary.
[b] For a specified period of 10 years or more.
[2] Any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under
Section 401(a)(9) of the Code.
[3] Any distribution or portion thereof which is not includable in gross
income of the distributee as determined in accordance with Section
402(c) of the Code.
[4] Any other distribution not qualifying for rollover treatment under
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
(b) Eligible retirement plan.
[1] Any individual retirement account described in Section 408(a) of the
Code.
[2] An individual retirement annuity described in Section 408(b) of the
Code (other than an endowment contract).
[3] A qualified trust described in Section 401(a) of the Code.
[4] An annuity plan described in Section 403(a) of the Code. Except that
if a lump-sum distribution is made to a spouse of an employee after
the employee's death under Code Section 402(c)(9), only individual
retirement accounts and individual retirement annuities as described
in this section shall be considered eligible retirement plans.
(c) Distributee. Includes the following:
[1] A plan member or former plan member.
[2] The surviving spouse of a former plan member.
[3] The former spouse of a plan member or former plan member who is
an alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations order, as
defined in Section 414(p) of the Code.
(3) Other provisions. All other provisions of this article known as the
"Middletown Township Retirement Plan" notwithstanding, neither the
Township nor the Plan Administrator shall be obligated to allow:
(a) A distributee to divide an eligible rollover distribution into two or more
separate distributions to be paid in direct rollovers to two or more eligible
retirement plans.
(b) A distributee to elect direct rollover if his or her eligible rollover
distributions during a year are reasonably expected to be less than $200
as provided by the Internal Revenue Regulations § 1.401(a)(31) - 1, Q-10
§ 70-114 PENSIONS § 70-114
70:23
§ 70-115. Greater restriction.
Whenever the requirements of this article are in conflict with other requirements of the
ordinances of the Township of Middletown, the most restrictive or those imposing the
higher standards shall govern.
§ 70-116. Early Retirement Incentive Program (ERIP). [Added 3-9-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-02; amended 11-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-06; 6-15-2020 by Ord. No. 20-03]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section of the Code of Ordinances of
Middletown Township, a participant who has attained the age of 60 years on or before
June 15, 2020 and who has completed 10 years of service shall be eligible to retire from
his or her employment with the Township and for purposes of this retirement plan on
and subject to the following terms and conditions:
and Q-11.7
A. A participant who will attain the age of 60 on or before June 15,2020, shall be
eligible to participate in the Early Retirement Incentive Program ("ERIP") as
outlined in in this section.
B. A participant who is eligible for the ERIP shall file a written notification of his or
her election to participate in the ERIP to the Plan Administrator and the Township
Manager no later than July 13, 2020.
C. The written notification shall also state whether the participant wishes to receive
either:
(1) A payment of his or her benefits under the ERIP in the form of a single lump
sum cash payment in the amount of $20,000 upon his or her retirement; or
(2) A continuation of health benefits held by the participant as of the date of his or
her retirement for a period of one year from the date of their retirement.
D. The ERIP participant shall be required to retire effective no later than August 14,
2020.
E. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a participant who elects to
participate in the ERIP shall upon his or her retirement be entitled to receive
benefits in accordance with the regular provisions of the Plan.
F. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Non-Uniform Pension Plan, an ERIP
participant shall be entitled to receive only such benefits as are set forth in this
section.
G. In the event of any conflict between the specific provisions of this section and any
other provision of this, article, the specific provisions of this section shall control,
and shall be construed so as to afford the ERIP participant with all of the specific
benefits set forth in this section, and no more. All other terms and provisions of the
Non-Uniformed Employee Pension Plan as set forth in this article shall remain in
full force and effect and be applicable to a participant in the ERIP to the extent they
7. Editor's Note: See 26 CFR 1.401(a)(31)-1.
§ 70-114 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 70-116
70:24
are not expressly or by implication modified by or contrary to the terms of this
section.
§ 70-116 PENSIONS § 70-116
70:25

ARTICLE II
Police Pension Fund
[Adopted 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 03-06 (Ch. 1, Part 7, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 70-200. Establishment of fund.
A police pension fund is hereby established pursuant to the Act of May 29, 1956, P.L.
1804, as amended.8 Said fund shall be under the direction of the Middletown Township
Board of Supervisors and shall be applied under such regulations as the Board may
prescribe. Investment or change of investment of the fund shall be by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 70-201. Eligibility for participation in the program.
Each full-time police officer now or hereafter employed by Middletown Township shall
be eligible to participate and shall be a participant in the police pension fund.
§ 70-202. Age and service requirements and military service. [Amended
12-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-05; 8-24-2020 by Ord. No. 20-04; 1-19-2021 by Ord. No.
21-02]
A. Normal retirement. Commencing on January 1, 2001, a member who has served on
the Middletown Township Police Department as a police officer for a total of
service in the aggregate of 20 years and in addition has attained the age of 50 years
may retire from active duty on the first day of the month following the required
years of service and age and shall be entitled to receive normal pension or normal
retirement benefits as hereinafter provided.
B. Any member of the Middletown Police Department who has been a regularly
appointed employee for a period of at least six months and who thereafter shall
enter the military service of the United States shall have credited to the member's
employment record for the pension or retirement benefits all the time spent by the
member in such military service, if such member returns or has heretofore returned
to the employ of the Middletown Township Police Department within six months
after separation from the service.
C. Members who are retired shall be subject to service, from time to time, as a police
reserve in cases of riot, tumult or preservation of the public peace until unfitted for
such services, when they may be fully discharged by reason of age or disability.
D. Any member of the Middletown Police Department may purchase retirement credit
for up to five years of active military service with the United States that occurred
before their employment with the Middletown Police Department, if the member is
not eligible to receive a military retirement pay for that service. To purchase such
credit, the member must pay an amount equal to the statewide average normal cost
for borough, town, township and regional police pension plans as certified by the
Public Employee Retirement Commission, not to exceed 10%, multiplied by the
member's average monthly salary during the first three years of employment as a
police officer, plus interest at the rate of 4.75% compounded annually, from the
8. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 761 et seq.
§ 70-200 PENSIONS § 70-202
70:27
§ 70-203. Contribution rate and actuarial studies. [Amended 12-14-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-05]
Effective December 14, 2015, the date of adoption of this Ord. No. 15-05, members shall
pay into the fund monthly, by a payroll deduction from each salary payment, an amount
equal to 5 3/4% of average monthly salary as defined in § 70-204B below. The pension
payroll deduction shall continue to be made during periods of temporary work-related
disabilities. Actuarial studies shall be performed as required by state law to determine
the amount of any additional sums necessary to maintain an actuarially sound fund. The
expenses attributable to the preparation of any actuarial valuation report or experience
investigation required pursuant to Chapter 2 of the Municipal Pension Plan Funding
Standard and Recovery Act, Act of December 18, 1984, P.L. 1005, No. 205, Section
201 et seq., as amended, 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq., shall be an allowable administrative
expense payable from the assets of the Police Pension Plan established pursuant to
Township ordinance.
§ 70-204. Retirement or pension benefits. [Amended 12-14-2015 by Ord. No.
15-05; 1-19-2021 by Ord. No. 21-02]
The pension or retirement benefits shall be payable during the balance of the participant's
life following actual retirement or entry into the Deferred Retirement Option Plan
(DROP) program, and for the life of his survivors subject to the limitations set forth in
§ 70-206 below, after fulfillment of the age and service requirements set forth above.
The basis for determining the monthly benefit shall be as follows:
participant's date of hire to the date of payment.
E. Commencing on January 1, 2020, a member who has served on the Middletown
Township Police Department as a police officer for a total of service in the
aggregate of 20 years and in addition has attained the age of 50 years may retire
from active duty on the first day of the month following the required years of
service and age shall be entitled to receive a reduced vested pension or retirement
benefits as hereinafter provided under § 70-204D of this article.
A. Monthly pension or retirement benefits other than length-of-service increments and
cost-of-living increases shall be the sum equal to 1/2 of the average monthly salary
of such member during the last 36 months of employment or the last 36 months
prior to entering into the DROP program, whichever occurs first.
B. Average monthly salary shall include base salary plus overtime pay.
(1) Base salary shall consist of base salary, longevity pay, vacation pay, and
holiday pay and educational incentive pay; however, any unused vacation
leave paid at retirement of seven or more weeks shall be excluded from the
definition of average monthly salary used to compute the monthly pension
benefit.
(2) Overtime pay shall consist of overtime pay, court time pay, and compensatory
time wage compensation.
(3) A police officer may be compensated for a maximum of six weeks of unused
vacation leave in the calendar year prior to entering the DROP program.
§ 70-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 70-204
70:28
However, at the end of the DROP period, the employee must use any available
vacation leave and shall not be compensated for any unused vacation leave at
final separation.
C. Service increment benefit.
(1) There shall be a service increment for all members who retire with more than
25 years of service paid as follows:
(a) After completion of at least 26 years of service: $600 additional annually.
(b) After completion of at least 27 years of service: $600 additional annually.
(2) The total maximum benefit for service increment shall be $1,200 additional
annually. (This includes the $600 annually after the 26th year of service.)
D. Reduced vested pension or retirement benefits pursuant to § 70-202E. The reduced
vested pension or retirement benefits ("early retirement benefits") shall be payable
during the balance of the participant's life following actual retirement, and for the
life of his survivors subject to the limitations set forth in § 70-206 below, after
fulfillment of the age and service requirements set forth above in § 70-202E. The
early retirement benefit shall be provided to a member of the Police Department
with 20 or more years of service who terminates employment prior to the
completion of superannuation retirement age and service requirements and who
files a written application for an early retirement benefit with the Board of
Supervisors. The early retirement benefit shall become effective as of the date the
application is filed with the Board of Supervisors or the date designated on the
application, whichever is later, and shall be the actuarial equivalent of a partial
superannuation retirement benefit calculated as follows:
(1) A partial superannuation retirement benefit shall be determined by applying
the percentage that the member's years of service bear to the years of service
that the member would have rendered had the member continued to be
employed until his superannuation retirement date to the gross pension amount
calculated using the monthly average salary during the appropriate period prior
to his termination of employment.
(2) The actuarial equivalent of the partial superannuation retirement benefit shall
be determined by actuarially reducing the partial superannuation retirement
benefit to reflect that it will commence on the effective date of the early
retirement rather than on the date on which the member would have completed
superannuation age and service requirements. The actuarial reduction shall be
calculated using the actuarial assumptions reported in the last actuarial
valuation report filed with the Public Employee Retirement Commission under
the Act of December 18, 1984 (P.L. 1005, No. 205), known as the "Municipal
Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act."9
E. Cost-of-living increases on pensions shall be paid to officers who retire with
pension benefits on or after January 1, 1991; provided, however, that such cost-ofliving
increase shall not exceed the percentage increase in the Consumer Price
9. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 70-204 PENSIONS § 70-204
70:29
Index (i.e., the CPI-U for the Philadelphia, Wilmington, and Atlantic City
Metropolitan Statistical Area) from August to August from the year in which the
police member last worked; provided, further, that in no case shall the total police
pension fund benefits (including service increments) exceed 75% of the salary for
computing retirement benefits; and provided, further, that the total cost-of-living
increase shall not exceed 20% effective January 1, 2002; 25% effective January 1,
2004; and 30% effective January 1, 2008. Such benefit shall commence one full
year after the employee's retirement date. Beginning with adjustments due for the
year 2,000, all adjustments will be made on January 1 based on the change in the
Consumer Price Index from August to August. A new retiree's initial adjustment
will be prorated to reflect the actual number of months retired prior to January 1,
and a current retiree, who consents, in writing, to this change, will have the January
1 adjustment prorated to reflect the actual number of months since his or her last
adjustment.
F. Ad hoc cost-of-living increase on pensions. Each retired participant who retired
prior to January 1, 1991, shall, beginning 2001, have the amount of his/her monthly
benefit increased by the lesser of $100 or the amount that will increase the
participant's monthly benefit to an amount that is the lesser of 75% of the salary
used in calculating the participant's original benefit or 130% of the participant's
original benefit.
G. Special ad home postretirement adjustment for police officers for those eligible
under § 70-204F by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Should the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at any time in the future mandate a special ad hoc
postretirement adjustment for police officers that affects those receiving benefits
under Subsection F of this section, the amount of those benefits received by those
police officers under Subsection F of this section shall be reduced dollar for dollar
by the amount of the special ad hoc retirement adjustment established by the
commonwealth.
H. Deferred Retirement Option Plan (DROP program). Beginning January 1, 2002, an
optional DROP program shall be made available to any Middletown Township
police officer who has fulfilled the age and service requirements as set forth in
§ 70-202 above. The DROP program shall be an optional retirement program in
which an eligible member of the pension plan may elect to participate, deferring
receipt of normal retirement benefits while continuing employment with the
Township of Middletown without the loss of any other employee benefits. The
DROP plan is designed to allow a police officer to accumulate a lump sum cash
amount for retirement without affecting his or her normal monthly retirement
benefit as of the date that he or she becomes a DROP participant. Under DROP, the
police officer effectively makes a decision to "retire" with respect to the pension
plan only, yet continues to work as an active police officer. The actual date of
availability of the DROP plan will commence at the ratification of the collective
bargaining agreement by both the Township and the PBA or the appointment of an
investment manager, whichever is later.
(1) Eligibility. Any Middletown Township police officer who has fulfilled the age
and service requirements for a normal retirement as set forth above shall be
eligible to participate in the DROP program at his or her option in
conformance with this agreement and after providing at least 30 days' written
§ 70-204 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 70-204
70:30
notice to the employer. A Middletown Township police officer electing to
retire pursuant to § 70-202E of this article shall not be eligible for the DROP
Program.
(2) Entry into DROP. Election to participate by an eligible police officer shall be
made on any date following the date on which the police officer fulfills the
minimum age and service requirements for retirement under the pension plan.
Once a police officer commences participation in the DROP program, he or
she may not choose to end participation in the DROP program and resume
contributions to the pension plan.
(3) Request to enter and enrollment forms. Election to participate shall be made
by completing the required request and enrollment forms, which shall show
the entry date into the DROP program and the deferred retirement date for the
term chosen by the police officer. The deferred retirement date shall not
exceed 96 months from the date of enrollment or entry into the DROP
program.
(4) The length of the DROP. For police officers hired on or before December 31,
2019, the DROP term shall be for a period of no more than 96 months from
the date of entry. For police officers hired on or after January 1, 2020, the
DROP term shall be for a period of no more than 60 months from the date of
entry. Termination of participation in the DROP program shall take place:
(a) At the end of the ninety-six- or sixty-month period (as applicable), or at
any other time prior if the police officer chooses to end his or her
participation earlier than 96 or 60 months (as applicable); or
(b) If the time limit of 96 or 60 months (as applicable) is extended in future
collective bargaining agreements, any member participating in the DROP
program at that time may at his or her option extend the DROP
participation period to that allowed under the then current agreement; or
(c) If the participant is terminated from employment for reasons set forth
under applicable Pennsylvania law.
(5) Retirement status and pension contributions. Once enrolled in the DROP
program, the participant shall be retired under the pension plan for the purpose
of calculating pension benefits, unless otherwise prescribed herein, but not for
the purpose of employment with the Middletown Township Police
Department. The DROP participant shall continue to receive all employee
benefits and programs as set forth in this agreement. Once a police officer
enters the DROP program, he or she shall no longer be required to make any
contributions to the pension fund.
(6) Retirement rate. Payments to DROP accounts will be made at the participant's
normal retirement monthly benefit amount, which is determined by § 70-204
above at the time said police officer enters the DROP program.
(7) Administration. DROP accounts shall be administered by an investment
manager who shall be selected, and agreed upon, by both the Township and
the PBA. All DROP accounts shall receive the rate of return experienced by
§ 70-204 PENSIONS § 70-204
70:31
§ 70-205. Disability pension. [Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009
by Ord. No. 09-04; 12-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-05]
the DROP Fund during the participant's DROP period.
(8) Disability issues. If, while a police officer is enrolled in DROP and he or she
is injured while on duty, to the extent that he or she is permanently disabled
from performing police work for Middletown Township as a result of that
service-connected disability, the police officer shall be retired on the basis of
a service-connected disability, at the then current normal monthly retirement
benefit.
(9) Survivorship options. If a DROP participant dies during his or her
participation period, all funds in that participant's account shall be disbursed to
the participant's beneficiary or beneficiaries listed in the DROP contract. If the
DROP participant dies after receiving the DROP account funds, further
disbursements or disposition of those funds shall be determined by the
deceased participant's last will and testament and/or applicable state and
federal estate laws.
(10) Conflict with existing laws. If, after the DROP plan is instituted, an agency of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania issues an official opinion holding that this
DROP plan is in conflict with Pennsylvania law, the Township and the PBA
agree to meet within 30 days to discuss such opinion and bring the DROP plan
into compliance with applicable law, if possible; or if no agreement can be
reached, or if there is a dispute as to the validity of the official opinion, either
or both parties may submit the dispute to the Court of Common Pleas of Bucks
County for a declaratory judgment. If the DROP plan cannot be brought into
compliance with Pennsylvania law, it shall be terminated subject to any
constitutionally vested rights of the participants. It is the intention of the
parties that the DROP program will only be terminated if a final determination
is made that the program cannot be brought into compliance with applicable
Pennsylvania law.
A. Service-connected disability pension.
(1) If a police officer hired on or before December 31, 2007, is permanently
disabled from performing police work for the Township as a result of a
service-connected disability, then the police officer shall receive a disability
pension that is 75% of average monthly salary at the time of the determination
that the disability is permanent, offset by any payment for such disability under
workers' compensation and further offset dollar for dollar by any income
earned in excess of $75,000 per year by the disabled officer from other
employment subsequent to the commencement of the disability pension
benefit. This pension shall continue to be paid until a determination is made
that the member is no longer permanently disabled or until the member's death,
whatever occurs first. In no case shall the amount of the annual pension be
reduced to an amount below $25,000. The earned income threshold of $75,000
per year, effective January 1, 2002, shall be adjusted annually commencing
January 1, 2003, based upon the Consumer Price Index for all Urban
Consumers (CPI-U), published by the United States Department of
§ 70-204 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 70-205
70:32
Commerce, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
(2) If a police officer hired on or after January 1, 2008, is permanently disabled
from performing police work for the Township as a result of a serviceconnected
disability, then the police officer shall receive a disability pension
that is 60% of average monthly salary at the time of the determination that the
disability is permanent, offset by any payment for such disability under
workers' compensation and further offset dollar for dollar by any income
earned in excess $75,000 per year by the disabled officer from other
employment subsequent to the commencement of the disability pension
benefit. This pension shall continue to be paid until a determination is made
that the member is no longer permanently disabled or until the member's death,
whatever occurs first. In no case shall the amount of the annual pension be
reduced to an amount below $25,000. The earned income threshold of $75,000
per year, effective January 1, 2002, shall be adjusted annually commencing
January 1, 2003, based upon the Consumer Price Index for all Urban
Consumers (CPI-U), published by the United States Department of
Commerce, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
(3) If a police officer hired on or after January 1, 2008, is permanently disabled as
a result of a service-connected disability to the extent that he/she is no longer
capable of performing any gainful employment, then the police officer shall
receive a disability pension that is 90% of average monthly salary at the time
of the determination that the disability is permanent, offset by any payment for
such disability under workers' compensation and further offset dollar for dollar
by any income earned in excess of $75,000 per year by the disabled officer
from other employment subsequent to the commencement of the disability
pension benefit. This pension shall continue to be paid until a determination is
made that the member is no longer permanently disabled or until the member's
death, whatever occurs first. In no case shall the amount of the annual pension
be reduced to an amount below $25,000. The earned income threshold of
$75,000 per year, effective January 1, 2002, shall be adjusted annually
commencing January 1, 2003, based upon the Consumer Price Index for all
Urban Consumers (CPI-U), published by the United States Department of
Commerce, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
(4) A disabled police officer who is receiving a disability pension and who has
received income earned from other employment subsequent to commencement
of the disability pension benefit shall submit annually by April 1 to the
Township Personnel Office copies of all W-2 and 1099 forms received from
employers for the prior calendar year. The Personnel Officer, after consulting
with the plan actuary, shall then determine if a pension adjustment based upon
the earned income offset is applicable and, if applicable, shall notify the
disabled police officer in writing of the adjusted monthly pension benefit.
Payment of the adjusted monthly pension benefit shall commence May 1 each
year and shall continue in effect for a period of 12 months.
B. Procedure for disability pension application. Any member of the Middletown
Township Police Department who shall suffer a service-connected disability so as
to render the member permanently disabled from performing police work for the
Township of Middletown may, upon application or on the application of one acting
§ 70-205 PENSIONS § 70-205
70:33
§ 70-206. Survivor's benefits: widow's, widower's or children's benefits.
[Amended 12-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-05; 8-24-2020 by Ord. No. 20-04: 1-19-2021
by Ord. No. 21-02]
in the member's behalf, or upon application of the Chief of Police, be retired on
disability pension if the physician(s) designated by the Board of Supervisors, after
a medical and/or psychiatric examination, shall certify to the Board of Supervisors
that the member is physically or mentally disabled from performing police work for
the Township of Middletown and that said member ought to be retired.
C. Reexamination.
(1) The Board of Supervisors may require any member receiving a disability
pension and not eligible for the normal police officer's retirement pension to
undergo a medical and/or psychiatric examination not more than once every
year for a period of five years from the date the member is determined to be
disabled by a physician(s) designated by the Board of Supervisors. Should the
physician's (physicians') report certify to the Board of Supervisors that such
pension beneficiary is no longer physically or mentally disabled, then the
member shall be returned to active-duty status until such time as the member
is eligible for normal retirement. After five years of a retiree receiving serviceconnected
disability pension, reexamination will not be necessary as the
service-connected disability pension determination will be permanent.
(2) Should a member on disability pension, and not on regular retirement, refuse
to submit to the aforesaid annual medical examination, the member's disability
pension shall be discontinued until the withdrawal of such refusal, and should
such refusal continue for a period of one year or more, then the member's right
in and to the disability pension shall be forfeited.
D. In the event the Board of Supervisors requires a medical and/or psychiatric
examination in connection with a disability pension, such examination shall be
conducted at a physician's office not more than 50 miles from the member's current
place of residence. Should the Board of Supervisors require the member to travel
more than 50 miles to the Greater Philadelphia Area for the examination, travel
expenses of the member, including necessary lodging and sustenance, shall be
borne by the Township of Middletown.
A. Survivor's benefits. Widow's, widower's or children's benefits will be paid in
accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, pursuant to Act
51 of 2009,10 as amended.
B. Retirement on or before December 31, 2019. In the event of the death of a police
officer who retired or became disabled on or before December 31, 2019, his widow,
or her widower, shall be entitled, during his or her lifetime, to 65% of the pension
the police officer was receiving or would have been receiving had he or she been
retired at the time of his or her death. If there is no surviving spouse, or if the spouse
survives and subsequently dies, then benefit entitlement shall continue to the
member's child or children under the age of 18 years, or if attending college, under
10. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 891 et seq.
§ 70-205 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 70-206
70:34
§ 70-207. Refunds.
Each member shall be entitled, in the event of termination or discontinuance of the
member's employment for reasons other than retirement or death, to have returned to
the member the total amount of all such monies paid by the member into the pension
fund, plus all interest earned by such monies while in the police pension fund. If such
termination or discontinuance of employment is due to death, such refund of monies
shall be paid to the member's designated beneficiary or, in the absence thereof, to the
member's estate.
§ 70-208. Prior pension assets and benefits.
All contracts, agreement or funds held for the purpose of providing pensions, annuities
or retirement income on any police officer who shall be a member in the program
herein established shall be and hereby are transferred and assigned to the fund herein
established. After transfer, the police pension fund shall assume the liability, if any, of
continuing the payments of pensions to the members of the Police Department retired
prior to such transfer in accordance with the laws and regulations under which such
members were retired.
§ 70-209. Pension to be free from attachment.
The pension payments herein provided for shall not be subject to attachment, execution,
levy, garnishment or other legal process and shall be payable only to the member or his
or her designated beneficiary and shall not be subject to assignment or transfer.
§ 70-210. Administrative expenses.
The general municipal pension system state aid credited to the police pension plan shall
be applied, as permitted by law, to defray the cost of the pension plan in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Auditor General Bulletin No. 1-85, dated December 13, 1985. Any
additional expenses or costs not allowed by law shall be borne by the general fund of the
Township.
§ 70-211. Vesting. [Amended 12-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-05]
Pension benefits for members shall vest after 12 years of service.
or attaining the age of 23 years.
C. Retirement on or after January 1, 2020. In the event of the death of a police officer
who retired or became disabled on or after January 1, 2020, his widow, or her
widower, shall be entitled, during his or her lifetime, to 75% of the pension the
police officer was receiving or would have been receiving had he or she been retired
at the time of his or her death. If there is no surviving spouse, or if the spouse
survives and subsequently dies, then benefit entitlement shall continue to the
member's child or children under the age of 18 years, or if attending college, under
or attaining the age of 23 years.
§ 70-206 PENSIONS § 70-212
70:35
§ 70-212. Police Pension Fund Advisory Board.
Two members of the Middletown Township Police Benevolent Association shall be
members of the Police Pension Fund Advisory Board.
§ 70-213. Annual meeting. [Amended 12-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-05]
Authorized representatives of the Middletown Township Police Benevolent Association
and the Township Manager shall, at a mutually convenient time, meet annually for the
purpose of discussing the Police Pension Plan.
§ 70-212 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 70-213
70:36
ARTICLE III
Police Early Retirement Incentive Program (PERIP)
[Adopted 1-4-2021 by Ord. No. 21-0111]
§ 70-300. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a one-time Early Retirement Incentive Program
for active police officers.
§ 70-301. Eligibility.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article III, as of the effective date of
this article, a police officer who has served on the Middletown Police Department
as a police officer for a total service of 25 years and in addition has attained the age
of 50 years shall be eligible to retire from his or her employment with the Township
and receive the proposed benefits under this Police Early Retirement Incentive
Program subject to the following terms and conditions:
(1) A participant who, as of the effective date of this article, has served on the
Middletown Police Department as a police officer for a total service of 25
years and in addition has attained the age of 50 years shall be eligible to
participate in the PERIP as outlined herein.
(2) A participant who is eligible for the PERIP shall file a written notification of
his or her election to participate in the PERIP to the Township Manager and
the Chief of Police no later than January 31, 2021. The PERIP participant shall
be required to retire effective no later than March 31, 2021. For purposes of
this article, "retirement" shall mean completely severing any employment with
Middletown Township. Entering or remaining in the Deferred Retirement
Option Plan does not qualify for retirement for PERIP purposes.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a participant who elects to
participate in the PERIP shall, upon his or her retirement, be entitled to receive
benefits in accordance with the regular provisions of the Police Pension Fund.
(4) In addition to the benefit set forth in Subsection A(3) above of this section, a
participant who is eligible to and timely elects to participate in the PERIP shall
also receive upon his or her retirement a lump sum payment of $100,000.
B. In the event of any conflict between the specific provisions of this section and any
other provision of this chapter, the specific provisions of this section shall control
and shall be construed so as to afford the PERIP participant with all of the specific
benefits set forth in this section, and no more. All other terms and provisions of the
Police Pension Fund as set forth in this chapter shall remain in full force and effect
and be applicable to a participant in the PERIP to the extent they are not expressly
or by implication modified by or contrary to the terms of this section.
11. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Article III, Police Early Retirement Incentive Program (PERIP),
adopted 1-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-04.
§ 70-300 PENSIONS § 70-301
70:37

Chapter 76
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 440.
Shade trees — See Ch. 462.
Zoning — See Ch. 500.
§ 76-100. Establishment.
§ 76-101. Control and protection of shade trees. [Added 3-1-1994 by Ord. No.
94-02]
The Middletown Township Planning Commission shall have exclusive custody and
control of the shade trees in the Township and is authorized to plant, remove, maintain
and protect shade trees on the public streets and highways in the Township.
A. The Middletown Township Planning Commission shall henceforth consist of seven
members, at least five of whom shall be citizen members.
B. The Middletown Township Planning Commission shall be appointed, be subject to
and have the powers and duties set forth in Article II of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, also known as Act 247, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.,
enacted and approved as a statute of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania on July
31, 1968.
§ 70-301 PLANNING COMMISSION § 76-101
76:1

Chapter 81
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Warrantless arrests — See Ch. 481.
§ 81-100. Statement of intent.
The Board of Supervisors deems it necessary and advantageous to the safety of the
persons or property of the Township to:
§ 81-101. Duties of Chief of Police. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13;
12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-0412]
A. Elevate the standing of the profession in the public mind and to strengthen public
confidence in law enforcement.
B. Encourage law enforcement officers to fully appreciate the responsibilities of their
office.
C. Develop and maintain complete support and cooperation of the public in law
enforcement.
D. Ensure the effectiveness of the service by encouraging complete cooperation of its
members for their mutual benefits.
E. Strive for full coordination of effort in all official relationships with other
governmental bodies.
F. Consider police work an honorable profession and to recognize in it an opportunity
to render a worthwhile service to society.
A. Shall direct and control the overall performance of the Department.
B. Shall be responsible for the organization, planning, staffing and overall
performance of the Middletown Township Police Department.
C. Shall have the authority required to execute the orders of the Township Manager
and Board of Supervisors, and he/she shall require the strict enforcement of all
ordinances of the Township, the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
the laws of the United States of America.
D. Shall frequently observe members and/or employees of the Department on duty and
at all times note the discipline, efficiency and morale of said personnel. He shall
12. Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed Ord. No. 08-06 which created the office of Director of Public Safety and
provided that any reference in the Code to "Chief of Police" should be deemed to refer to the Public Safety Director.
Pursuant to Ord. No. 09-04, references in the Code have again been revised to refer to the Chief of Police.
§ 76-101 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 81-101
81:1
§ 81-102. Duties of Administrative Assistant. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
§ 81-103. Duties of uniform Lieutenants. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
instruct subordinates on all necessary matters of Department policies and
procedures and also develop training programs.
E. Shall conduct staff meetings and inspections to evaluate and attempt to improve the
overall performance and efficiency of the Police Department.
A. Shall perform the duties as set forth in duties of all Department personnel and shall
assist the Chief of Police in the performance of duties assigned to him/her by the
Chief of Police.
B. Shall assist the Chief of Police in supervising, coordinating, planning, organizing,
staffing and directing the operation of the various divisions of the Police
Department.
C. Shall have direct control over all members and employees within his/her command,
in addition to the general and individual responsibilities of a commanding officer in
the absence of the Chief of Police.
A. Shall perform the duties as set forth in the duties of all Department personnel.
B. Shall be subject to the direction of the Chief of Police. [Amended 12-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-04]
C. Shall have direct control over all members of lower rank and be responsible for the
direction and performance of personnel under his/her command, the development
and maintenance of loyalty, esprit de corps, maintaining discipline and a high spirit
of morale.
D. Shall promote harmony and cooperation between divisions of the Police
Department and assist in the planning, proper organization, staffing, and
assignment of duties within his/her command.
E. Shall review daily all reports of the police personnel, prepare required reports,
correspondence and maintenance of records relating to activities of his/her
command.
F. Shall constantly evaluate the police services in Middletown Township and submit
his/her recommendations, in writing, to the Chief of Police. [Amended 12-8-2009
by Ord. No. 09-04]
G. Shall at all times inform the Chief of Police of all significant conditions and
activities existing in the uniform division. [Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord. No.
09-04]
H. Shall, if requested by the Chief of Police, confidentially investigate all complaints
involving police personnel. [Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
I. Shall supervise personnel at scenes of emergency, disaster or catastrophe until
§ 81-101 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 81-103
81:2
§ 81-104. Duties of Lieutenant of Detectives. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
§ 81-105. Duties of Patrol Sergeant. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
relieved by the Chief of Police. [Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
A. Shall be responsible for the efficient performance and quality of service of all
personnel under his/her command.
B. Shall be responsible for the clearance of crimes by assuring the arrest of the proper
perpetrator and the recovery of stolen property.
C. Shall be responsible for cultivating a close degree of cooperation between the
Detective Division and the Patrol Division.
D. Shall review all reports prepared and submitted by his subordinates.
E. Shall supervise police operations at the scene of major crimes, emergencies, serious
incidents, sporting and recreation events, until relieved by the Chief of Police.
[Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
F. Shall inform and advise the Chief of Police of any significant conditions existing in
the Township. [Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
G. Shall approve all duty assignments and schedules for men/women under his/her
command.
H. Shall foster good public relations, meet with community groups, schools and church
groups within the Township.
I. Shall submit criminal arrest monthly reports to the Chief of Police. [Amended
12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
J. Shall submit FBI monthly reports.
K. Shall assign and direct personnel in the operation of the photographic dark room.
A. Shall be the immediate supervisor of his/her squad.
B. May be directed to assume the duties of the Lieutenant during the absence of same.
C. Shall be responsible for the efficient performance and quality of service of all
personnel under his/her supervision.
D. Shall assign his/her personnel to their various duties before going out on patrol.
E. Shall inspect uniforms, equipment and personal appearance of his/her personnel
during each tour of duty; inspect during each tour of duty all assigned police
vehicles as to their condition and serviceability.
F. Shall enforce all laws and all ordinances in the area of his/her assignment.
G. Shall ensure that patrol and other required duties are properly performed by his/her
subordinates, providing advice and assistance when necessary.
§ 81-103 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 81-105
81:3
§ 81-106. Duties of Juvenile Officer. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
§ 81-107. Duties of Crime Investigation Officers. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-13]
H. Shall review all reports prepared and submitted by his/her subordinates.
I. Shall supervise police operations at the scene of major crimes, emergencies, serious
accidents and complaints, sporting and recreation events, etc., until the arrival of a
higher ranking officer.
J. Shall inform and advise his/her immediate supervisor of any significant or unusual
conditions existing during his/her tour of duty.
K. Shall investigate accidents and injuries to members under his/her supervision;
prepare and submit required reports.
A. Shall be primarily responsible for investigation of crimes and other investigatory
work that involves juveniles; also may be called on to do activities or duties of
policeman.
B. Shall perform investigations involving any field of juvenile crime and maintain
sources of information.
C. Shall obtain detailed information and physical evidence leading to identification
and arrest of suspects and give material assistance to prosecuting authorities in
preparation of court cases.
D. Shall search crime scenes for physical evidence and locate and question witnesses,
victims and suspects.
E. Shall prepare case summaries and inform prosecuting authorities of evidence
available, persons who may be called as witnesses and testify in court actions as a
result of investigation.
F. Shall patrol certain areas of the Township, if assigned, for suspicious persons and
circumstances and assist uniform personnel in cases of riots and disturbances.
G. Shall assist other officers from other jurisdictions in investigating cases in the
Township and participate in investigations in other jurisdictions when necessary.
H. Shall furnish information to anyone connected with the investigative field
pertaining to juveniles.
I. Shall render police assistance, whether on or off duty, when needed.
J. Shall maintain good public relations.
K. Shall submit lists of juvenile arrests and monthly juvenile reports to the Lieutenant
of Detectives or Detective Sergeant.
A. Shall be primarily responsible for the investigation of crimes and other
investigatory work, but assignments may include the elements of patrol and other
activities common to the duties of a policeman. The Criminal Investigation Officer
§ 81-105 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 81-107
81:4
§ 81-108. Duties of Communications Dispatcher. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
§ 81-109. Duties of police officer. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
shall normally be assigned to specific cases.
B. Shall perform investigations involving any field of crime and shall maintain sources
of information.
C. Shall obtain detailed information and physical evidence leading to the identification
and arrest of suspects and give material assistance to prosecution authorities in the
preparation of court cases.
D. Shall search crime scenes for physical evidence and shall locate and question
witnesses, victims and suspects.
E. Shall prepare case summaries and inform prosecuting authorities of the evidence
available and of the persons who may qualify as witnesses, and shall testify
concerning the result of investigations.
F. Shall investigate applications for permits to carry firearms and shall serve legal
papers.
G. Shall, when assigned, patrol a designated area of the Township, looking for
suspicious persons and circumstances, and assist uniformed police personnel in
cases of disturbances and riots.
H. Shall arrange for technical assistance, such as that provided by specialists in
identification, ballistics, laboratory analysis or toxicology.
I. Shall assist officers from other jurisdictions in investigations in Middletown
Township, shall participate in extradition proceedings, and shall be available for
investigations extending into other jurisdictions.
A. Shall operate radio and telephone equipment.
B. Shall direct and coordinate the activities of radio mobile units on assignment.
C. Shall answer incoming calls from the general public, learn the nature of such calls,
reroute and otherwise dispose of those that do not require police action.
D. Shall record calls requiring police action on appropriate forms, indicate the vehicles
to be assigned, and broadcast calls to the proper police vehicle.
E. Shall notify his/her immediate supervisor or the Chief of Police of any calls of any
nature if the matter is one that should be brought to his/her attention. [Amended
12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
F. Shall perform such other work as instructed by his/her immediate supervisor.
A. Shall perform general police work and be the primary public relations
representative of the Department.
§ 81-107 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 81-109
81:5
§ 81-110. Duties of all Departmental personnel. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
B. Shall conduct preliminary investigations at the scene of crimes or accidents and
gather evidence, administer first aid, locate and interview witnesses, make proper
arrests, and submit proper reports.
C. Shall watch particularly the actions of suspected criminals.
D. Shall be responsible for all phases of police work, not just his/her specific
assignments.
E. Shall confine his/her patrol within the limits of his/her beat or sector except to
perform a police function, to take a proper lunch period, or for personal necessity.
F. Shall furnish information and render aid to anyone properly requesting or needing
it, if not inconsistent with his/her work.
G. Shall note and investigate all vehicles, the driver or occupants of which arouse
suspicion. He/she shall question the occupants and driver, learning names, ages,
sexes, residences and other pertinent information, together with the make, license
number, serial number, color and type of vehicle.
H. Shall prohibit loitering on the sidewalks or streets to the inconvenience of the
public.
I. Shall note all defects in highways, sidewalks, buildings, etc., from which accidents
might arise, and when unable to immediately adjust such defect, shall notify his/her
superior officer by written report or, where urgency is required, by phone or other
means.
J. Shall report at once to a superior officer all defective traffic signals, streetlights, etc.
A. In addition to the duties specified hereinabove, all Departmental personnel, both
police and civilian, commensurate with rank or assignment, shall:
(1) Have the responsibility and obligation to uphold the Constitution and the laws
of the United States; the Constitution and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania; the ordinances of the Township of Middletown and the lawful
orders of the Township Manager and Supervisors of Middletown Township.
(2) Have the responsibility to carry out the orders of the Police Chief and all other
superior officers, whether such orders are verbal or written.
(3) Maintain order and protect persons and property, prevent crime and apprehend
criminals.
(4) Prevent accidents.
(5) Investigate crime and make legal arrests.
(6) Be responsible for investigating any unlawful acts being performed or existing
in the area of his/her assignment, including gambling, vice and crime.
§ 81-109 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 81-110
81:6
(7) Be responsible for maintaining good public relations.
(8) Instruct subordinates on all necessary matters of Departmental policies and
procedures and develop programs of on-the-job training.
(9) Evaluate the work of personnel assigned to him/her through review of reports
and observation of results obtained.
(10) Supervise the work of personnel assigned to him/her through individual
discussions, conferences and written orders.
(11) Be responsible for the transmittal of all necessary orders and directives to his/
her subordinates and to his/her relief.
(12) Familiarize himself/herself with all orders issued to him/her by superior
officers and with all relevant orders issued to the man/woman he/she relieves.
(13) Assure himself/herself that his subordinates are adhering to all rules,
regulations, orders and procedures of the Department.
(14) Be responsible for the quality and effectiveness of police services rendered by
his/her subordinates.
(15) Be responsible for the discipline and conduct of subordinates.
(16) Prepare cases for court, attend hearings, and testify before courts and grand
juries as required.
(17) Review reports of investigations and recommend further action as necessary.
(18) Make an immediate written report to his/her commanding officer of any bribe
offer.
(19) Treat the public with courtesy and respect, keeping in mind the necessity of
public respect for the police force.
(20) Render police assistance when needed, regardless of whether he/she is on or
off duty or on a special assignment within the guidelines established by state
law.
(21) Ensure the order and cleanliness of Township property and equipment
assigned to him/her.
(22) Report in writing immediately to his/her commanding officer the loss of any
equipment necessary for the performance of duty.
(23) Reside in accordance with the current residency requirements set forth in the
current collective bargaining agreement.
(24) Give his/her name and badge number upon proper request.
(25) When in uniform, salute the national colors as they pass in public parades or
other ceremonies.
(26) Perform related work as required.
§ 81-110 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 81-110
81:7
§ 81-111. Additional duties, responsibilities and rules of conduct. [Amended
12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
B. Failure to perform the obligations and responsibilities of all positions promptly and
efficiently through acts of omission or commission shall result in disciplinary
action.
A. Additional standards of behavior for all police officers:
(1) In carrying out the functions of the Department, a member shall direct and
coordinate his/her efforts in such manner as will tend to establish and maintain
the highest standard of efficiency.
(2) A member is required to discharge his/her duties in a cool and firm manner;
he/she shall act so as to assist and protect the other members of the Department
in the maintenance of law and order.
(3) Any member of the Department who shall in the performance of his/her
official duties display reluctance to properly perform his/her assigned duties,
or who acts in a manner tending to bring discredit upon himself/herself or the
Department, or who fails to assume responsibility or exercise diligence,
intelligence and interest in the pursuit of his/her duties, may be deemed
incompetent.
(4) A member of the Department shall be punctual in reporting for duty at the time
and places designated by his/her superior officer. Habitual failure to report
promptly at the time directed shall be deemed neglect of duty.
(5) No member shall absent himself/herself from duty without proper leave, or
shall be absent from duty without permission, except when unable to report for
duty at the prescribed time because of sickness or injury to himself/herself or
his/her immediate family.
(6) Any member of the Department, when off duty for illness or other reason, shall
report the fact immediately to his/her superior officer, giving the nature of the
illness or circumstances relative to his/her absence. While absent from duty
because of sickness or disability, he/she shall remain at his/her residence or
place of confinement unless otherwise authorized by a physician. No member
shall feign sickness or injury or deceive a representative of the Department as
to his/her real condition.
(7) A member of the Department, except in the discharge of official duty, shall not
knowingly associate with or have dealings with any person or organization
advocating or instrumental in fostering hatred, prejudice or oppression against
any racial, ethnic or religious group.
(8) A member of the force shall not affiliate with, or become a member of, any
organization if such affiliation or membership would in any way interfere with
or prevent him/her from performing police duty.
(9) A member of the force shall be particularly careful not to interfere officiously
or unnecessarily in the private business of any person, but when required to act
§ 81-110 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 81-111
81:8
in the discharge of his/her duty, he/she will do so with energy and decision.
(10) A member of the force is always on duty, although periodically relieved from
routine performance; he/she is always subject to orders from the proper
authorities and to calls from citizens.
(11) A member of the force shall not accept an award, reward or gift for police
services except an award of Department recognition. Bequests, gifts or awards
to the Department may be accepted as authorized by the Chief.
(12) A member of the Department shall not address any public gathering or appear
on radio or television programs or write articles or manuscripts for publication,
wherein he/she is identified as a member of the Department, unless authorized
and in compliance with Departmental regulations.
(13) A member of the Department shall not remove any official record of the
Department except as directed by his/her superior officer or under due process
of law.
(14) A member of the Department shall not speak critically or derogatorily to other
officers and employees of the Department or to any person outside of the
Department regarding the orders or instructions issued by any senior officer.
(15) A member of the Department shall treat another member of the Department
civilly and respectfully, and he/she shall not publicly criticize any official act
of any member of this or any other department.
(16) Members of the Department shall conduct themselves in a manner that will
foster the greatest harmony and cooperation between each other and the
various divisions and units of the organization.
(17) Any member of this Department desiring to engage in outside employment,
either in uniform or plain clothes, must conform to Departmental regulations
and procedures established for that purpose.
(18) No member shall engage in outside employment as a private detective, bill
collector, notary public, or counselor at law. Furthermore, no member shall
have as a business partner any person whose occupation would fall into the
above categories.
(19) A member shall report and take proper action in any situation requiring police
attention within a reasonable time after arriving on the scene thereof.
(20) A member of the Department shall strictly obey and properly execute any
lawful order emanating from a ranking officer who is his/her senior. The term
"lawful order" shall be construed as an order in keeping with the performing
of any duty prescribed by law or rule of the Department or for the preservation
of order, efficiency and proper discipline.
(21) During the course of any official investigation by the Department, if requested,
a member shall be required to give a full, complete and truthful statement.
(22) When in the presence of persons from outside the Department, officers and
§ 81-111 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 81-111
81:9
employees shall address fellow employees by their rank or their titles, as the
circumstances warrant.
(23) A member shall not cause any person or his/her superior officers to intervene
or make representation on his/her behalf in connection with his position in the
Department.
(24) A member shall not use threatening or insulting language or behave in an
insubordinate manner toward any other member of the Department.
(25) A member of the Department shall at all times maintain decorum and
command of his/her temper; he/she shall be patient and discrete and shall not
use harsh, violent, profane or insolent language; and he/she shall be courteous
and considerate under all circumstances.
(26) A member, while on duty, must at all times be neat and clean in person, his/
her clothes clean and shoes shined, and his/her dress shall be in conformity
with the rules and regulations of the Department unless, due to weather or
other sufficient cause arising from the immediate discharge of his duty, his/her
dress becomes soiled or disarranged, in which case it will be put in proper
condition as soon as circumstances permit. He/she shall, as often as is
necessary, examine and clean his/her equipment and keep the same always in
good, serviceable condition.
(27) A member shall not sleep while on a regular tour of duty.
(28) A member of the Department shall not drink intoxicants while on duty.
Furthermore, he/she shall not drink intoxicants at any time to the extent of
making him/her unfit for duty.
(29) No intoxicating liquor shall be brought into or kept in any division of the
police building or part thereof, except when officially seized, or upon the
advice of a physician.
(30) A member of the Department shall not use habit-forming drugs or narcotics
unless such drugs or narcotics are properly prescribed by a physician for an
illness or injury.
(31) A member of the Department, while on duty, shall not smoke when conducting
interviews or under like conditions when smoking may be detrimental to good
conduct, appearance or procedure.
(32) A member of the Department shall not knowingly enter any house of ill repute
except in the performance of his/her duty, and if required to enter such a place,
as soon as possible he/she shall report the fact to his/her superior officer.
(33) A member of the Department shall not use threatening or insulting language
or behave in an insubordinate manner toward any other member of the
Department.
(34) A member of the Department shall not display cowardice or fail to support his/
her fellow officers in the performance of duty.
§ 81-111 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 81-111
81:10
(35) A member of the Department shall not willfully violate any federal statute,
state law, or local ordinance.
(36) No member shall act or behave privately or in any official capacity in such a
manner as to bring discredit upon himself/herself or the Department.
(37) A member shall not intentionally become involved in neighborhood quarrels
or disputes, either on duty or off duty.
(38) A member of the Department shall not testify in civil cases unless legally
summoned.
(39) A member of the Department shall not give expert testimony against the
interest of the Township in any litigation to which the Township is a party. A
member of the Department shall not give expert testimony for a defendant in a
criminal case without the permission of the Chief.
(40) Any monies or other property coming into the possession of any member of
the Department which is not his/her own shall be delivered to the proper
custodian and a report made of the transaction.
(41) It shall be the duty of every member to properly report any information given
him/her in good faith by any citizen regarding matters which indicate the need
for action by the Department.
(42) A member shall not fabricate, withhold or destroy evidence of any kind.
(43) A member of the Department shall not make false statements to superior
officers when questioned, interviewed or in submitting reports.
(44) A member of the Department shall treat as confidential the official business of
the Department. He/she shall not discuss or impart same to anyone except
those for whom it is intended, or as directed by his/her superior officers, or
under the process of law.
(45) No contribution or subscription shall be made by a member or employee to
buy any present intended for another member or employee of the Department;
and they shall not collect or receive any money, property or other thing of
value from citizens or other persons for any such purpose; neither shall they
circulate subscription papers, sell tickets, or collect money from any person for
any purpose without permission from the Chief.
(46) A member of the Department shall at no time abuse or misuse his/her authority
as a law-enforcing officer, nor shall his/her actions in the performance of his/
her official duties reflect any degree of personal feelings. He/she shall not use
unnecessary force, nor shall he/she hesitate to use force when necessary.
(47) A member of the Department shall not at any time, or for any reason, willfully
subject any person or animal to cruel treatment or willfully neglect necessary
humane action which circumstances may require.
(48) A member of the Department shall not use his/her position to seek free
admission to places of amusement, sporting events, etc.; furthermore,
§ 81-111 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 81-111
81:11
members shall not solicit free meals or transportation or any other favors or
gratuities which would not ordinarily be accorded a private citizen.
(49) A member shall not fraternize with, engage the services of, accept services
from, or do favors for any person in the custody of the Department except as
set forth in the rules and regulations of the Department.
(50) A member shall not associate socially with or fraternize with the spouse of any
person in the custody of the Department.
(51) A member of the Department shall not solicit or make contributions, directly
or indirectly on any pretext, to any person, committee or association for
political purposes, nor shall he/she interfere or use the influence of his/her
office for political reasons. Neither shall a member take part in the
management of political affairs or in political campaigns, other than to cast
his/her vote and to express privately his own opinions.
(52) A member of the Department shall not engage in political discussions to the
detriment of good discipline, and he/she shall not speak disparagingly of the
nationality, color, creed, belief, sex or handicap of any person.
(53) A member shall be required to properly support his/her family.
(54) A member of the Department shall pay his/her just debts. He/she shall not sell
or assign his/her salary or income or contract any debts or liabilities which he/
she is unable or unwilling to pay. Neither shall he/she refuse to promptly pay
all indebtedness, claims and judgments and satisfy all executions which may
be held or issued against him/her.
(55) It shall be the duty of all officers to report to the Chief of Police any deliberate,
willful violation of Departmental rules and regulations by any member of the
force which may come to his/her attention. It shall be the duty of all
supervisory officers to report to the Chief of Police for appropriate action any
infractions of the Disciplinary Code, § 81-112 of this chapter, which come to
his/her attention. [Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
(56) It shall be the duty of all officers at all times, whether on or off duty, to conduct
themselves in a manner which will reflect credit upon themselves and the
Department, and therefore, to conduct themselves in a manner which is
reasonably in accord with the generally accepted standards of behavior of the
community and society. Conversely, they shall at all times avoid behavior
which would reflect discredit upon themselves or the Department or would
adversely affect public respect for law and order. It is not possible nor should
it be necessary to enumerate all conduct which would be unbecoming of police
officers, but the following list may serve as typical examples of obviously
unacceptable behaviors:
(a) Deliberate violation of laws.
(b) Willful or malicious violation of any person's rights under the
Constitution or laws of the Commonwealth or the United States.
(c) Abuse of the officer's position of authority for personal aggrandizement
§ 81-111 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 81-111
81:12
§ 81-112. Disciplinary Code of all police personnel. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-13]
or out of personal vindictiveness.
(d) Discriminatory administration of laws by reason of friendship or dislike
for any person or his/her race, nationality, creed, color, sex or handicap.
A. The following list of penalties shall be a guide for the Chief of Police to follow in
the interests of uniformity and fairness. Offenses not included in the following list
shall result in penalties similar to those specified for a listed offense of comparable
seriousness. [Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
(1) Supervisory officers shall be subject to reduction in rank with accompanying
loss of compensation in addition to any other penalties imposed.
(2) In addition to his/her rights under the act of the Legislature known as the
"Police Officer's Tenure Act,"13 any officer who has successfully completed
his/her probationary period may request an informal hearing before the
Township Manager and in the presence of the Chief of Police if he/she
believes the application of the Disciplinary Code has been unfair to his/her
case. Such requests shall only be granted when addressed in writing to the
Chief of Police within 72 hours after notification of disciplinary action has
been received by the officer.
(3) Repeated violations of Department rules and regulations or any other course
of conduct indicating a person has little or no regard for the obligations of
members of the Police Department shall be cause for dismissal. This shall
apply regardless of the severity of the offenses, regardless of any reckoning
period, and regardless of whether these violations are of the same type.
B. Rules of conduct.
(1) Violation of rules. Officers shall not commit any acts or omit any acts which
constitute a violation of any of the rules, regulations, directives or orders of the
Department, whether stated in this general order or elsewhere.
(2) Unbecoming conduct. Officers shall conduct themselves at all times, both on
and off duty, in such manner as to reflect most favorably on the Department.
Conduct unbecoming an officer shall include that which brings the Department
into disrepute or reflects discredit upon the officer as a member of the
Department, or that which impairs the operation and efficiency of the
Department or officer.
(3) Good conduct. Officers shall maintain a level of good conduct in their personal
and business affairs which is in keeping with the highest standards of the law
enforcement profession. Officers shall not participate in any incident involving
moral turpitude which impairs their ability to perform as law enforcement
officers or causes the Department to be brought into disrepute.
13. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 811 et seq.
§ 81-111 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 81-112
81:13
(4) Conformance to laws.
(a) Officers shall obey all laws of the United States, of this state, and of the
local jurisdiction.
(b) An indictment or information filed against an officer or a conviction of
the violation of any law shall be cause for disciplinary action.
(5) Reporting for duty. Officers shall report for duty at the time and place required
by assignment or orders and shall be physically and mentally fit to perform
their duties. They shall be properly equipped and cognizant of information
required for the proper performance of duty so that they may immediately
assume their duties. Judicial subpoenas shall constitute an order to appear
under this section.
(6) Neglect of duty. Officers shall not read, play games, watch television or
movies or otherwise engage in entertainment while on duty, except as may be
required in the performance of duty. They shall not engage in any activities or
personal business which would cause them to neglect or be inattentive to duty.
(7) Fictitious illness or injury reports. Officers shall not feign illness or injury,
falsely report themselves ill or injured, or otherwise deceive or attempt to
deceive any official of the Department as to the condition of their health.
(8) Sleeping on duty. Officers shall remain awake while on duty. If unable to do
so, they shall so report to their superior officers, who shall determine the
proper course of action.
(9) Meals. Officers shall be permitted to suspend patrol or other assigned activity,
subject to immediate call at all times, for the purpose of having meals during
their tour of duty, but only for such period of time, and at such time and place,
as established by Department procedures.
(10) Unsatisfactory performance. Officers shall maintain sufficient competency to
properly perform their duties and assume the responsibilities of their positions.
Officers shall perform their duties in a manner which will maintain the highest
standards of efficiency in carrying out the functions and objectives of the
Department. Unsatisfactory performance may be demonstrated by a lack of
knowledge of the application of laws required to be enforced; an unwillingness
or inability to perform assigned tasks; the failure to conform to work standards
established for the officer's rank, grade or position; the failure to take
appropriate action on the occasion of a crime, disorder, or other condition
deserving police attention; absence without leave; or unnecessary absence
from the assigned patrol during a tour of duty. In addition to other indices of
unsatisfactory performance, the following will be considered prima facie
evidence of unsatisfactory performance: repeated poor performance
evaluations.
(11) Employment outside of department.
(a) Officers may engage in off-duty employment subject to the following
limitations:
§ 81-112 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 81-112
81:14
[1] Such employment shall not interfere with the officer's employment
with the Department;
[2] Officers shall submit a written request for off-duty employment to
the Chief, whose approval must be granted prior to engaging in such
employment; or
[3] Officers shall not engage in any employment or business involving
the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages, investigative work for
insurance agencies, private guard services, collection agencies or
attorneys or bail bond agencies.
(b) Approval may be denied where it appears that the outside employment
might:
[1] Render the officers unavailable during an emergency;
[2] Physically or mentally exhaust the officers to the point that their
performance may be affected;
[3] Require that any special consideration be given to scheduling of the
officers' regular duty hours; or
[4] Bring the Department into disrepute or impair the operation or
efficiency of the Department or officers.
(12) Alcoholic beverages and drugs in police installations. Officers shall not bring
into or store alcoholic beverages, controlled substances, narcotics or
hallucinogens in any police facility or vehicle except alcoholic beverages,
controlled substances, narcotics or hallucinogens which are held as evidence.
(13) Possession and use of drugs. Officers shall not possess or use any controlled
substances, narcotics or hallucinogens except when prescribed in the treatment
of officers by a physician or dentist. When controlled substances, narcotics or
hallucinogens are prescribed, officers shall notify their superior officer.
(14) Use of alcohol on duty. Officers shall not drink intoxicating beverages while
on duty except in the performance of duty and while acting under proper and
specific orders from a superior officer. Officers shall not appear for duty or be
on duty while under the influence of intoxicants to any degree whatsoever or
with an odor of intoxicants on their breath.
(15) Use of alcohol off duty. Officers, while off duty, shall refrain from consuming
intoxicating beverages to the extent that it results in impairment, intoxication
or obnoxious or offensive behavior which would discredit them or the
Department, or render the officers unfit to report for their next regular tour of
duty.
(16) Use of tobacco. Officers, when in uniform, may use tobacco as long as:
(a) They are not in a formation;
(b) They do not have to leave their assignment or post for the sole purpose of
doing so;
§ 81-112 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 81-112
81:15
(c) They are not engaged in traffic direction and control; or
(d) When they are in direct contact with the public, (or) they have first
obtained permission to use tobacco from the public with whom they are
in direct contact.
(17) Insubordination. Officers shall promptly obey any lawful orders of a superior
officer. This will include orders relayed from a superior officer by an officer
of the same or lesser rank.
(18) Conflicting or illegal orders.
(a) Officers who are given an otherwise proper order which is in direct
conflict with a previous order, rule, regulation or directive shall
respectfully inform the superior officer issuing the order of the conflict.
If the superior officer issuing the order does not alter or retract the
conflicting order, the order shall stand. Under these circumstances, the
responsibility for the conflict shall be upon the superior officer. Officers
shall obey the conflicting order and shall not be held responsible for
disobedience of the order, rule, regulation or directive previously issued.
(b) Officers shall not obey any order which they reasonably believe would
require them to commit any illegal act. If in doubt as to the legality of the
order, officers shall request the issuing officer to clarify the order or to
confer with higher authority.
(19) Gifts, gratuities, bribes or rewards.
(a) Officers shall not solicit or accept from any person, business or
organization any valuable gift (including money, tangible or intangible
personal property, loan, promise, service or entertainment) for the benefit
of the officers or the Department if it may reasonably be inferred that the
person, business or organization:
[1] Seeks to influence action of an official nature or seeks to affect the
performance or nonperformance of an official duty; or
[2] Has an interest which may be substantially affected directly or
indirectly by the performance or nonperformance of an official duty.
(b) Officers shall not use their official position, official identification cards
or badges:
[1] For personal or financial gain;
[2] For obtaining privileges not otherwise available to them except in
the performance of duty; or
[3] For avoiding consequences of illegal acts.
(20) Abuse of position.
(a) Use of official position or identification.
§ 81-112 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 81-112
81:16
[1] Officers shall not use their official position, official identification
cards or badges:
[a] For personal or financial gain;
[b] For obtaining privileges not otherwise available to them except
in the performance of duty; or
[c] For avoiding consequences of illegal acts.
[2] Officers shall not lend to another person their identification cards or
badges or permit them to be photographed or reproduced without the
approval of the Chief.
(b) Use of name, photograph or title. Officers shall not permit or authorize
the use of their names, photographs or official titles which identify them
as officers in connection with testimonials or advertisements of any
commodity or commercial enterprise without the approval of the Chief.
(21) Endorsements and referrals. Officers shall not recommend or suggest in any
manner, except in the transaction of personal business, the employment or
procurement of a particular product, professional service, or commercial
service (such as an attorney, ambulance service, towing service, bondsman,
mortician, etc.). In the case of ambulance or towing service, when such service
is necessary and the person needing the service is unable or unwilling to
procure it or requests assistance, officers shall proceed in accordance with
established Departmental procedures.
(22) Identification. Officers shall carry their badges and identification cards on
their persons at all times, except when impractical or dangerous to their safety
or to an investigation. They shall furnish their name and badge number to any
person requesting that information, when they are on duty or while holding
themselves out as having an official capacity, except when withholding of
such information is necessary for the performance of police duties or is
authorized by proper authority.
(23) Citizen complaints. Officers shall courteously and promptly record in writing
any complaint made by a citizen against any officer of the Department.
Officers may attempt to resolve the complaint but shall never attempt to
dissuade any citizen from lodging a complaint against any officer of the
Department. Officers shall follow established Departmental procedures for
processing such complaints.
(24) Courtesy. Officers shall be courteous to the public. Officers shall be tactful in
the performance of their duties, shall control their tempers and exercise the
utmost patience and discretion, and shall not engage in argumentative
discussions even in the face of extreme provocation. In the performance of
their duties, officers shall not use coarse, violent, profane or insolent language
or gestures and shall not express any prejudice concerning race, religion,
politics, national origin, lifestyle, sex, handicap or similar personal
characteristics.
§ 81-112 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 81-112
81:17
(25) Requests for assistance. When any person applies for advice or makes
complaints or reports, either by telephone or in person, all pertinent
information will be obtained in an official and courteous manner and will be
properly and judiciously acted upon consistent with established Departmental
procedures.
(26) Associations. Officers shall avoid regular or continuous associations or
dealings with persons whom they know, or should know, are racketeers, sexual
offenders, gamblers, suspected felons, persons under criminal investigation or
indictment, or who have a reputation in the community for present
involvement in felonious or criminal behavior, except as necessary to the
performance of official duties or where unavoidable because of other personal
relationships of the officers.
(27) Visiting prohibited establishments. Officers shall not knowingly visit, enter or
frequent a house of prostitution, gambling house, or establishment wherein the
laws of the United States, the state or the local jurisdiction are regularly
violated, except in the performance of duty or while acting under proper and
specific orders from a superior officer.
(28) Public statements and appearances.
(a) Officers shall not publicly criticize or ridicule the Department, its policies
or other officers by speech, writing or other expression, where such
speech, writing or other expression is defamatory, obscene, unlawful,
undermines the effectiveness of the Department, interferes with the
maintenance of discipline, or is made with reckless disregard for truth or
falsity.
(b) Officers shall not address public gatherings, appear on radio or television,
prepare any articles for publication, act as correspondents to a newspaper
or a periodical, release or divulge investigative information or any other
matters of the Department while holding themselves out as having an
official capacity in such matters without official sanction or proper
authority. Officers may lecture on "police" or other related subjects only
with the prior approval of the Chief.
(29) Personal appearance.
(a) Officers on duty shall wear uniforms or other clothing in accordance with
established Departmental procedures.
(b) Except when acting under proper and specific orders from a superior
officer, officers on duty shall maintain a neat, well-groomed appearance
and shall style their hair according to the following guidelines:
[1] Hair must be clean, neat and combed. Hair shall not be worn longer
than the top of the shirt collar at the back of the neck when standing
with the head in a normal posture. The bulk or length of the hair shall
not interfere with the normal wearing of all standard headgear.
[2] Wigs or hairpieces are permitted if they conform to the above
§ 81-112 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 81-112
81:18
standards for natural hair.
[3] Sideburns shall be neatly trimmed and rectangular in shape.
[4] Officers shall be clean-shaven, except that they may have mustaches
which do not extend below the upper lip line.
(c) Female officers.
[1] Hair must be clean, neat and combed. Hair shall not be worn longer
than the top of the shirt collar at the back of the neck when standing
with the head in a normal posture. The bulk or length of the hair shall
not interfere with the normal wearing of all standard headgear.
[2] Wigs or hairpieces are permitted if they conform to the above
standards for natural hair.
(30) Political activity.
(a) Officers shall be permitted to:
[1] Register and vote in any election.
[2] Express opinions as individuals privately and publicly on political
issues and candidates.
[3] Attend political conventions, rallies and similar political gatherings.
[4] Actively engage in any nonpartisan political functions.
[5] Sign political petitions as individuals.
[6] Make financial contributions to political organizations.
[7] Serve as election judges or clerks in performance of nonpartisan
duties as prescribed by state or local laws.
[8] Hold membership in a political party and participate in its functions
to the extent consistent with the law and consistent with this section.
[9] Participate fully in public affairs to the extent that such endeavors do
not impair the neutral and efficient performance of official duties or
create real or apparent conflicts of interest.
(b) Officers are prohibited from:
[1] Using their official capacity to influence, interfere with or affect the
results of an election.
[2] Assuming active roles in the management or organization of partisan
political clubs, campaigns or parties.
[3] Serving as officers of partisan political parties or clubs.
[4] Becoming candidates for or campaigning for a partisan elective
public office.
§ 81-112 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 81-112
81:19
[5] Soliciting votes in support of or in opposition to any partisan
candidates.
[6] Serving as delegates to a political party convention.
[7] Endorsing or opposing a partisan candidate for public office in a
political advertisement, broadcast or campaign literature.
[8] Organizing, selling tickets to, or actively participating in a fundraising
function for a partisan political party or candidate.
[9] Addressing political gatherings in support of or in opposition to a
partisan candidate.
[10] Engaging in prohibited partisan activities on the federal, state,
county or municipal level.
(31) Labor activity.
(a) Officers shall have the right to join labor organizations, but nothing shall
compel the Department to recognize or to engage in collective bargaining
with any such labor organizations except as provided by law.
(b) Officers shall not engage in any strike. "Strike" includes the concerted
failure to report for duty, willful absence from one's position,
unauthorized holidays, sickness unsubstantiated by a physician's
statement, the stoppage of work, or the abstinence in whole or in part
from the full, faithful and proper performance of the duties of
employment for the purpose of inducing, influencing or coercing a
change in conditions, compensation, rights, privileges or obligations of
employment.
(32) Payment of debts. Officers shall not undertake any financial obligations which
they know or should know they will be unable to meet, and shall pay all just
debts when due. An isolated instance of financial irresponsibility will not be
grounds for discipline except in unusually severe cases. However, repeated
instances of financial difficulty may be cause for disciplinary action. Filing for
a voluntary bankruptcy petition shall not, by itself, be cause for discipline.
Financial difficulties stemming from unforeseen medical expenses or personal
disaster shall not be cause for discipline, provided that a good faith effort to
settle all accounts is being undertaken. Officers shall not cosign for any
superior officer.
(33) Residence. Residence requirements shall be as set forth in the current
collective bargaining agreement.
(34) Telephone. Officers shall have telephones in their residences and shall
immediately report any changes of telephone numbers or addresses to their
superior officers and to such other persons as may be appropriate.
(35) Dissemination of information. Officers shall treat the official business of the
Department as confidential. Information regarding official business shall be
disseminated only to those for whom it is intended, in accordance with
§ 81-112 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 81-112
81:20
established Departmental procedures. Officers may remove or copy official
records or reports from a police installation only in accordance with
established Departmental procedures. Officers shall not divulge the identity
of persons giving confidential information except as authorized by proper
authority in the performance of police duties.
(36) Intervention.
(a) Officers shall not interfere with cases being handled by other officers of
the Department or by any other governmental agency unless:
[1] Ordered to interfere by a superior officer; or
[2] The interfering officer believes beyond a reasonable doubt that a
manifest injustice would result from inaction.
(b) Officers shall not undertake any investigation or other official action not
part of their regular duties without obtaining permission from their
superior officer unless the exigencies of the situation require immediate
police action.
(37) Departmental reports. Officers shall submit all necessary reports on time and
in accordance with established Departmental procedures. Reports submitted
by officers shall be truthful and complete, and no officer shall knowingly enter
or cause to be entered any inaccurate, false or improper information.
(38) Processing property. Property which has been discovered, gathered or received
in connection with Departmental responsibilities will be processed in
accordance with established Departmental procedures. Officers shall not
convert to their own use, manufacture, conceal, falsify, destroy, remove,
tamper with or withhold any property found in connection with an
investigation or other police action, except in accordance with established
Departmental procedures.
(39) Abuse of process/withholding evidence. Officers shall not convert to their own
use, manufacture, conceal, falsify, destroy, remove, tamper with or withhold
evidence or information, or make false accusations of a criminal or traffic
charge.
(40) Use of Department equipment. Officers shall utilize Department equipment
only for its intended purpose, in accordance with established Departmental
procedures, and shall not intentionally abuse, damage or lose Department
equipment. All Department equipment issued to officers shall be maintained
in proper order.
(41) Operating vehicles. Officers shall operate official vehicles in a careful and
prudent manner, and shall obey all laws of the state and all Departmental
orders pertaining to such operation. Loss or suspension of any driving license
shall be reported to the Department immediately.
(42) Carrying firearms. Officers shall carry firearms in accordance with the law and
established Departmental procedures.
§ 81-112 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 81-112
81:21
(43) Truthfulness. Upon the order of the Chief, the Chief's designee or a superior
officer, officers shall truthfully answer all questions specifically directed and
narrowly related to the scope of employment and operations of the Department
which may be asked of them.
(44) Use of polygraph; medical examinations; photographs; lineups.
(a) Polygraph examinations. Upon the request of the Chief, officers may
submit to polygraph examinations when the examinations are specifically
directed and narrowly related to a particular internal investigation being
conducted by the Department. Whenever a complaint from a citizen is the
basis for the investigation, the matter is noncriminal, and no
corroborating information has been discovered, officers shall not be
requested to submit to polygraph examinations unless the citizen also
submits to a polygraph examination which is specifically directed and
narrowly related to the complaint.
(b) Medical examinations; photographs; lineups. Upon the order of the Chief
or the Chief's designee, officers shall submit to any medical, ballistics,
chemical or other tests, photographs or lineups. All procedures carried out
under this subsection shall be specifically directed and narrowly related
to a particular internal investigation being conducted by the Department.
(45) Financial disclosure. Upon the order of the Chief of Police, an officer shall
submit financial disclosure statements if they are in connection with a criminal
complaint in which this information is material to the investigation. These
statements are to be maintained by the Chief of Police and shall not be
available for public disclosure. [Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
(46) Treatment of persons in custody. Officers shall not mistreat persons who are
in their custody. Officers shall handle such persons in accordance with law and
established Departmental procedure.
(47) Use of force. Officers shall not use more force in any situation than is
reasonably necessary under the circumstances. Officers shall use force in
accordance with law and established Departmental procedures.
(48) Use of weapons. Officers shall not use or handle weapons in a careless or
imprudent manner. Officers shall use weapons in accordance with law and
established Departmental procedures.
(49) Arrest, search and seizure. Officers shall not make any arrest, search or seizure
which they know or should know is not in accordance with law and established
Departmental procedures.
(50) Violating any law of the commonwealth, that is to say, if he/she:
(a) Is convicted of any misdemeanor or felony under the laws of this
commonwealth.
(b) Connives or is knowingly an accessory to any criminal offense or against
any discipline under this code.
§ 81-112 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 81-112
81:22
§ 81-113. Punishment. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
§ 81-114. Request for hearing. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13; 12-8-2009
by Ord. No. 09-04]
In addition to his/her rights under the act of the Legislature known as the Police Officer's
Tenure Act, any officer who has successfully completed his/her probationary period may
request an informal hearing before the Township Manager and in the presence of the
Chief of Police if he/she believes the application of the Disciplinary Code has been
unfair to his/her case. Such requests shall only be granted when addressed in writing
to the Chief of Police within 72 hours after notification of disciplinary action taken has
been received by the officer.
§ 81-115. Amendment. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
Any amendment to any provisions of this chapter may be adopted by ordinance of the
Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 81-116. Resolution of conflict.
Whenever the requirements of this chapter are in conflict with other requirements in this
Code, the most restrictive, or those imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
(c) Accepts and retains any bribe.
A. An offense against discipline may be punished by:
(1) Removal.
(2) Reduction in rank.
(3) Reduction in rate of pay.
(4) Suspension without pay.
(5) Extension of probationary period.
B. The following list of penalties is intended to serve as a guide for and is not to be
construed as binding or inclusive upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police
or as to the penalties which may be imposed by the Township Manager or the Board
of Supervisors. Offenses not included herein shall result in penalties similar to those
specified for a listed offense of comparable seriousness. [Amended 12-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-04]
C. Repeated violations of Department rules and regulations or any other course of
conduct indicating a man has little regard for the obligations of members of the
Police Department shall be cause for dismissal. This shall apply regardless of the
severity of the offenses, and regardless of whether these violations are of the same
type.
D. Subsections B(1) through (50) of § 81-112 shall be administered in the following
manner: Reprimand to dismissal.
§ 81-112 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 81-117
81:23
§ 81-117. Multi-agency special reaction team. [Added 6-8-1999 by Ord. No. 99-09]
A. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Middletown shall enter into an
intergovernmental agreement with the Townships of Northampton and Falls, and
other townships and boroughs which may become participants in the future, to
create and operate a special reaction team which will provide specialized police
services to the participating municipalities. A copy of the formal agreement is
attached hereto and its terms approved and incorporated herein to the same extent
as if they were fully set out in this section.14
B. The agreement shall remain in effect until the Township of Middletown withdraws
from further participation in it by giving notice as required therein.
C. Middletown Township's expenses necessarily incurred as a result of its
participation shall be paid from the general fund or other appropriate fund, pursuant
to an appropriation made by the Board of Supervisors.
14. Editor's Note: The intergovernmental agreement is on file in the Township office.
§ 81-117 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 81-117
81:24
Chapter 98
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION; INSURANCE BENEFITS
§ 81-117 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION; INSURANCE § 81-117
98:1

ARTICLE I
Health Care Benefits for Supervisors
[Adopted 4-25-2006 by Ord. No. 06-07]
§ 98-100. Allocation of costs.
If a future Board of Supervisors of Middletown Township elects to be included in the
Township-sponsored health insurance plan after following the process outlined in the
Second Class Township Code, it shall pay the total costs of inclusion in the plan with no
subsidy by the Township.
§ 98-101. Severability; effective date.
If any provision of this article shall be held invalid, such provision shall be deemed
severable and the invalidity thereof shall not affect the remaining provisions of this
article. This article shall take effect 30 days after its adoption by the Board of
Supervisors but shall apply to only those Supervisors who assume office after December
31, 2007.
§ 98-100 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION; INSURANCE § 98-101
98:3

ARTICLE II
Compensation for Supervisors
[Adopted 9-12-2006 by Ord. No. 06-14]
§ 98-200. Rejection of additional compensation.
The Board of Supervisors of Middletown Township shall not authorize any individual
Supervisor or the Board as a whole to receive additional compensation as described
in Pennsylvania Senate Bill 809 of 2005, as amended on third consideration by the
Pennsylvania House of Representatives on June 28, 2006. This prohibition shall not
apply to any compensation already authorized by the Middletown Township Board
of Supervisors, the Second Class Township Code, or the General Laws of the
Commonwealth.
§ 98-200 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION; INSURANCE § 98-200
98:5

Chapter 108
TOWNS AGAINST GRAFFITI FUNDING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Graffiti — See Ch. 264.
§ 108-100. Purpose.
The participation of Middletown Township in the multijurisdictional anti-graffiti
community development program Towns Against Graffiti (TAG) is voluntary and
desirable to reduce the cost of eliminating graffiti from the Township.
§ 108-101. Funds to be contributed.
Funds in the amount of up to $5,000 per year may be contributed to the Towns Against
Graffiti program for the purpose of financing graffiti removal for as long as Middletown
continues to participate.
§ 98-200 TOWNS AGAINST GRAFFITI FUNDING § 108-101
108:1

Part II: General Legislation
§ 108-101 TOWNS AGAINST GRAFFITI FUNDING § 108-101
108:3

Chapter 120
ADULT BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 190. Zoning — See Ch. 500.
§ 120-101. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose of this chapter to address the negative impacts associated with adult or
sexually oriented businesses as identified in the legislative findings made in connection
with the adoption of this chapter; to reduce or prevent neighborhood blight; to protect
and preserve the quality of the Township's neighborhoods and commercial districts; to
protect the Township's retail trade; to maintain property values; to protect and preserve
the quality of Township life; to reduce the incidence of unlawful activity; and to promote
the health, safety, moral and general welfare of the citizens of the Township. The
provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation
or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult-oriented
materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny
access by adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or to deny
access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to their intended
market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene material.
§ 120-102. Definitions.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly require different meaning,
the words, terms and phrases set forth shall have the meanings given them in this
section.
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or club-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture or video machines, projectors or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial, significant or
preponderant portion of its stock in matter which is distinguished or characterized
by its emphasis on content depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein.
ADULT BUSINESS — Any adult or sexually oriented business, including any
business establishment that regularly features live performances which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of the genitals or
buttocks of any person or the breasts of any female person or specified sexual
activities that involve the exposure of the genitals or buttocks of any person or the
§ 108-101 ADULT BUSINESSES § 120-102
120:1
breasts of any female person or any business whose primary purpose is the sale
of display of matter that, because of its sexually explicit nature, may, pursuant to
state law or other regulatory authority, be offered only to persons over the age of 18
years. Adult business may include an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret,
adult hotel/motel, adult motion-picture theater, adult visual materials or video store,
adult modeling studio or adult entertainment enterprise, as defined herein.
ADULT BUSINESS OPERATOR—A person who supervises, manages, inspects,
directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the
premises of an adult business or the conduct or activities occurring on the premises
thereof.
ADULT BUSINESS OWNER—A person or persons who hold a financial or other
business interest, in whole or in part, either singly or jointly, in an adult business.
For purposes of this chapter, indicia of ownership may be established by evidence,
including, but not limited to, business license information, fictitious business name
registration, utility billing information or by other competent evidence. For
purposes of this chapter, the person whose name appears on the business license
application as the business owner shall be deemed to be the adult business owner.
ADULT CABARET—A building or portion thereof or area regularly featuring the
presentation or exhibition of live performers whose performances are distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as hereinafter defined, or
whose performances are rendered in a state of dress so as to expose the female
breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, male or female
genitals, pubic areas, buttocks or the female breast with only the nipple and areola
covered, or any combination thereof, for observation by patrons or customers.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ENTERPRISE — Any business activity wherein is
furnished for a fee or charge or other like consideration the opportunity to paint,
feel, handle, touch, be in the presence of, be entertained by, be painted by, felt
by or touched by the unclothed body or the unclothed portion of the body of
another person or to observe, view or photograph such activity; or a fee or charge
or like consideration is paid or received for goods sold or services rendered by or
in the presence of one or more persons with an unclothed body or an unclothed
portion of the body. Adult entertainment enterprise shall include, but not be limited
to, the following business activities and activities similar thereto to adult or nude
encounter studios, adult or nude dance studios, nude exhibitions, peep shows,
wrestling centers, adult or nude art or photograph studios. "Unclothed portion of
the body" shall mean state of dress so as to expose the female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola, male or females genitals, pubic areas,
buttocks or female breast with the nipple and areola covered.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ROOM — Any room of an adult entertainment
establishment which constitutes an adult cabaret, adult motion-picture theater, adult
entertainment enterprise or adult theater or adult visual materials store pursuant to
this section.
ADULT HOTEL/MOTEL — A hotel or motel or similar business establishment
offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which provides
patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, computer-generated
images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions,
§ 120-102 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 120-102
120:2
30% or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, and rents, leases or lets any room for less than a six-hour
period, or rents, leases or lets any single room more than twice in a twenty-fourhour
period.
ADULT MODELING STUDIO — A business which provides, for any form of
compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who,
for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display specified anatomical areas
to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted
by persons paying such consideration. "Modeling studio" does not include schools
maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. "Modeling
studio," further, does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated or
maintained by an individual artist or group of artists and which does not provide,
permit or make available specified sexual activities.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER—A building or portion thereof or area,
open or closed, used for the presentation on more than 1/3 of the days in a calendar
year during which motion-picture films, videocassettes, cable television or any
other such visual media are displayed or exhibited of films, videocassettes, cable
television or other visual media which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas, as hereinafter defined, for observation by patrons
or customers. Adult motion-picture theater does not include any room or suite
of rooms rented for human occupancy in a hotel or motel which is equipped or
furnished with a video cassette-playing machine or cable television, unless such
hotel or motel is determined to be an "adult hotel/motel" as defined herein.
ADULT VISUAL MATERIALS OR VIDEO STORE — A building or portion
thereof used by an establishment having not less than 30% of its actual display
area devoted to or its stock-in-trade for sale or rental to the public, or any segment
thereof, consists of books, magazines, other publications, films, videocassettes or
any combination thereof which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas as hereinafter defined.
APPLICANT — A person who is required to file an application for permit under
this chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a
corporation or any other operator, manager, employee or agent of an adult business.
BAR—Any commercial establishment licensed by the State Liquor Control Board
to serve any alcoholic beverages on the premises.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The person responsible for ordinance
enforcement functions within the jurisdiction of the Township, including, but not
limited to, responsibility for administration and enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter.
DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON — The
dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase.
EMPLOYEE — Every owner, partner, manager, supervisor, performer or other
worker, whether paid or not, who renders services of any nature in the conduct of
an adult business establishment. For purposes of this chapter, it shall be rebuttable
§ 120-102 ADULT BUSINESSES § 120-102
120:3
presumption that every person who renders services of any nature in the conduct of
an adult business is an employee of the adult business.
ENTERTAINER — Any person who is an employee or independent contractor of
the adult business or any person who, with or without any compensation or other
form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an adult business.
OPERATE AN ADULT BUSINESS — The supervising, managing, inspecting,
directing, organizing, controlling or in any way being responsible for or in charge of
the conduct of activities of an adult business or activities within an adult business.
PERMITTEE — The person to whom an adult business permit is issued.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, partnership, coparty, corporation,
limited liability corporation, joint-stock company, joint venture or combination of
the above in whatever form or character.
REGULARLY FEATURES — With respect to an adult business means a regular,
substantial course of conduct. The presentation, in or at any building or portion
thereof, of live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity
on two or more occasions within a thirty-day period, three or more occasions
within a sixty-day period or four or more occasions within a one-hundred-eightyday
period shall, to the extent permitted by law, be deemed to be a regular and
substantial course of conduct.
SEMINUDE—A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body
covered by supporting straps or devices, such as by "G" strings, pasties, thongs,
bikinis or other similar forms of garments or devices.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Any of the following:
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following, whether performed
directly or indirectly, through clothing or other coverings:
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely opaquely
covered.
(2)
Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body part included
in subsections (1) and (2) above.
(3)
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Sexual acts, actual or simulated, including sexual intercourse, oral copulation
or sodomy.
(2)
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or
female breast.
(3)
(4) Masturbation, actual or simulated.
§ 120-102 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 120-102
120:4
§ 120-103. Excluded activities.
This chapter does not apply to any of the following activities:
§ 120-104. Adult business permit required.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the other activities
described in subsections (1) through (4) above.
(5)
B. The foregoing definitions are generic. The uses and businesses governed by
Subsection A include any other use or business, regardless of how named or
advertised, that is of a character like or similar to the uses and businesses set forth
in Subsection A.
A. Any activity conducted or sponsored by a school district or other public agency, so
long as activity is being conducted as part of and within the scope of an authorized
and regular part of the curriculum or is part of a training or instructional program
being conducted by a public agency.
B. Any activity conducted by a person pursuant to any license issued by the State of
Pennsylvania or any agency thereof charged with the responsibility of licensing,
prescribing standards for and supervising such activity or profession, in and to the
extent that such activity is conducted within the course and scope of the exercise of
the privileges authorized by such license or the duties of such agency.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry a permit to be
engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises within the Township
the operation of an adult business unless the person first obtains and continues to
maintain in full force and effect a permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
as required by this chapter.
B. A permit shall be issued to any applicant who has complied with all of the following
requirements:
(1) The applicant has paid the adult business application fee required pursuant to
Subsection C.
(2) The applicant has not made a material misstatement in the application for a
license.
(3) The establishment, including the building and lot or portion thereof where the
establishment is or is proposed to be situated and the physical facilities and
maintenance related thereto, complies with all building, fire, electrical,
plumbing, health, zoning requirements of this Code (Chapter 500, Zoning), all
the requirements of this chapter and all state and federal requirements of a
similar nature which are customarily enforced by the Township, as determined
pursuant to one or more inspections conducted by investigating officials of the
Township.
C. Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an
amount established by resolution of the Township Board of Supervisors. The
application fee shall be used to defray, in part, administrative costs incurred in
§ 120-102 ADULT BUSINESSES § 120-104
120:5
§ 120-105. Application for adult business permit.
processing the application and is not made in lieu of any other fees or taxes required
under this chapter.15
A. Any person who proposes to operate, maintain or conduct an adult business in the
Township shall first submit to the Code Enforcement Officer a complete application
for an adult business permit on a form provided by the Township containing the
information set forth in this section and payment of the required Township
nonrefundable application fee as established by resolution and amended by the
Township Board of Supervisors from time to time. An application which is not
accompanied by the required application fee shall not be deemed a complete
application.
B. If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his/her complete name,
including any aliases, and address and submit satisfactory written proof that he or
she is at least 18 years of age.
C. If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partner's complete name,
address, the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited and
attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.
D. If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its name, the date of
its corporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of
Pennsylvania, the names and capacity of all officers and directors, name of the
registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of
process.
E. If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the application. If the applicant
is other than an individual, an officer of the business entity or an individual with a
ten-percent or greater interest in the business entity shall sign the application.
F. If the applicant intends to operate the adult business under a name other than that of
the applicant, the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult business and
show proof of registration of the fictitious name.
G. Each application shall contain:
(1) A narrative description of the proposed or existing adult business for which
the permit is requested, which shall include hours of operation, number of
employees and description of titles and/or positions.
(2) A sketch or diagram showing the interior floor plan and configuration of the
premises, depicting all interior rooms, including rest rooms, office space,
storage areas and public areas and dimensions. The sketch or diagram need not
be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale with
marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.
(3) A site plan showing the lot or property on which the adult business is or will
15. Editor's Note: Township fee schedules are on file in the Township Building and available to be viewed on the
Township's website at www.middletownbucks.org.
§ 120-104 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 120-105
120:6
§ 120-106. Application processing.
be located, the location of the building or portion thereof in which the adult
business is or will be located, the number of available parking spaces, the
location and type of available and proposed lighting, landscaping, trash
enclosures and all means of ingress and egress to and from the property. The
site plan need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to scale with
marked dimensions to an accuracy of plus or minus one foot.
(4) The full name, address and telephone number of the property owner and/or
property management company if different from the applicant, a copy of the
lease agreement in effect at the time of the application and a copy of any other
agreements, easements, conditions, covenants, restrictions or other such
documents that contain evidence affecting the use or operation of the lot,
property, premises or structures which will be subject to the permit for which
the application has been submitted.
H. Each application shall also contain the following information about the applicant:
(1) Full name including any aliases, current residential address, telephone number,
date of birth, social security number and driver's license number.
(2) The previous address of each applicant for a period of three years immediately
prior to the date of application and the dates of residence at each.
(3) Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
(4) Applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair.
(5) Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for three years
immediately preceding the date of the application.
(6) Two recent passport-style color photographs.
I. Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the Code Enforcement
Officer to secure the foregoing information.
J. An adult business establishment lawfully existing and operating on the effective
date of this chapter shall apply for a permit within 90 days therefrom and shall be
allowed to continue operating during the pendency of the application, provided they
are otherwise in compliance with applicable provisions of this chapter.
K. Upon application of any adult business establishment not lawfully existing and
operating on the effective date of this chapter, a temporary permit not to exceed 30
days shall be issued immediately upon receipt of a completed application. This
permit shall expire automatically at the end of the thirty-day period unless extended
by the Code Enforcement Officer.
A. Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the application and permit
fees, the application shall be immediately stamped as received by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
B. Within 30 days of receipt of the completed application, the Code Enforcement
§ 120-105 ADULT BUSINESSES § 120-106
120:7
§ 120-107. Denial of permit.
Officer or his designated official shall conduct and complete an investigation of the
information contained in the application to determine whether the applicant shall be
issued an adult business permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
and notify the applicant as follows:
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall write or stamp "granted" or "denied" on
the application and date and sign such notation.
(2) If the application is denied, the Code Enforcement Officer shall provide a
statement of the reasons for denial.
(3) If the application is granted, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue an adult
business permit.
(4) The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall be sent by
United States Mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant, to
the address stated in the application.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall grant the application and issue a business
permit upon finding that the proposed business meets the locational and zoning
requirements of the Township and that the applicant has met all of the development
and performance standards and requirements of this chapter.
D. Upon notification that the permit has been granted by the Code Enforcement
Officer, or if the director fails to either grant or deny the application within 30 days
of receipt of a completed application, the applicant may begin operating as an adult
business pursuant to the terms and conditions of the permit. The permittee shall post
the permit conspicuously in the premises of the adult business establishment.
E. Each adult business permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may
be renewed only by filing with the Code Enforcement Officer a written request for
renewal accompanied by the annual permit fee and a copy of the permit to be
renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the
expiration date of the permit. When made less than 30 days before the expiration
date, the expiration of the permit will not be stayed. Each application for renewal
shall be acted on as provided herein for action upon applications for permits.
A. Within 30 days of receipt of a completed application, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall deny an application for a permit if he or she makes any of the following
findings:
(1) The lot or property on which the adult business is or is proposed to be located
does not comply with the locational or zoning requirements of the Middletown
Township Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 500).
(2) The establishment, including the building or portion thereof where the adult
business is or is proposed to be situated and the physical facilities and
maintenance related thereto, fails to comply with all applicable building, fire,
electrical, plumbing and health requirements of this Code, all applicable state
and federal requirements of a similar nature which are customarily enforced
§ 120-106 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 120-107
120:8
§ 120-108. Appeal of denial.
§ 120-109. Reapplication after denial.
An applicant whose application for a license has been denied may reapply for such
license after a period of not less than one year has elapsed from the date such denial
was deposited in the mail or received by the applicant, whichever occurs first; provided,
however, that an earlier reapplication may be made if accompanied by evidence that the
by the Township and all applicable provisions of this chapter.
(3) The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer,
shareholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an adult business
permit.
(4) The applicant or any of the following persons has had a license or permit
issued pursuant to this chapter revoked within one year of the date of the
application:
(a) If the applicant is a corporation, any officer or director of the corporation
or any stockholder holding more than 5% of the corporate stock of the
applicant.
(b) If the applicant is a partnership, any general or limited partner or
applicant.
(c) Any person currently employed by or in the adult business establishment.
B. Transmittal of decision. The permit or decision to deny the application shall be
given to the applicant, in writing, setting forth specifically the ground or grounds
upon which the decision is based, the pertinent Code section or sections and a brief
statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The decision shall be mailed,
postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the last known address of the
applicant, or it may be personally delivered to the applicant.
A. Appeal to the Board of Supervisors. Within 10 days from the deposit of the denial
in the mail or from its receipt by applicant, the applicant may appeal, in writing, to
the Board of Supervisors, setting forth with particularity the ground or grounds for
the appeal.
B. Hearing on appeal. The Board of Supervisors, consisting of at least three members,
shall hear the appeal and shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal not
less than 10 days nor more than 30 days from the date the appeal was received by
the Board of Supervisors.
C. Disposition of appeal. After the hearing on the appeal, the Board of Supervisors
may refer the matter back to the Code Enforcement Officer for a new investigation
and decision, may affirm the denial of the application by the Code Enforcement
Officer or may approve the application. The decision of the Board of Supervisors
shall be final. Notice of the Board of Supervisors' decision shall be mailed to the
applicant within 10 days of the hearing date.
§ 120-107 ADULT BUSINESSES § 120-109
120:9
ground or grounds for denial of the application no longer exist.
§ 120-110. Grounds for suspension or revocation.
A permittee may be subject to suspension or revocation of a permit issued pursuant to
this chapter or be subject to other appropriate disciplinary action for any of the following
grounds arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee or employee, agent, partner,
director, stockholder or manager of an adult business:
A. The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of
material facts in the application for a permit or in any report or reports required to
be filed with the Township.
B. The establishment, including the building and lot or portion thereof where the
establishment is or is proposed to be situated and the physical facilities and
maintenance related thereto, fails to comply with all applicable building, fire,
electrical, plumbing, health and zoning requirements of this Code, all applicable
state and federal requirements of a similar nature which are customarily enforced
by the Township and all provisions of this chapter.
C. The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder or manager of the
adult business has knowingly allowed or permitted and has failed to make a
reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises
of the adult business establishment:
(1) Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or
masturbation.
(2) The use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitation of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation occur.
(3) The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation or prostitution.
(4) Any act constituting a violation of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903, relating to the
distribution of obscene and other sexual materials and performances.
(5) Any act constituting a violation of provisions relating to obscene matter or
distribution of harmful matter to minors.
(6) Any conduct constituting a criminal offense of which an essential element
consists of the use of force or violence.
(7) Any act constituting a felony involving the sale, use, possession or possession
for sale of any controlled substance.
D. Failure to abide by any disciplinary action previously imposed by the appropriate
Township officer.
E. Failure to comply with one or more of the facilities and operations requirements set
forth in § 120-114.
F. The existence of the condition of the premises as hazardous or unsafe for human
occupancy.
§ 120-109 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 120-111
120:10
§ 120-111. Notice of permit violations.
Upon determining that grounds for permit suspension or revocation exist, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or
revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of hearing and
the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent Code sections and
a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed,
postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the permittee and/or shall be
delivered to the permittee personally at least 10 days prior to the hearing date.
§ 120-112. No refund of fee.
No refund or rebate of a permit fee shall be allowed by reason of the fact the permit
discontinues an activity for which a permit is required pursuant to this chapter or that the
license is suspended or revoked.
§ 120-113. Return of permit.
In the event that a permit is canceled, suspended, revoked or invalidated, the permit shall
be forwarded to the Code Enforcement Officer not later than the end of the third business
day after notification of such cancellation, suspension, revocation or invalidation.
§ 120-114. Facilities and operation requirements.
All adult business establishments subject to the provisions of this chapter shall comply
with the following facilities and operations requirements:
A. Each adult business establishment shall comply with all building, fire, electrical,
plumbing, health and zoning requirements of this Code, all state and federal
requirements of a similar nature which are customarily enforced by the Township
and all provisions of this chapter.
B. No adult business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of
any material or activities depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas from any public way or from any location
outside the building or area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any
display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. No exterior door or
window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at any time while the
business is open, and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering
at all times.
C. All off-street parking areas and premises entries of the adult business should be
illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which
provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one footcandle of
lighting on the parking surface and/or walkways. The required lighting level is
established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and
walkways servicing the sexually oriented business for the personal safety of patrons
and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The
lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.
D. The premises within which the adult business is located shall provide sufficient
sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside the premises shall not be
§ 120-111 ADULT BUSINESSES § 120-114
120:11
audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any
other building or other separate unit within the same building.
E. With the exception of adult cabarets, each adult business subject to the chapter shall
close and remain closed from midnight to 9:00 a.m. the following day.
F. The building entrance to an adult business shall be clearly and legibly posted with
a notice indicating that persons under 18 years of age are precluded from entering
the premises. The notice shall be constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the
Chief of Police or designee. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted
within the premises at any time. [Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
G. All indoor areas to the adult business shall be physically arranged in such a manner
that the entire interior portion of the booths, rooms, cubicles or stalls where adult
entertainment is provided shall be clearly visible from the common areas of the
premises, excluding rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain video-reproduction
equipment.
H. Visibility into booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls shall not be blocked or obscured by
doors, curtains, partitions, drapes or any other obstruction whatsoever.
I. No adult business shall contain partitions between subdivisions of a room or
portions or parts of a building, structure or premises with an aperture which is
designed or constructed to facilitate sexual activity between persons on either side
of the partitions.
J. No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one time.
K. Customers, patrons or visitors shall not be allowed to stand idly by or in the vicinity
of any such video booths or from remaining in the common area of such business,
other than the rest rooms, who are not actively engaged in shopping for or
reviewing the products available on display for purchaser viewing. Signs
prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places in and near the video
booths.
L. The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all video booths shall be
maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions. Presence of human
excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any such booth shall be evidence of improper
maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls, repeated instances of such conditions
may justify suspension or revocation of the owner's and operator's license to
conduct the adult-oriented establishment.
M. All areas of the adult premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access
at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. It
should be the duty of the operator and operator's agents to ensure that the
illumination required by this subsection is maintained at all times that a patron is
present on the premises.
N. The adult business shall provide and maintain separate rest room facilities for male
patrons and employees and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and
employees shall be prohibited from using the rest room(s) for females, and female
§ 120-114 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 120-114
120:12
patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the rest room(s) for males,
except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the rest room
facilities. The rest rooms shall be free from any adult material. Rest rooms shall not
contain television monitors or other motion-picture or video-projection, -recording
or -reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this subsection shall not
apply to an adult business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of adult
material which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult bookstore
or adult video store, and which does not provide rest room facilities to patrons or
the general public.
O. The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult businesses providing
live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified
sexual activities:
(1) No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult business
except upon a stage at least 18 inches above the level of the floor which is
separated by a distance of at least 10 feet from the nearest area occupied by
patrons, and no patron shall be permitted within 10 feet of the stage while the
stage is occupied by an entertainer.
(2) The adult business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for
entertainers which are exclusively dedicated to the entertainer's use. No
cameras or other surveillance devices shall be installed or maintained by the
adult business owner or operator in the dressing room facilities for the purpose
of broadcasting or projecting images for viewing by the patrons of the
establishment or for broadcasting or projecting images over the Internet.
(3) The adult business shall provide an entrance/exit for entertainers separate from
the entrance/exit used by patrons.
(4) The adult business shall provide access for entertainers between the stage and
the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such
separate access is not physically feasible, the adult business shall provide a
minimum three-foot-wide walk aisle for entertainers between the dressing
room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the
patrons and the entertainers capable of (and which actually results in)
preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers.
(5) No entertainer, either before, during or after performances, shall have physical
contact with any patron, and no patron shall have physical contact with any
entertainer either before, during or after performances by such entertainer.
This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the
adult business.
(6) Fixed rail(s) at least 30 inches in height shall be maintained establishing the
separations between entertainers and patrons required by this subsection.
P. Adult businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain public peace and
safety, based upon the following standards:
(1) Adult businesses featuring live entertainment shall provide at least one
security guard at all times while the business is open. If the occupancy limit of
§ 120-114 ADULT BUSINESSES § 120-114
120:13
§ 120-115. Inspection by public officials.
§ 120-116. Business name.
It shall be unlawful to operate an adult business establishment under any name or
conduct business under any designation not specified in the permit.
§ 120-117. Business location change.
Before changing the location of an adult business establishment, an application to the
Code Enforcement Officer shall be made pursuant to § 120-105.
the premises is greater than 35 persons, an additional security guard shall be
on duty.
(2) Security guard(s) may be required for other adult businesses if it is determined
by the Code Enforcement Officer that their presence is necessary in order to
prevent any of the conduct listed in § 120-110 from occurring on the premises.
(3) Security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and
enforcing compliance by patrons of the requirements of these regulations.
Security guard(s) shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily
identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a
security guard as required by applicable provisions of state law. No security
guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a door person, ticket
taker, admitting person or sole occupant of the manager's station while acting
as a security guard.
Q. The requirements of this section shall be deemed conditions of adult business
regulatory permit approvals, and failure to comply with every such requirement
shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit issued pursuant to these
regulations.
A. The applicant shall authorize and allow entry by public officials of the Township
into the premises wherein the applicant operates or proposes to operate an adult
business establishment for the purpose of conducting one or more inspections to
determine whether the establishment complies with all applicable building, fire,
electrical, plumbing, health and zoning requirements of this Code, all state and
federal requirements of a similar nature which are customarily enforced by the
Township, and the provisions of this chapter.
B. Any and all investigating officials of the Township shall have the right to enter adult
entertainment establishments, from time to time, during regular business hours to
make reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with building, fire,
plumbing, zoning or health regulations or provisions of this chapter. A warrant shall
be obtained whenever required by law.
C. A person who operates an adult business or his or her agent or employee is in
violation of the provisions of this chapter if he or she refuses to permit a lawful
inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business.
§ 120-114 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 120-118
120:14
§ 120-118. Transfer of interest.
No permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be assigned or
transferred in any manner, nor shall any person other than those mentioned in such
permit engage in the enterprise for which the permit is issued. As used herein, "transfer"
shall include, but not be limited to, any modification of a business entity operating an
enterprise or otherwise required to be disclosed pursuant to § 120-105, including transfer
of more than 10% of the stock of any corporation.
§ 120-119. Display of permits.
The owner or operator of an adult business establishment shall display the permit in an
open and conspicuous place on the premises. Passport-size photographs of the permit
shall be affixed to the permit on display pursuant to this section.
§ 120-120. Existing establishments.
Each operator of an establishment subject to the provisions of this chapter and legally
doing business on the effective date of this chapter shall apply for a permit not later than
90 days therefrom and shall comply with all requirements which are prerequisites for
issuance of a license before such license will issue.
§ 120-121. Regulations nonexclusive.
The provisions of this chapter regulating adult businesses are not intended to be
exclusive, and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other
regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses adopted by the Township.
§ 120-118 ADULT BUSINESSES § 120-121
120:15

Chapter 133
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing of contractors — See Ch. 196, Art. I Noise — See Ch. 320.
§ 133-101. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Middletown Township Ordinance
Regulating Burglar and Holdup Alarm Businesses, Systems and Users."
§ 133-102. Purpose and definitions. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13;
3-7-1995 by Ord. No. 95-07]
A. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this
chapter.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards and regulations
applicable to burglar and holdup alarm systems, alarm businesses, alarm agents and
alarm users as defined in this chapter.
C. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
ALARM AGENT — Any person employed by an alarm business whose duties
include the altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, selling,
servicing, responding to, or causing others to respond to an alarm device. No
construction personnel not in the employ of an alarm business may be involved
under contracts or subcontracts in the use or installation of alarm systems. Such
persons are not required to obtain identification cards as alarm agents or obtain
licenses as alarm businesses.
ALARM BUSINESS — Any business operated by a person for a profit which
engages in the activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing,
replacing, selling, servicing or responding to a burglar or holdup alarm system, or
which causes any of these activities to take place.
ALARM SYSTEM — An assembly of equipment and devices or a single device
such as a solid state unit, which is electrically powered, arranged to signal the
presence of a physical force or condition inherently characteristic of a hazard
requiring urgent attention and to which the Police Department is expected to
respond. In this chapter, the term "alarm system" shall include the terms "automatic
holdup alarm system," "burglar alarm systems," "holdup alarm systems," as those
terms are hereinafter defined. Fire alarm systems and alarm systems which monitor
temperature, humidity or any other condition not directly related to the detection of
an unauthorized intrusion into a premises or an attempted robbery at a premises are
§ 120-121 ALARM SYSTEMS § 133-102
133:1
specifically excluded from the provisions of this chapter. The Police Department
response to an alarm is initiated through a direct-connect alarm signal in an
annunciator panel located in the communications center of the Police Department
or upon notification by a central station, modified central system, or answering
service over regular telephone line by direct or indirect connection to the Police
Department Communications Room.
ALARM USER — Any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained
with the Township, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles or proprietary
systems. Also excluded from this definition and from the coverage of this chapter
are persons who use alarm systems to alert or signal persons within the premises in
which the alarm system is located of an attempted unauthorized intrusion or holdup
attempt. If such a system, however, employs an audible signal emitting sounds or
a flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises, such
systems shall be within the definition of "alarm system" and shall be subject to this
chapter.
ANNUNCIATOR — The instrumentation on an alarm console at the receiving
terminal of a signal line which, through both visual and audible signals, shows
when an alarm device at a particular location has been activated, or it may also
indicate line trouble.
ANSI — The American National Standards Institute.
ANSWERING SERVICE — Refers to a telephone answering service providing
among its services the service of receiving on a continuous basis through trained
employees emergency signals from alarm systems and thereafter immediately
relaying the message by live voice to the communications center of the Police
Department.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — Refers to an alarm system which
automatically sends over regular telephone lines a prerecorded voice message or
signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system
is designed to detect. An automatic dialing device may only be interconnected to
a telephone line transmitting to a central station, modified central system or an
answering service.
AUTOMATIC HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM — An alarm system in which the
signal transmission is initiated by the action of the robber.
BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM — An alarm system signaling an entry or
attempted entry into the area protected by the system.
CENTRAL STATION — An office to which remote alarm and supervisory
signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise the circuits, and where
guards are maintained continuously to investigate signals.
CENTRAL STATION EQUIPMENT — The signal-receiving, -recording or
-retransmitting equipment installed in the central station.
CENTRAL STATION SYSTEM — A system in which the operation of electrical
protection circuits and devices are signaled automatically to, recorded in,
maintained and supervised from a central station having trained operators and
guards in attendance at all times.
§ 133-102 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 133-102
133:2
CONTINUAL ACCIDENTAL ACTIVATION — A false alarm which occurs
more than one time during a continuous thirty-day period.
DIRECT CONNECT — An alarm system which has the capability of transmitting
system signals to and receiving them at the police communications center through
an annunciator panel.
DIRECT LINE—A nonlisted telephone line leading directly from a central station
to the communications center of the Police Department that is for use only to report
emergency signals on a person-to-person basis.
FALSE ALARM —The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure,
malfunction, improper installation, failure, interruption or fluctuation of primary
power source, or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of
his employees or agents. Such terminology does not include, for example, alarms
caused by hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes or other violent conditions.
HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM—An alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted
robbery.
INTERCONNECT — To connect an alarm system to a voice-grade telephone line,
either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a standard telephone, for
the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit an emergency message upon the
activation of the alarm system.
LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM—A signaling system which when activated causes an
audible and/or visual signaling device to be activated in or on the premises within
which the system is installed.
MANUAL HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM — An alarm system in which the signal
transmission is initiated by the direct action of the person attacked or by an observer
of the attack.
MISUSE — The willful activation of an alarm system for any reason other than
providing notification of a crime.
MODIFIED CENTRAL STATION — An office to which remote alarm and
supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise the circuits.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
POLICE CHIEF — The Chief of the Police Department of the Township of
Middletown, or his designated representative.
POLICE or POLICE DEPARTMENT — The publicly supported Police
Department of the Township of Middletown.
PRIMARY TRUNKLINE — A telephone line leading directly into the
communications center of the Police Department that is for the purpose of handling
emergency calls on a person-to-person basis, and which is identified as such by
a specific number included among the emergency numbers listed in the telephone
directory issued by the telephone company and covering the service area within the
Police Department's jurisdiction.
PROPRIETARY SYSTEM — An alarm system sounding and/or recording alarms
and supervisory signals at a control center located within the protected premises,
§ 133-102 ALARM SYSTEMS § 133-102
133:3
§ 133-103. Application for license by alarm business. [Amended 12-1-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-13]
the control center being under the supervision of the proprietor of the protected
premises. If a proprietary system includes a signal line connected directly to a
police communications center, a central station, modified central station or
answering service, it thereby becomes an alarm system as defined in this chapter.
REMOTE SIGNALING SYSTEM — An alarm-signaling system which, when
activated by an alarm device, transmits a signal from an alarm-signaling device to a
central location other than the Police Department, where appropriate action is taken
to investigate and respond to the signal.
SIGNAL LINE — The transmission line through which the signal passes from one
of the elements of the signal transmission to another.
SUBSCRIBER — A person who buys and/or leases or otherwise obtains an alarmsignaling
system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm business to monitor
and/or service the alarm device.
TELEPHONE COMPANY — The utility that furnishes telephone services to the
Township of Middletown.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middletown.
UL —Underwriters' Laboratories.
A. Any person engaging in an alarm business in the Township shall, within 30 days
after the effective date of this chapter, apply to the Chief of Police for a license to
operate on a form to be furnished by the Chief of Police. Businesses which sell only
those alarm systems excluded from the definition of alarm systems in § 133-102 of
this chapter are not required to obtain a license under this section. Such application
shall be signed by the individual proprietor of such business, or by a partner, or by
the proper corporate official, as is appropriate for the form of the business seeking
the license, and shall include: [Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06;
12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the alarm business, and the type
of business organization it is (individual, partnership or corporation). If the
business is an individual proprietorship, the name, address and telephone
number of the owner; if a partnership, the name, address and telephone number
of each partner (general, limited, silent, etc.); if a corporation, the names and
addresses of the directors, principal officers and any stockholders holding
more than 20% of the corporation's authorized and issued stock and the state
where incorporated.
(2) Certification that within 90 days after the effective date of this chapter or upon
receipt of notice of approval of a license application, whichever date occurs
later, the alarm business shall maintain a description of the alarm systems and
devices offered for sale or lease to the public and a description of any services
related to alarm devices offered to the public.
(3) Certification that within 90 days after the effective date of this chapter or upon
receipt of notice of approval of a license application, whichever date occurs
§ 133-102 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 133-103
133:4
§ 133-104. Action on business license applications. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-13; 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
later, a complete list of the names and addresses and telephone numbers of all
persons in the Township to whom or for whom alarm systems have been sold
and who are currently under contract to the alarm business for services on or
after the effective date of this chapter shall be furnished the Chief of Police.
The following information shall also be furnished to the Chief of Police:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of a central station protective
system or any other person or firm who is authorized to respond to an
emergency and gain access to the address where the alarm device is
installed.
(b) By the fifth working day of each month following the submission of the
initial list, every alarm business engaging in business in the Township of
Middletown shall furnish the Chief of Police with a supplemental list of
any additional installation along with any corrections to or deletions from
lists previously furnished. All information furnished pursuant to these
sections shall be kept confidential and shall be for the use of the Police
Department only.
(4) A complete list of criminal convictions, if any, except for minor traffic
offenses, of the applicant or a list of criminal convictions, if any, except for
minor traffic offenses, of each partner, officer or local office manager, if the
applicant is other than an individual.
B. License applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, as established
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, to cover the costs to
the Township of processing the application and investigating the applicant. The
license, when issued, must be renewed annually by March 15 of each subsequent
year. The renewal fee for the license, when renewed, will also be established by
resolution of the Board.
C. Applicants already doing business in the Township on the effective date of this
chapter may continue to do business while their license applications are being
processed. An applicant not previously doing business in the Township on the
effective date of this chapter shall not commence doing business until his
application is approved.
D. If an alarm business is operating or intends to operate a central station, a modified
central station, or a telephone answering service, the license application shall so
specify.
A. The Chief of Police shall cause a report on the applicant to be prepared based on
the information contained in the application together with such other relevant
information as may be obtained pertaining to the applicant and his business.
B. On the basis of this report, the Chief of Police shall, within 60 days after the receipt
of an application for an alarm business license, either approve or deny the issuance
of a license. Upon making a decision, he shall:
§ 133-103 ALARM SYSTEMS § 133-104
133:5
§ 133-105. Revocation of alarm licenses.
(1) In the case of approval, notify the applicant, in writing, of the approval, and
inform him that, upon the presentation of the approved application to the
Township Treasurer or his designated representative and the payment of the
required fee, the applicant will be issued a license to operate.
(2) In the case of denial, notify the applicant, in writing, of the denial and of the
basis for the denial, which may be nonconformance with any part of this
chapter. If the basis for the denial can be corrected, the writing shall so state
and shall explain how these corrections may be made and set a reasonable time
limit for making such corrections. The notice of denial shall inform the
applicant that he may appeal the denial and set forth the procedure for appeal.
The procedure for appeal shall be as follows:
(a) Within 10 days after receipt of the notice of denial, the applicant shall file
a notice of appeal with the Township Manager, addressed to the
Municipal Building, and stating the basis of the appeal.
(b) Within 10 days after receipt of the notice of appeal, the Township
Manager or his designated representative shall arrange for a conference
with the applicant and the Chief of Police to attempt to reach an
agreement concerning the appeal.
(c) If the conference fails to settle the matter in a way acceptable to the
applicant, arrangements shall be made to have the appeal heard before the
Board of Supervisors. Such hearing shall be held within 20 days after the
conference. The Township Manager shall cause the applicant to be given
notice of the hearing by certified mail at least seven days in advance of
the date of the hearing. Notice of such hearing shall also be posted as part
of the Board of Supervisors' agenda for that meeting. The applicant may
appear before the Board of Supervisors, and the applicant or his
designated representative may make an oral presentation of his appeal, or
he may make the appeal through a written statement, or he may do both.
The Board of Supervisors shall rule on the appeal within seven days after
it is heard, and such ruling shall be final.
A. In addition to any penalties which may be imposed for the violation of certain
provisions of this chapter, the Township may, pursuant to the provisions of this
section, revoke the license of an alarm business on any of the following grounds:
(1) Fraud or willful and knowing misrepresentation or a false statement made in
an application for a license.
(2) Fraud or willful and knowing misrepresentation or a false statement made in
the conduct of an alarm business.
(3) Failure to correct any deficiencies in equipment or operation within 30 days
after receipt of notice of same from the Chief of Police, or within a reasonable
time if the deficiencies cannot be corrected within the said 30 days. [Amended
12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
§ 133-104 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 133-105
133:6
(4) Failure to comply within a reasonable time with any order or notice issued by
the Chief of Police after the licensee's rights to hearing and appeal have been
exhausted, or failure, after reasonable notice, to furnish the Chief of Police
with any lists which he is authorized to receive under this chapter, or failure to
comply with the standards imposed by this chapter within a reasonable time,
not less than 30 days, after notice or order from the Chief of Police. [Amended
12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
B. No alarm business license shall be revoked until a hearing is held by the Chief of
Police. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be served on the
holder of the license at least 10 days before the date set for the hearing. The notice
shall set forth a summary of the grounds advanced as the basis for the revocation of
the license. [Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No.
09-04]
C. At the hearing before the Chief of Police, the holder of the license or his authorized
representative shall be given an opportunity to confront and examine any adverse
witness and to present evidence on his own behalf. After the hearing, the Chief of
Police shall either dismiss the complaint or shall forward the complaint to the
Township Manager with his recommendation that the license be revoked. Within
10 days after receiving such recommendation, the Township Manager shall approve
or disapprove the recommendation. In either event, the Township Manager shall
cause the holder of the license to be given notice in writing of his decision within
10 days after making it. [Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-04]
D. Any person whose license is revoked pursuant to § 133-105C of this chapter shall
have the right, within 10 days after receiving notice in writing of the revocation
from the Township Manager, of filing a written appeal with the Board of
Supervisors. Such appeal shall set forth in detail the specific ground or grounds on
which it is based. The Board of Supervisors shall hold a hearing on the appeal
within 30 days after its receipt by the Township and shall cause the appellant to be
given at least 10 days' written notice of such hearing. At the hearing, the appellant
or his authorized representative shall have the right to present a written or oral
argument, or both, in support of his appeal. The determination of the Board of
Supervisors on the appeal shall be final.
E. Within 10 days after an alarm business receives notice of revocation of its license,
or after it has exhausted all appeals with respect to such revocation, it shall notify
all persons for whom it is required to maintain a list pursuant to § 133-103A(3) of
this chapter of such revocation, and the notice shall advise such persons that the
alarm business must cease providing service for or selling burglar and holdup alarm
systems to such persons within 30 days after they receive notice of revocation. For
the purposes of this section, any alarm business other than a central station,
modified central station or telephone answering service may satisfy the notice
requirements by placing an advertisement in a newspaper or newspapers published
in the geographic areas in which its customers are located, which advertisement
shall be in a form prescribed by the Chief of Police. Such advertisement should
appear at least one day a week for three successive weeks. When the notice required
by this subsection has been completed, the alarm business shall submit a sworn
certificate to the Chief of Police that it has met the requirements of this subsection.
§ 133-105 ALARM SYSTEMS § 133-105
133:7
§ 133-106. Alarm agents; identification cards. [Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No.
08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
Every alarm agent employed by an alarm business within this Township shall be
required to obtain an identification card from the Chief of Police. Until the Chief of
Police acts upon the application of an alarm agent for an identification card, an alarm
business may issue a temporary identification card. The owners, managers, corporate
officers and partners of all alarm businesses are also required to obtain identification
cards from the Chief of Police if they directly engage in selling, installing, servicing,
maintaining or responding to alarm systems within the Township. Any person who is
not an alarm agent who, as an employee of a licensed alarm business, has access to
confidential information of an alarm user or to monitoring radio equipment must also
obtain an identification card. Within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter, alarm
agents and, if required by this subsection, owners, managers, corporate officers and
partners shall submit applications to the Chief of Police for identification cards. The
application for the identification card shall be on a form prescribed by the Chief of
Police.
§ 133-107. Action on alarm agent applications. [Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No.
08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
[Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
F. After notice of revocation has been given, an alarm business licensee may continue
to operate his business until all of his rights of appeal under this chapter have been
exhausted.
A. The Chief of Police shall cause a report on the applicant to be prepared based on
the information contained in the application together with such other relevant
information as may be obtained pertaining to the applicant. No identification card
shall be issued if:
(1) The applicant has been convicted of a felony (or a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude).
(2) The application contains any false statements made willfully and knowingly.
(3) The applicant is not employed as an alarm agent or is not to be employed as an
alarm agent by an alarm business if he is issued an identification card.
B. If the application is approved, the Chief of Police shall cause an identification card
to be issued to the applicant.
C. If the application is denied, the Chief of Police shall notify the applicant, in writing,
of the denial and of the basis for the denial. The notice of denial shall inform the
applicant that he may appeal the denial and set forth the procedure for appeal. The
procedure for appeal shall be as follows:
(1) The applicant shall have 10 days after receipt of the notice of denial to file a
notice of appeal with the Township Manager or his designated representative
stating the basis for the appeal.
§ 133-105 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 133-107
133:8
§ 133-108. Suspension or revocation of identification cards.
(2) Within 10 days after receipt of the notice of appeal, the Township Manager or
his designated representative shall either reverse the decision of the Chief of
Police and order an identification card to be issued or uphold the decision of
the Chief of Police and cause the applicant to be so notified. The ruling of the
Township Manager or his designated representative shall be final.
A. In addition to any penalties which may be imposed for the violation of provisions
of this chapter, the Township may, pursuant to the provisions of this section, revoke
the identification card of an alarm agent on any of the following grounds:
(1) Fraud or willful and knowing misrepresentation or false statement made in an
application for an identification card.
(2) Fraud or willful and knowing misrepresentation or false statement made while
employed as an alarm agent.
(3) Conviction of a felony or of a misdemeanor which reflects unfavorably upon
the cardholder's fitness to be an alarm agent.
B. No identification card shall be revoked until a hearing is held by the Chief of Police.
Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be served on the holder of
an identification card at least 10 days before the date set for the hearing. The notice
shall set forth a summary of the grounds advanced as the basis for the revocation of
the identification card. [Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
C. At the hearing before the Chief of Police, the holder of the identification card shall
be given an opportunity to confront and examine any adverse witness and to present
evidence in his own behalf. After the hearing, the Chief of Police shall either
dismiss the complaint or shall forward the complaint to the Township Manager with
his recommendation that an identification card be revoked. Within 10 days after
receiving such recommendation, the Township Manager shall approve or
disapprove the recommendations. In either event, the Township Manager shall
cause the holder of an identification card to be given notice in writing of his
decision within 10 days after making it. [Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
D. Any person whose identification card is revoked pursuant to § 133-108 of this
chapter shall have the right, within 10 days after receiving notice in writing of the
revocation from the Township Manager, of filing a written appeal with the Board
of Supervisors. Such appeal shall set forth in detail the specific ground on which it
is based. The Board of Supervisors shall hold a hearing on the appeal within 30
days after its receipt by the Township and shall cause the appellant to be given at
least 10 days' written notice of such hearing. At the hearing, the appellant or his
authorized representative shall have the right to present a written or oral argument,
or both, in support of his appeal. The determination of the Board of Supervisors on
the appeal shall be final.
E. After notice of revocation is given, an alarm agent identification card shall remain
in full force and effect, and the holder of an alarm agent identification card shall be
permitted to perform the authorized functions of a licensed alarm agent until any
appeal has been concluded.
§ 133-107 ALARM SYSTEMS § 133-109
133:9
§ 133-109. Identification cards; form. [Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06;
12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
An identification card issued by the Chief of Police shall contain a recent photograph
of the applicant, the date of issue, the applicant's signature and such other information
as the Chief of Police may in his discretion require. All identification cards shall be
consecutively numbered.
§ 133-110. Administrative rules.
The Police Chief shall promulgate such rules as may be necessary for the
implementation of this chapter and for determination of grounds for clerical suspension
or revocation of any license or permit required by this chapter. The rules shall be
approved by the Township Manager and the Board of Supervisors and shall be open to
inspection by the public.
§ 133-111. Interconnecting to primary trunklines prohibited.
§ 133-112. Automatic dialing device to be interconnected to intermediary services.
§ 133-113. Direct connections to Police Department Communications Center.
A. No automatic dialing device shall be interconnected to a primary trunkline after the
effective date of this chapter.
B. Within 90 days after the effective date of this chapter, all automatic dialing devices
interconnected to a primary trunkline shall be disconnected therefrom. The owner
or lessee of such device shall be responsible for having the device disconnected
within the ninety-day time period.
A. Persons owning or leasing an automatic dialing device shall have the device
interconnected to a telephone line transmitting directly to:
(1) A central station;
(2) A modified central station; or
(3) A licensed answering service.
B. The relaying of messages by intermediate services to the Police Department shall
be over a primary trunkline, except that central stations may relay messages over a
direct line.
C. Automatic dialing devices may also be interconnected to one or more telephone
numbers available to the owner or lessee of the devices or their designated
representatives at another location.
A. Upon the approval of the Chief of Police, alarms from business premises and
financial institutions may be terminated in the Police Department. [Amended
12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
B. The Chief of Police shall have the authority to specify the type of annunciator panel
and components to be installed in the Police Department Communications Center
§ 133-109 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 133-113
133:10
§ 133-114. Local alarm system; audible. [Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06;
12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
After the enactment of this chapter, owners or lessees of local alarms with audible
signaling devices must equip this type of alarm with a timing mechanism that will
disengage the audible alarm after a maximum period of 15 minutes, unless a longer
maximum period is authorized by the Chief of Police. Audible alarms without such a
timing mechanism shall be unlawful in the Township and must be disconnected by the
owner or lessee within 60 days from the effective date of this chapter. The failure of an
owner or lessee of an unlawful alarm system to disconnect such system in accordance
with the requirements of this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 133-115. Inspection of alarm devices and businesses.
and shall have the authority to request bids from equipment manufacturers,
installers and contractors to design, manufacture, fabricate and install the
annunciator panel and related equipment. Repair and maintenance service must be
supplied by the bidder receiving the contract on a twenty-four-hour, seven-daysper-
week basis. [Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-04]
C. Any subscriber or alarm user who obtains authority from the Chief of Police to
terminate its alarm system in the Police Department Communications Center may
contract with any licensed alarm business of its choice for the sale, installation,
maintenance and/or servicing of the alarm system to be installed on its premises.
[Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
D. The alarm subscriber approved for a direct connection to the Police Department
Communications Center or the alarm business contracting for servicing the
subscriber's alarm system shall be responsible for obtaining the leased telephone
line between subscriber's premises and the alarm-receiving equipment at the Police
Department Communications Center and for furnishing the appropriate equipment,
if required, in order to provide an input signal which is compatible with the
receiving equipment used to operate the annunciator panel.
E. The communications center is reserved for receipt of alarms only. Signals
indicating malfunctions, including power outages and short or open circuits, shall
not be transmitted to the Police Department.
A. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the Chief of Police shall
have the authority, at reasonable times and upon reasonable oral notice, to enter any
premises in the Township in or upon which alarm systems or alarm businesses
subject to this chapter are located to inspect the installation and/or operation of such
alarm systems or alarm businesses on official police business. [Amended
12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
B. If such inspection reveals any violations of the provisions of this chapter, a written
report detailing such violations shall be promptly sent to the Township Manager
and to the owner, lessee or other persons responsible for the alarm system or
business in violation of this chapter. Such report shall require the correction within
30 days after receipt of the notice of the violation discovered and shall state that a
§ 133-113 ALARM SYSTEMS § 133-115
133:11
§ 133-116. Testing of equipment. [Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06;
12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
No alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages directly to the Police
Department shall be tested or demonstrated without first obtaining permission from the
Chief of Police. Permission is not required to test or demonstrate alarm devices not
transmitting emergency messages directly to the Police Department unless the messages
are to be relayed to the Police Department.
§ 133-117. Copies to owners.
Alarm businesses shall furnish copies of this chapter at or prior to the time of contracting
and, at their expense, to owners, lessees or users of the equipment or services to be
supplied.
§ 133-118. Installation fees; rental charge.16 [Amended 3-25-1980 by Ord. No.
80-3; 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
§ 133-119. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13;
6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
failure to comply may result in the revocation of the alarm business's license to
operate or in the revocation of the alarm user's permit in accordance with provisions
of this chapter relating to revocation of licenses and permits. The alarm user or
alarm business shall be granted a reasonable extension of time to correct such
violation upon good cause shown.
A. The owner or lessee of an alarm system that is directly connected to an annunciator
panel in the Police Department Communications Room by a privately leased
telephone line shall pay to the Township of Middletown an installation charge and
an annual rental charge, as established from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors, payable by January 31 of the current year. The annual rental charge
shall be prorated on the actual months remaining in the year should the alarm owner
or lessee connect into the Police Department Communications Room annunciator
panel after January 31. There will be no refund if service is terminated by either
party.
B. Alarm system devices connected to a central station, a modified central station or
any answering service from which an emergency message is relayed by live voice
to the Police Department Communications Room are exempt from an installation
and rental charge.
A. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District
Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this
16. Editor's Note: Township fee schedules are on file in the Township Municipal Building and available to be viewed on the
Township's website at www.middletownbucks.org.
§ 133-115 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 133-119
133:12
§ 133-120. Prohibited activities. [Added 3-7-1995 by Ord. No. 95-07]
chapter continues or each section of this chapter which shall be found to have been
violated shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Costs of prosecution shall be collectible before any Magisterial District Judge as
like fines and penalties are now by law collectible. Notice of violation shall
continue in force and effect until full compliance with the requirements stated
herein, and each and every failure to comply with such notice within 24 hours after
the three days allowed for compliance shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Misuse of an alarm system within Middletown Township by any person is
prohibited.
B. The continual accidental activation of an alarm system within Middletown
Township is prohibited.
§ 133-119 ALARM SYSTEMS § 133-120
133:13

Chapter 141
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 190, Art. I. Entertainment tax — See Ch. 448, Art. III.
§ 133-120 AMUSEMENTS § 133-120
141:1

ARTICLE I
Mechanical Amusement Devices
[Adopted 5-20-1976 by Ord. No. 76-10 (Ch. 13, Part 5, of the 1992 Code]
§ 141-101. Definitions.
§ 141-102. Imposition of tax. [Amended 6-22-1982 by Ord. No. 82-8]
There is hereby imposed a tax for general Township purposes, under the authority of
the Act of General Assembly approved the 31st day of December, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 1
et seq.,17 upon the privilege of using for profit within the Township of Middletown any
vending machine, jukebox or mechanical amusement device, as herein defined. Such
tax shall be payable by the person owning and/or operating the establishment in which
such device is installed or located for use. Such use shall be payable at the following
rate: On each mechanical amusement device and jukebox, $100 for the calendar year or
any portion thereof; on each vending machine, $20 for the calendar year or any portion
thereof.
§ 141-103. Taxes payable. [Amended 4-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-07]
A. Unless otherwise herein expressly stated, the following terms shall have for the
purpose of this article the meanings therefor respectively indicated:
JUKEBOX—Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice or other
opening, operates or may be operated for the emission of song, music or similar
amusement.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any device, other than a jukebox,
which upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk may be operated for
use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score and
whether or not a prize is offered.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, copartnership, firm or corporation.
VENDING MACHINE — Any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug,
token, plate, disc or key, costing $0.10 or more, emits an article of merchandise or
provides a service. This term shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following
types of machines: peanut vending machines; beverage vending machines; cigarette
vending machines; bread vending machines; milk vending machines; candy
vending machines; ice vending machines; washing machines and drying machines
and other similar type of machines.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
A. The tax imposed under this article shall be payable to the Township Manager or to
an individual designated by him on or before the 15th day of August of each
calendar year. In the case of machines which are installed after the 15th day of
August of each calendar year, the tax imposed under this article shall be paid prior
17. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6924.301.1.
§ 141-101 AMUSEMENTS § 141-103
141:3
§ 141-104. Certification.
to the use of the machine or device. No deduction or refund of any tax payable
under this article shall be granted in the case of any device being destroyed, stolen,
sold or otherwise disposed of or transferred out of the Township of Middletown
after payment of tax.
B. If any tax levied in pursuance of this article shall not be paid when due, a penalty
of 10% of the amount of the tax due and unpaid shall be added thereto.
A. The Township Manager shall procure, at the expense of the Township, a sufficient
number of tabs or certificates upon which the following information shall be printed
or inserted:
(1) The name of the Township.
(2) The number of the tag or certificate.
(3) The name and address of the person paying the tax.
(4) The year for which the tax shall have been paid.
(5) The date on which such tax shall have been paid.
(6) The serial number of the machine or device for which the tax shall have been
paid.
(7) The amount of the tax.
B. Whenever any tax shall have been paid under this article, the Township Manager
shall prepare in duplicate a certificate, as herein prescribed. The original of such
certificate, to which the Township Seal shall be affixed, shall be given to the person
paying such tax, and the duplicate shall be kept on file by the Township Manager.
The Township Manager shall also procure and give to each person paying such tax
a seal to be affixed to each device for the use of which such tax shall have been
paid. Such seal shall indicate the year for which such tax shall have been paid, the
type of device and the certificate number.
C. In the case of the loss, defacement or destruction of any original certificate or seal,
the person to whom such certificate or seal was issued shall apply to the Township
Manager, who may issue a new certificate or seal in replacement thereof upon
payment of a fee as set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of the Township,
and who shall amend the duplicate of the certificate first issued in case that a new
certificate has been issued. [Amended 10-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
D. In the case of removal from any establishment in which any device for the use of
which a tax shall have been paid under this article to another location in the
Township, or in case of a change in the identity of the person operating such
establishment, the new user of the machine(s) shall report such fact within five days
of such change in location or personnel, and the Township Manager shall
immediately amend the certificate and duplicate certificate.
E. Before the removal of any device from any establishment, the person operating such
§ 141-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 141-104
141:4
§ 141-105. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-07;
6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
§ 141-106. Verification.
Any information gained by the Township Manager or any other official or agent of the
Township as a result of any returns, investigations or verifications required or authorized
by this article shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except in accordance
with proper judicial order, or as otherwise provided by law. Any disclosure of any
information contrary to the provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this
article.
§ 141-107. Recoverable debts.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with all penalties, interest and costs, shall be
recoverable by the Township Solicitor as debts of like amount are by law recoverable.
§ 141-108. Taxes recoverable.
All taxes, interest and penalties collected or recovered by the Township Manager or any
other Township officer or person for or in behalf of the Township shall be paid into the
Township treasury as general revenue to be used for general revenue purposes.
§ 141-109. Expenses.
All expenses incurred in the administration of this article shall be paid by the Township.
establishment shall remove the seal issued under this article from such device and
shall forthwith return the certificate to the Township Manager.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the
manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs, including attorney's fees, and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a
violation of this article continues or each section of this article which shall be found
to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Such fine imposed by this section shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed
by any other section of this article; provided, however, that if any producer of any
mechanical amusement device within the provisions of this article shall offer
evidence or testimony or submit to examination in any proceeding instituted by the
Township for the recovery of any taxes or interest due or alleged to be due to the
Township under this article, no process, civil or criminal, for the recovery of any
fines or penalties imposed by this article may thereafter issue against the person so
testifying or offering such evidence or testimony on account of any violation of the
provisions of this article which such evidence or testimony may disclose.
§ 141-104 AMUSEMENTS § 141-110
141:5
§ 141-110. Limit of applicability.
This article shall not apply to any person or property as to whom or which it is beyond
the legal power of the Township Supervisors to impose the tax or duties herein provided
for.
§ 141-110 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 141-110
141:6
ARTICLE II
Traveling Shows, Circuses and Carnivals
[Adopted 6-30-1987 by Ord. No. 87-12 (Ch. 13, Part 2, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 141-201. Definitions.
Unless otherwise herein expressly stated, the following terms shall have, for the purpose
of this article, the meanings herein respectively indicated:
AMUSEMENT—A certain manner or form of entertainment, including but not limited
to circuses, carnivals, side shows, fairs, traveling shows, amusement parks and like
activities, which may partially consist of mechanical rides designed for use by human
beings as a form of amusement.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT—Any location within the Township where the public may
attend or engage in any amusement as herein defined.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middletown, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 141-202. Registration.
A. All amusements conducted within the Township shall be required to register with
the Township.
B. The owner of the place of amusement and/or owner of the amusement shall inform
and notify, shall register and make complete application in writing, and shall supply
all information as hereinafter required to the Township for any amusement to be
conducted within the Township at least 30 days prior to the scheduled
commencement date of the amusement.
C. The owner or person conducting the amusement shall appear in person and register
the amusement with the Township on a form provided by the Township. Said form
shall include the name under which the amusement will be conducted, the name and
permanent address of the owner of the amusement, a description of the type of
amusement, the dates and length of time such amusement will be conducted within
the Township and any other information the Township may require. Said
registration form shall be signed and verified by the owner or person conducting the
amusement or, if applicable, as follows:
(1) Associations. In the case of an association or partnership, the registration shall
be signed and verified by a partner thereof.
(2) Corporations. In the case of a corporation, the registration shall be signed and
verified by an executive officer thereof, or some person specifically authorized
by the corporation to sign the registration, to which he/she shall attach written
evidence of his/her authority.
D. At the time of registration, the registrant shall provide to the Township:
(1) Certifications for all facilities, structures and equipment including all seating
facilities and structures to be used by the amusement in order to establish
compliance with the Middletown Township Fire Prevention Code (Chapter
§ 141-201 AMUSEMENTS § 141-202
141:7
§ 141-203. Requirements. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
No amusement shall be conducted in the Township unless it meets the following
requirements:
§ 141-204. Inspection.
§ 141-205. Financial responsibility.
190, Article I), and all other Middletown Township ordinances, Pennsylvania
law and/or federal law.
(2) A plot plan of the amusement site. Said plot plan shall include an emergency
access route around the perimeter of all structures.
(3) A proposed plan for security, fire equipment and emergency health care
equipment as provided for in § 141-203E hereinafter.
(4) A proposed plan for trash disposal as provided for in § 141-203D hereinafter.
A. All facilities, structures and equipment whatsoever used by the amusement shall
meet and be in compliance with all the requirements of the Middletown Township
Fire Prevention Code (Chapter 190, Article I) and all other Middletown Township
ordinances, all state laws and/or federal laws.
B. All seating facilities and structures, including but not limited to benches, bleachers
and grandstands, shall meet and be in compliance with all the requirements of the
Middletown Township Fire Prevention Code and all other Middletown Township
ordinances, all state laws and/or federal laws.
C. All amusement rides, if any, shall meet all Pennsylvania state safety requirements
and be certified and comply with all Pennsylvania laws and federal laws, if
applicable.
D. All amusements shall provide facilities for waste and trash disposal during the
amusement and shall be responsible for the cleanup of the place of amusement after
the amusement has ended. A refundable payment, to be established by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors, shall be made by the applicant and shall be refunded if
the premises is free from trash and debris after the amusement has ended.
E. All places of amusement shall provide for or make arrangements for on-site security
personnel, on-site emergency health care facilities, equipment and personnel and
on-site fire-fighting equipment and personnel to the satisfaction of the Township.
A. All amusement facilities, structures and equipment that are used in the amusement
shall be fully erected and set up a minimum of 24 hours before the first performance
of the amusement so that the Township can inspect to ensure compliance with the
requirements imposed by the Township.
B. A representative from the amusement shall be continuously available from time of
registration to the end of all events, shows and/or performances for the purpose of
answering any questions or inquiries by the Township.
§ 141-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 141-205
141:8
§ 141-206. Fees and escrows.
§ 141-207. Greater restriction.
Whenever the requirements of this article are in conflict with other requirements of the
ordinances of Middletown Township, the most restrictive or those imposing the higher
standards shall govern.
§ 141-208. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13;
amended 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section of this article
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
A. At the time that the amusement is registered with the Township, the registrant shall
submit proof of financial responsibility for any bodily injury or property damage to
any member of the public and for any damage to the Township. Proof of financial
responsibility shall be a certificate of liability insurance, which must include the
name and permanent address of the amusement, the name and permanent address
of the owner of the amusement, the insurance carrier, the policy number, the named
insureds, the date of expiration of the policy and types and amount of insurance
coverage.
B. The Township shall be named as an additional insured under the aforesaid policy of
insurance.
C. Liability insurance shall be equal to or exceed $50,000 per person and $1,000,000
per occurrence.
D. At the time the amusement is registered, the registrant shall execute an agreement
indemnifying the Township against any claims or liability that may arise as a result
of the amusement being conducted within the Township.
A. All amusements conducted within the Township shall comply with the Township's
entertainment tax (Chapter 448, Article III).
B. The owner, manager or person conducting the amusement shall meet with the
Township's Entertainment Tax Collector to determine the approximate amount of
tax revenue expected from the operation of the amusement. Twice the amount of
the projected tax revenues shall be deposited into an escrow account by the
amusement and held by the Township until a final accounting is presented to the
Township by the amusement. After the final accounting is presented to the
Township, any necessary adjustments shall be made so that the Township collects
the tax revenue to which it is entitled under the entertainment tax.
§ 141-205 AMUSEMENTS § 141-208
141:9

Chapter 145
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 320. Park rules and regulations — See Ch. 337.
§ 141-208 ANIMALS § 141-208
145:1

ARTICLE I
Prohibiting Dogs Running at Large
§ 145-101. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
OWNER — Any person having a right of property in any dog or having custody of
any dog, or any person who harbors or permits a dog to remain on or around his or her
property.
RUNNING AT LARGE — Being upon any public highway, street, alley, park or any
other public land, or upon property of another person other than the owner and not being
accompanied by or under the control of the owner or any other person having custody of
said dog.
§ 145-102. Appointment and duties of Dog Warden.
A Dog Warden shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors to serve during its
pleasure. Such Dog Warden, along with the police officers/constable, shall have
concurrent responsibility for the enforcement of this article and of the Dog Law of 1982,
(3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq., as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted
by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania), provided that he shall not have the power to
make arrests under this Act of Assembly or any other act of assembly or ordinance of
the Township of Middletown.
§ 145-103. Unlawful to allow dogs to run at large.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or dogs to allow or permit such dog or dogs
to run at large in the Township of Middletown.
§ 145-104. Seizing of dogs.
The Dog Warden or any police officer or constable may seize any dog found at large in
the Township of Middletown. Such dogs are to be impounded in a licensed kennel.
§ 145-105. Licensed dogs. [Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
The Chief of Police/constable shall notify the owner of a licensed dog, by registered or
certified mail, with return receipt, that the dog is impounded and will be disposed of in
five days if not claimed. Five days after the return receipt has been received and the dog
has not been claimed, the dog may be sold or destroyed in accordance with the 1982 Dog
Law.
§ 145-106. Unlicensed dogs.
Unlicensed dogs that are seized shall be held in such kennel for 48 hours and, if not
claimed, may be destroyed in accordance with the 1982 Dog Law.
§ 145-101 ANIMALS § 145-107
145:3
§ 145-107. Threatening dogs.
Dogs that, in the opinion of any police officer or dog warden, constitute a threat to public
health and welfare may be killed by the police or dog warden.
§ 145-108. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
The first two times a dog is seized, the owner shall pay a fine of $15 to the Township
as well as reasonable fees for keeping the animal in a kennel as fixed by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors.18 Any person allowing a dog to run at large a third time in
violation of this article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues
or each section of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute
a separate offense.
18. Editor's Note: Township fee schedules are on file in the Township Municipal Building and available to be viewed on the
Township's website at www.middletownbucks.org.
§ 145-107 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 145-108
145:4
ARTICLE II
Animal Noise Control
§ 145-201. Intent and purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Middletown, finding that excessive levels
of sound are detrimental to the physical, mental and social well-being of the people
as well as to their comfort, living conditions, general welfare and safety and being,
therefore, a public health and welfare hazard, hereby declares it to be necessary to
provide for the greater control and more effective regulation of excessive sound and the
sources of excessive sound within the Township of Middletown.
§ 145-202. Noise disturbance.
It shall be illegal within the Township of Middletown for any person or persons to own,
possess, harbor or control any animal or bird which makes any noise continuously and/or
incessantly for a period of 10 minutes or makes such noise intermittently for 1/2 hour or
more to the disturbance of any person any time of the day or night regardless of whether
the animal or bird is physically situated in or upon private property, said noise being a
nuisance, provided that, at the time the animal or bird is making such noise, no person is
trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which the animal
or bird is situated nor is there any other legitimate cause which justifiably provoked the
animal or bird.
§ 145-203. Exceptions.
This article shall not be deemed to prohibit or otherwise declare unlawful any
agricultural operations protected from nuisance suits by Act No. 1982-133 (3 P.S. § 951
et seq.).
§ 145-204. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section of this article
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 145-201 ANIMALS § 145-204
145:5

ARTICLE III
Disposal of Animal Waste
§ 145-301. Animal defecation on public and private property restricted.
No person having possession, custody or control of any animal shall knowingly or
negligently permit any dog or other animal to commit any nuisance, i.e., defecation or
urination, upon any gutter, street, driveway, alley, curb or sidewalk in the Township
of Middletown, or upon the floors or stairways of any building or place frequented by
the public or used in common by the tenants, or upon the outside walls, walkways,
driveways, alleys, curbs or stairways of any building abutting on a public street or park,
or upon the grounds of any public park or public area, or upon any private property other
than the property of the owner of such animal.
§ 145-302. Disposal of animal feces.
Any person having possession, custody or control of any dog or other animal which
commits a nuisance, i.e., defecation or urination, in any area other than the private
property of the owner of such dog or other animal, as prohibited in § 145-301, shall be
required to immediately remove any feces from such surface and either:
§ 145-303. Dogs accompanying blind or handicapped persons exempted.
The provisions of §§ 145-301 and 145-302 hereof shall not apply to a guide dog
accompanying any blind persons or to a dog used to assist any other physically
handicapped person.
§ 145-304. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section of this article
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Carry same away for disposal in a toilet; or
B. Place same in a nonleaking container for deposit in a trash or litter receptacle.
§ 145-301 ANIMALS § 145-304
145:7

ARTICLE IV
Cats
[Added 9-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-07]
§ 145-401. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the meaning indicated, unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
CARETAKER — A person or organization which provides food, water, shelter or other
forms of sustenance or care to a feral cat colony
FERAL CAT — A homeless, wild or untamed cat.
FERAL CAT COLONY — A group of feral cats living in one territory and/or in close
proximity, often near food sources and shelter.
STRAY CAT — Any cat whose owner or keeper allows said cat to run free outside of
the residence of the owner or keeper from time to time.
§ 145-402. Finding; intent.
The Township finds that stray cats, feral cats and feral cat colonies have an adverse
effect on the health, protection, safety, and welfare of the Township and its residents
and businesses, in that such stray cats, feral cats and feral cat colonies create unwanted
noise, commit trespass upon private and public lands, are responsible for the deaths
of native songbirds and other animals, exist in unsanitary conditions that contribute to
the spread of disease, and increase the production of fleas, lice, ticks and other similar
disease-carrying insects. The Township further finds that a properly managed feral cat
colony may be a humane means to reduce populations over a period of time if and when
management guidelines are propounded and strictly adhered to.
§ 145-403. Responsibilities of owners and keepers of stray cats.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of any cat to permit such cat to run free
outside of the residence of its owner or keeper unless said cat has been:
§ 145-404. Feral cats and feral cat colonies.
A. Neutered or spayed to prevent it from procreating;
B. Immunized against rabies; and
C. Identified as the property of its owner or keeper by means of a collar and tag and/or
by means of a microchip implanted on the cat.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to intentionally provide food,
water, shelter and/or other forms of sustenance and/or care to any stray cat and/or
feral cat unless said person and/or said organization participates in a humane feral
cat program sponsored by the Township and adheres to the strict guidelines set forth
in that program and in this article.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to intentionally provide food,
§ 145-401 ANIMALS § 145-404
145:9
water, shelter and/or other forms of sustenance and/or care to a feral cat colony on
public and/or private land unless said person and/or said organization participates in
a humane feral cat program sponsored by the Township, the said person and/or said
organization has registered the feral cat colony on an annual basis with the Animal
Control Officer, and the said person and/or said organization adheres to the strict
guidelines set forth in that program and in this article, which such guidelines shall
require that the said person and/or said organization shall:
(1) Sterilize (spay or neuter) all adult cats that can be captured.
(2) Vaccinate and/or immunize all cats that can be captured against rabies,
preferably with a three-year vaccine.
(3) Make every attempt to remove kittens from the colony before eight weeks of
age for domestication and placement.
(4) Make every attempt to remove sick or injured cats from the colony for
immediate veterinarian care or humane euthanasia.
(5) Assume responsibility and make arrangements for feeding the cat colony
regularly throughout the year, including weekends and holidays.
(6) Make every attempt to ear-tip all cats with a single cut, preferably on the left
ear.
(7) Maintain proof of sterilization, vaccination, immunization, ear tipping and
medical records for all cats, which such records shall be provided to the
Animal Control Officer upon request.
(8) Secure and maintain written authorization of the owner of the property upon
which the person and/or organization is providing food, water, shelter and/or
other forms of sustenance and/or care to the feral cat colony and/or any feral
cat. Proof of such written authorization shall be provided to the Animal
Control Officer.
C. The Animal Control Officer shall inspect and regulate any proposed or existing
feral cat colony location. The approval of the Animal Control Officer shall be
required for the development and/or maintenance of a feral cat colony and the
humane program for that feral cat colony.
D. The Township Animal Control Officer or his designee shall at all times be
permitted to seize or otherwise remove any feral cat and/or feral cat colony.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to destroy any traps and/or to
release any stray cat and/or feral cat that has been captured pursuant to any humane
efforts on behalf of the Township.
F. Any person and/or organization determined to be in violation of this article shall be
issued a written warning and be granted a period of time, in the discretion of the
Animal Control Officer, but not to exceed 30 days, to come into compliance with
this article.
§ 145-404 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 145-405
145:10
§ 145-405. Violations and penalties.
Any person, organization, firm or corporation which shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District
Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$100 and not more than $500, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day or part of each day during which a violation occurs or
continues. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section of this article
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 145-405 ANIMALS § 145-405
145:11

Chapter 155
BAMBOO
§ 155-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Middletown Township Bamboo
Ordinance."
§ 155-2. Intent and purpose.
The Township has determined that the planting, cultivating and growing of certain
running noxious plants and grasses, particularly those plants and/or grasses commonly
referred to as "bamboo," within the Township of Middletown has a negative impact on
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Middletown Township and the public
at large, as the uncontrolled planting, cultivating and growth of said bamboo plants
and grasses results in the destruction of private and public property and constitutes a
nuisance within the Township. The Township has therefore determined that is in the
best interests of the citizens of Middletown Township and the public at large to control
the planting, cultivating and/or growing of said bamboo plants and grasses within the
Township of Middletown, primarily by prohibiting the future planting, cultivating and/
or growing of said bamboo plants and grasses within the Township, and by requiring
the use of barriers to prevent the invasive spread of existing bamboo plants and grasses
within the Township.
§ 155-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BAMBOO — Any monopodial (running) tropical or semitropical grasses from the
genera Bambusa, including, but not limited to, Bambusa, Phyllostachys, Fallopia and
Pseudosasa, as well as common bamboo, golden bamboo, arrow bamboo, and Japanese
bamboo.
BAMBOO OWNER — Any property owner and/or resident who has planted and/or
grows bamboo, or who maintains and/or cultivates bamboo on his/her property, or who
permits bamboo to grow or remain on the property even if the bamboo has spread from
an adjoining property. Any property owner and/or resident of property on which bamboo
is found shall be considered to be a bamboo owner. A property owner and/or resident
will not be considered to be a bamboo owner if:
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middletown, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
§ 155-4. Planting, cultivating or growing of bamboo prohibited; exceptions;
He has provided satisfactory proof to the Township that, within a reasonable period
of time after discovering the encroachment of bamboo onto the subject property
from an adjoining or neighboring property, he advised the owner of such property
of his/her objection to the encroachment of the bamboo; and
A.
He has initiated steps for the removal of the bamboo from the property, including
remedies at law.
B.
§ 145-405 BAMBOO § 155-4
155:1
removal.
A. For purposes of this chapter, bamboo found growing upon a property shall
constitute presumptive evidence that the bamboo was planted, cultivated and/or
grown by and/or with the consent of the subject property owner, tenant, and/or any
other individual, entity or corporation then having control of and/or over the subject
property.
B. Prohibition. Upon the effective date of this chapter, the planting, cultivating and/or
growing of bamboo shall be prohibited within the Township. No persons, property
owners, tenants, and/or other individuals, entities, and/or corporations having
control of and/or over any property located within the Township shall plant,
cultivate, and/or cause to grow any bamboo on any real property within the
Township. Any person who plants, cultivates, and/or grows, and/or causes or allows
to be planted, cultivated and/or grown, bamboo within the Township shall be
deemed to be in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to such penalties as
are set forth herein.
C. This chapter shall not be deemed to alter or abrogate any rights at common law, or
otherwise, that any persons, property owners, tenants, and/or other individuals,
entities, and/or corporations may have to recover the cost of removal of any bamboo
found on their own property that has encroached from a neighboring property.
D. Exceptions. Notwithstanding the prohibitions set forth in § 155-4B above, upon the
effective date of this chapter, persons, property owners, tenants, and/or other
individuals, entities, and/or corporations having control of and/or over any property
located within the Township shall be permitted to plant, cultivate, and/or cause to
grow bamboo on any real property within the Township only if:
(1) Containment of root system.
(a) The root system of such bamboo is entirely contained within an
aboveground-level planter, barrel or other vessel of such design, material,
and location as to entirely prevent the spread of growth of the bamboo
root system beyond the container in which it is planted; or
(b) The root system of such bamboo is contained within and/or restricted by
a barrier, constructed in accordance with the following specifications, and
only after a compliance inspection is performed and a permit issued by
the Township:
[1] The barrier itself shall be composed of a high-density polypropylene
or polyethylene, with a thickness of 40 ml or more;
[2] Each portion or sheet of the barrier shall be secured or joined
together by the use of stainless steel clamps or stainless steel closure
strips designed to be used with such barriers;
[3] The barrier shall be installed not less than 30 inches deep;
[4] The barrier shall be circular or oblong shaped;
[5] Not less than three inches of the barrier shall protrude above ground
§ 155-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 155-4
155:2
level around the entire perimeter of the bamboo; and
[6] When installed, the barrier shall slant outward from the bottom to
top.
(2) Any and all bamboo existing pursuant to this § 155-4D shall, at all times, be
located, trimmed and maintained so that no bamboo, or any part thereof, shall
be within 10 feet of any property line, curb, and/or sidewalk, nor within 40 feet
of any roadway, cartway, street, storm sewer, sanitary sewer and/or public
water facilities within the Township.
E. Any bamboo that has been planted or otherwise permitted to grow on any property
within the Township prior to the effective date of this chapter may remain on such
property subject to compliance with the following:
(1) The bamboo shall not be within 10 feet of any property line, curb, and/or
sidewalk or within 40 feet of any roadway, cartway, street, storm sewer,
sanitary sewer and/or public water facilities within the Township.
(2) Any bamboo owner whose property contains bamboo that is located within 10
feet of any property line, curb, and/or sidewalk or within 40 feet of any
roadway, cartway, street, storm sewer, sanitary sewer and/or public water
facilities within the Township shall remove such bamboo and shall abate the
growth of such bamboo so that it is not within 10 feet of any property line,
curb, and/or sidewalk or within 40 feet of any roadway, cartway, street, storm
sewer, sanitary sewer and/or public water facilities within the Township.
(3) A bamboo owner shall further be responsible to ensure that any bamboo
planted and/or growing on the property of the bamboo owner prior to the
effective date of this chapter is maintained such that it does not encroach or
grow upon any adjoining or neighboring property or properties, including all
public property and public rights-of-way. If the Township determines that any
such bamboo, or part thereof, has been allowed to encroach, grow upon,
extend roots across, and/or extend branches, stalks and/or leaves over any
public right-of-way and/or any private property not owned by and/or in the
possession of the bamboo owner, the bamboo owner shall be required to
comply with the provisions of § 155-4D(1)(b) above.
F. Removal. In the event that a bamboo owner does not remove or contract for the
removal of any bamboo that is found to be in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter within 30 days of the date of notice of violation issued by the
Township, the Township may, at its discretion, and in addition to any and all other
enforcement actions available to it, take any and all actions necessary to effectuate
the removal of such bamboo. The bamboo owner shall be liable and responsible to
the Township for any and all costs incurred by the Township in effectuating the
removal of such bamboo, including reasonable attorney's fees. Such costs may be
assessed against the property of the bamboo owner and entered as a lien on the
property. Nothing herein shall be construed to create any affirmative obligation on
the part of the Township to abate or remove any bamboo within the Township.
G. Replanting prohibited. Any bamboo either planted or caused to be planted or
existing on a property prior to the effective date of this chapter may not be replanted
§ 155-4 BAMBOO § 155-4
155:3
§ 155-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, property owner, tenant, and/or other individual, entity, and/or corporation
who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction before any
Magisterial District Justice, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be required to
pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 and costs of prosecution, in addition to all other costs
hereinbefore provided. Each and every day on which any person, property owner, tenant,
and/or other individual, entity, and/or corporation shall be in violation of the provisions
of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
or replaced in kind once such running bamboo is or has become, for any reason,
dead, destroyed, uprooted or otherwise removed, unless such replanting is
consistent with the provisions of § 155-4D above.
§ 155-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 155-5
155:4
Chapter 167
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building codes — See Ch. 190. Property maintenance — See Ch. 363.
§ 167-101. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Building Numbering Ordinance of Middletown
Township."
§ 167-102. Definitions and word usage. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13;
5-2-2016 by Ord. No. 16-02]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings as indicated:
ASSIGNED NUMBER — The identification number assigned to a building and/or a lot
located within the Township, commonly referred to as the "address" of the building and/
or lot.
BUILDING — The term Building shall have the same meaning as indicated in the
Middletown Township Zoning Ordinance in § 500-202 of the Code of the Township of
Middletown.
TRUSS CONSTRUCTION—A combination of members, such as beams, bars and ties,
usually arranged in triangular units to form a rigid framework for supporting loads over
a span of structural members that connect together to span the space between the walls
of the building to support a vertical load.
TRUSS EMBLEM — A sign, made of reflective material, in the shape of an isosceles
triangle measuring not less than 12 inches horizontally by not less than six inches
vertically. The sign shall have a white background and red lettering, and shall have one
of the following letter designations affixed thereupon:
§ 167-103. Responsibility of Township Manager. [Amended 5-2-2016 by Ord. No.
16-02]
The Township Manager of Middletown Township or his designee shall be responsible
for the assignment of an assigned number to every building and/or lot located within the
The letter "F" shall designate a building having a floor constructed using truss
construction methods and/or materials.
A.
The letter "R" shall designate a building having a roof constructed using truss
construction methods and/or materials.
B.
The letters "FR" shall designate a building having both a floor and a roof
constructed using truss construction methods and/or materials.
C.
§ 155-5 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 167-103
167:1
Township.
§ 167-104. Numbering requirements. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13;
5-2-2016 by Ord. No. 16-02]
§ 167-105. Truss emblem requirements. [Amended 5-2-2016 by Ord. No. 16-02]
A. The assigned number of a building shall be affixed to the front of that building prior
to issuance of a use and/or occupancy permit for the building. The assigned number
shall be affixed to a building at the expense of the owner(s) and/or occupant(s) of
the building and/or lot.
B. The assigned number shall be affixed using a sign, placard, and/or one or more
emblems that describe the assigned number in plain, block, numerical form. Script
form shall not be permitted. The numbers utilized in and/or as any such sign,
placard and/or emblems shall measure not less than four inches for a residential
building, not less than six inches vertically for all buildings containing three or
more dwelling units, and not less than 10 inches vertically for all other buildings.
The method by which the assigned number is affixed to the building shall utilize
one or more colors such that the assigned number shall be in contrast to the
immediate background and such that the assigned number shall further be clearly
visible from the street.
C. When the front of a building is located less than 50 feet from the street line, the
assigned number shall be conspicuously placed immediately above or at the side of
the main door of the building in such a manner that the assigned number can be
seen plainly from the street. Whenever the front of a building is located more than
50 feet from the street line, the assigned number shall be conspicuously placed near
the walk, driveway or common entrance to the lot on which the building is erected
or upon a gate, post, rural mailbox, fence, tree, post, or other appropriate place so
as to be easily discernible and visible from the street.
D. In addition to affixing the assigned number on the front of the building, the assigned
number shall also be conspicuously placed on the rear of a building with three or
more dwelling units in a prominent place so that the assigned number is clearly
visible from the rear of the building and the lot.
A. Identification of truss construction.
(1) The owner(s) and/or occupant(s) of a building containing and/or utilizing truss
construction in any form or manner shall affix a truss emblem to the front of
the building prior to issuance of a use and/or occupancy permit for the
building. The truss emblem shall be affixed to a building at the expense of the
owner(s) and/or occupant(s) of the building and/or lot. The truss emblem
required under this section may be purchased from the Township.
(2) The truss emblem shall affixed to the building to the left of the main entrance
and at a height of not less than five feet above the floor level. The truss emblem
shall further be clearly visible from the street.
(3) Where an entire residential subdivision, residential condominium complex
consisting of multiple buildings, or apartment complex consisting of multiple
§ 167-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 167-105
167:2
§ 167-106. Maintenance. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13; 5-2-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-02]
The sign, placard, and/or emblems that describe the assigned number and the truss
emblem shall be at all times maintained by the owner(s) and/or occupant(s) of the
building and/or lot so as to at all times conform with the provisions of this chapter. The
owner(s) and/or occupant(s) of the building and/or lot shall at all times maintain the
building and/or lot so that trees, shrubs, plantings and/or grass do not grow in such a
fashion so as to hide the assigned number and/or the truss emblem, and/or otherwise
obstruct the view of the assigned number and/or the truss emblem from the street as
required by this chapter.
§ 167-107. Administration and enforcement. [Amended 5-2-2016 by Ord. No.
16-02]
The Director of Building and Zoning, the Fire Marshal, and their respective employees
and/or designees are hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 167-108. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13;
6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each section of this chapter
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 167-109. Greater restriction to govern.
Whenever the requirements of this chapter are in conflict with other requirements of the
ordinances of Middletown Township, the most restrictive or those imposing the higher
buildings has within it one or more buildings that contain or utilize truss
construction in any form or manner, the owner(s), developer, and/or
homeowners' association of that residential subdivision, residential
condominium complex, and/or apartment complex shall affix and install a
truss emblem within the public right-of-way, or upon the common element/
area (in the case of a private street or condominium), at each entrance to such
subdivision, condominium complex and/or apartment complex, in a manner
and at such location(s) as approved by the Township Fire Marshal.
(4) The owner(s) and/or occupant(s) of any single-family dwelling unit or
semidetached dwelling containing not more than two dwelling units shall be
exempt from installing and maintaining a truss emblem.
B. The owners, occupants, developers, and/or homeowners' associations to whom this
§ 167-105 is applicable shall comply with this section on or before the first day of
January 2017.
§ 167-105 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 167-109
167:3
standards shall govern.
§ 167-109 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 167-109
167:4
Chapter 178
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 167-109 CABLE TELEVISION § 167-109
178:1

ARTICLE I
Rate Regulations
[Adopted 8-23-1994 by Ord. No. 94-13 (Ch. 13, Part 8, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 178-101. Definitions. [Amended 3-25-1997 by Ord. No. 97-03]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ANNUAL RATE ADJUSTMENT — A proposed change in a cable operator's existing
rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment, costs, using the annual filing
system pursuant to §§ 76.922(e) and 76.923 of the Federal Communications
Commission rules.
BASIC SERVICE TIER—The basic service tier shall, at a minimum, include all signals
of domestic television broadcast stations provided to any subscriber [except a signal
secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station,
regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable operator(s)], any public,
educational and governmental programming required by the franchise agreement to be
carried on the basic tier and any additional video programming signals or service added
to the basic tier by the cable operator(s).
CABLE ACT OF 1992 — Cable Television Consumer Protection and Completion Act,
Pub. L. 102-385, 106 Stat. 1460 (1992).
CABLE OPERATOR(S) — All cable television operators who are party to a franchise
agreement with the franchising authority.
CABLE PROGRAMMING SERVICE — Any video programming provided over a
cable television system, regardless of service tier, including installation or rental of
equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other than:
CERTIFICATION — The certification received by the franchising authority from the
FCC, empowering the franchising authority to regulate certain cable television rates.
COST-OF-SERVICE RATE APPLICATION — A rate application filed in the manner
prescribed and on the forms adopted by the FCC. A cost-of-service rate application may
be submitted by a cable operator, in its sole discretion, in support of its current rates or a
proposed rate increase.
CURRENT RATES — Those rates in effect for the basic service tier and for the
equipment and installation necessary to receive the basic service tier existing on the
date when the franchising authority notifies the cable operator(s) that it has received
certification.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — The agreement between one or more cable operator(s)
A. Video programming carried on the basic service tier.
B. Video programming offered on a pay-per-channel or pay-per-program basis.
A combination of multiple channels of pay-per-channel or pay-per-program video
programming offered on a multiplexed or time-shifted basis so long as the
combined service consists of commonly identified video programming and is not
bundled with any regulated tier of service.
C.
§ 178-101 CABLE TELEVISION § 178-101
178:3
and the franchising authority pursuant to which the cable operator(s) was granted a
franchise to offer cable television services to subscribers.
FRANCHISE AUTHORITY — Board of Supervisors of the Township of Middletown.
MAXIMUM PERMITTED RATES — Those rates against which all rate applications
shall be measured. The maximum permitted rates shall be determined consistent with the
rules adopted by the FCC.
OPINION — An opinion issued by the franchising authority in response to any rate
application.
ORDER — An order issued by the franchising authority advising the cable operator(s)
and other interested parties of the franchising authority's intent to take additional time to
review and approve or disapprove any rate application.
PRESCRIBED RATE — The rate prescribed by the franchising authority for the basic
service tier and/or for the equipment and installation necessary to receive the basic
service tier, which may differ from the proposed rates submitted by the cable operator(s)
in a rate application.
PROSPECTIVE RATE ADJUSTMENT — A reduction by the franchising authority in
the current rates charged by cable operator(s).
RATE APPLICATION — An application on the form adopted by the FCC to be
submitted by the cable operator(s) for approval of its current rates and/or any proposed
increase in the rates for the basic service tier and/or for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier.
REFUND—Any refund order by the franchising authority of rates charged for the basic
service tier and/or the rates for the equipment and installation necessary to receive the
basic service tier pursuant to the terms contained in § 178-104D(2).
SUBSCRIBER—A customer of the cable operator(s) receiving cable television service
within the geographic boundaries of the franchising authority.
§ 178-102. Obtaining certification.
A. The franchising authority is hereby empowered to make application for certification
with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to regulate cable television
rates for the basic service tier, the equipment and installation necessary to receive
the basic service tier and to provide notice to the cable operator(s) of its application
for certification. Application shall be made in the manner and on the forms adopted
by the FCC, and notice shall be provided to the cable operator(s) before or on the
same day of filing of the application.
B. Upon the effective date of certification, the franchising authority shall provide
notice to the cable operator(s) of its certification, its intention to regulate rates for
the basic service tier and the equipment and installation necessary to receive the
basic service tier.
C. In the event that the franchising authority shall not obtain certification, or that its
certification shall be reconsidered and revoked, the franchising authority is hereby
authorized to take such steps as are necessary to receive certification.
§ 178-101 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 178-103
178:4
§ 178-103. Regulatory authority.
Pursuant to the power and authority granted to the franchising authority under the Cable
Act of 1992, its certification by the FCC for regulating rates for the basic service tier
and rates for the equipment and installation necessary to receive the basic service tier
and other charges which may be regulated by the franchising authority pursuant to the
regulations adopted by the FCC under the Cable Act of 1992, the franchising authority
shall exercise regulatory power over the rates charged or to be charged to a subscriber
for the basic service tier and for the equipment and installation necessary to receive the
basic service tier applicable to those subscribers of the cable operator(s).
§ 178-104. Rate applications. [Amended 3-25-1997 by Ord. No. 97-03]
A. Initial procedures.
(1) The cable operator(s) shall give notice to its subscribers within 90 days (or
three billing cycles) of the effective date of the rules adopted by the
franchising authority and to all new subscribers at the times of installation of
the availability of the basic service tier.
(2) Each cable operator shall submit a rate application to the franchising authority
for approval of that cable operator's current rates for the basic service tier and
for approval of its rates for the equipment and installation necessary to receive
the basic service tier, and for approval of any proposed rate increase.
(a) The rate application for approval of current rates for the basic service tier
and the rates for the equipment and installation necessary to receive the
basic service tier shall be filed within 30 days of notice from the
franchising authority to the cable operator(s) that the franchising
authority has been certified by the FCC and has adopted the regulations
required by the FCC for rate regulation.
(b) The rate application for any proposed increase in rates for the basic
service tier or for the equipment and installation necessary to receive the
basic service tier other than an annual rate adjustment shall be filed a
minimum of 30 days before the effective date of the proposed increase.
(c) A cable operator that submits for review an annual rate adjustment for the
basic service tier and associated equipment costs shall do so no later than
90 days from the effective date of the proposed rates.
(d) Included in a rate application shall be such information as is set forth in
the application form adopted by the FCC.
(e) The cable operator(s) shall submit any relevant information as is
permitted by FCC rules, as contained on the application and worksheets
adopt by the FCC for rate applications, and which the cable operator(s)
would like the franchising authority to consider in evaluating the current
rates for the basic service tier and/or for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier, and/or in evaluating any
proposed rate increase of those same items.
§ 178-103 CABLE TELEVISION § 178-104
178:5
(f) If the current rates for the basic service tier and/or for the equipment and
installation necessary to receive the basic service tier or any proposed rate
increase exceeds the maximum permitted rates, the cable operator(s) may
submit a cost-of-service rate application in conformity with FCC rules.
Only the cable operator(s) may decide whether to submit a cost-of-service
rate application.
(3) The cable operator shall give notice to its subscribers that a rate application
has been filed at least 30 days prior to the effective date of any proposed rate
increase. In the case of an annual rate adjustment rate application, the cable
operator may give subscribers notice of the proposed rate changes at the time
a cable operator files its rates with the franchise authority. Such notice should
state that the proposed rate change is subject to approval by the franchise
authority. If the cable operator is only permitted a smaller increase than was
provided for in the notice, the cable operator must provide an explanation to
subscribers on the bill in which the rate adjustment is implemented. If the cable
operator is not permitted to implement any of the rate increase that was
provided for in the notice, the cable operator must provide an explanation to
subscribers within 60 days of the date of the franchise authority's opinion. Said
notice shall provide the name and address of the franchising authority before
whom the rate application is pending.
(4) The cable operator(s) bears the burden of proof that its current rates or any
proposed rate increase complies with the statutes of the United States and the
regulations of the FCC.
(5) Within 14 days of receipt of a rate application, the franchising authority shall
provide notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the jurisdiction of
the franchising authority, which notice shall contain at a minimum:
(a) Notice that the rate application has been received from the cable
operator(s).
(b) The manner in which interested parties may review and/or obtain copies
of the rate application.
(c) The effective date of the proposed rate increase, if that is the subject of
the rate application.
(d) The manner in which interested parties may offer their comments
regarding the rate application.
(e) The date all comments must be received by the franchising authority.
(f) The date on which the franchising authority must act on the rate
application or the rate application shall have become effective without
action.
(6) Within 30 days of receipt of the rate application, other than an annual rate
adjustment, the franchising authority shall:
(a) Review the rate application and documentation submitted by the cable
operator(s).
§ 178-104 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 178-104
178:6
(b) Compare the current rates or the proposed rate increase submitted by the
cable operator(s) with the maximum permitted rates or with such other
applicable standards as have been adopted and/or approved by the FCC.
(c) Consider any public input on the rate application which may have been
provided.
(d) Approve, disapprove or seek additional time to consider the rate
application.
(7) In the event the cable operator files an annual rate adjustment, the franchise
authority shall have 90 days from the date of the filing to:
(a) Review the rate application and documentation submitted by the cable
operator(s).
(b) Compare the current rates or the proposed rate increase submitted by the
cable operator(s) with the maximum permitted rates or with such other
applicable standards as have been adopted and/or approved by the FCC.
(c) Consider any public input on the rate application which may have been
provided.
(d) Approve, disapprove or seek additional time to consider the rate
application. However, if the franchise authority or its designee concludes
that the cable operator has submitted a facially incomplete filing, the
franchise authority's deadline for issuing an opinion, the date on which
rates may go into effect if no opinion is issued, and the period for which
refunds are payable will be tolled while the franchise authority is waiting
for this information, provided that, in order to toll these effective dates,
the franchise authority or its designee notifies the cable operator of the
incomplete filing within 45 days of the date of the filing is made.
(8) If the franchising authority shall fail to either approve, disapprove or seek
additional time to consider the rate application, other than an annual rate
adjustment, within said 30 days, the rate application shall be deemed approved
on the 30th day after submission. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in this article, in the event the cable operator files an annual rate
adjustment, if the franchise authority has taken no action within the ninety-day
review period, then the proposed rates may go into effect at the end of the
review period, subject to a prospective rate reduction and refund, if the
franchise authority subsequently issues an opinion disapproving any portion of
such rates; provided, however, that in order to order a prospective rate
reduction and refund, if the cable operator who made the filing inquires as to
whether the franchise authority intends to issue an opinion after the initial
review period, the franchise authority or its designee must notify the cable
operator of its intent in this regard within 15 days of the cable operator's
inquiry. If a proposed rate goes into effect before the franchise authority issues
its opinion, the franchise authority shall have 12 months from the date the
cable operator filed for the rate adjustment to issue its opinion. In the event the
franchise authority does not act within this twelve-month period, it may not at
a later date order a refund or a prospective rate reduction to that rate filing.19
§ 178-104 CABLE TELEVISION § 178-104
178:7
B. Request for additional time.
(1) Rate application. If the franchising authority is unable to determine from the
rate application, including any supporting documentation submitted by the
cable operator(s), whether the current rates for the basic service tier and/or for
the equipment and installation necessary to receive the basic service tier and/
or the proposed rate increase are within the maximum permitted rates, the
franchising authority may, in cases not involving an annual rate adjustment or
cost-of-service showings, take an additional 90 days to consider the rate
application.
(a) The franchising authority shall issue an order and serve the same upon
the cable operator(s) indicating that additional time is required to consider
the rate application. The order shall be issued prior to the expiration of
the 30 days during which the franchising authority may consider the rate
application. Within 10 days of issuance of such order, the franchising
authority shall publish notice in a newspaper of general circulation within
the jurisdiction of the franchising authority, which notice shall contain a
summary of the order, including the additional time requested, and the
reason for requesting such additional time.
(b) The cable operator may submit such additional information as it believes
will cure any deficiencies in the rate application during the additional
time.
(c) The franchising authority may require the cable operator(s) to furnish
additional specified information, including proprietary information, when
the current rate or proposed rate increase is in excess of the maximum
permitted rate. When the current rate is equal to or below the maximum
permitted rate, the franchising authority may only require furnishing of
documentation that the rate is within the maximum permitted rate.
(d) If no decision is issued by the franchising authority at the expiration of
the additional time, the current rates or proposed rate increase shall
become effective, subject to any later refund order adopted by the
franchising authority. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the franchising
authority, in order to later order a refund, must within the text of the order
direct the cable operator(s) to keep an accurate account of all amounts
received by reason of the rate in issue and on whose behalf such amounts
were paid.
(2) Cost-of-service rate application. If the cable operator(s) has submitted a costof-
service rate application and the franchising authority is unable to determine
whether the current rates for the basic service tier and/or for the equipment and
installation necessary to receive the basic service tier and/or the proposed rate
increase are within the maximum permitted rates, the franchising authority
may take an additional 150 days to consider the cost-of-service rate
application.
(a) The franchising authority shall issue an order and serve the same upon
19. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 178-104 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 178-104
178:8
the cable operator(s) indicating that additional time is required to consider
the rate application because it is a cost-of-service rate application. The
order shall be issued prior to the expiration of the 30 days during which
the franchising authority may consider the rate application. Within 10
days of issuance of such order, the franchising authority shall publish
notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the jurisdiction of the
franchising authority, which notice shall contain a summary of the order,
including the additional time requested, and the reason for requesting
such additional time.
(b) The franchising authority may require the cable operator(s) to furnish
additional specified information, including proprietary information, when
the current rate or proposed rate increase is in excess of the maximum
permitted rate. When the current rate is equal to or below the maximum
permitted rate, the franchising authority may only require furnishing of
documentation that the rate is within the maximum permitted rate.
(c) If no decision is issued by the franchising authority at the expiration of
the additional time, the current rates or proposed rate increase shall
become effective, subject to any later refund order adopted by the
franchising authority. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the franchising
authority, in order to later order a refund, must within the text of the order
direct the cable operator(s) to keep an accurate account of all amounts
received by reason of the rate in issue and on whose behalf such amounts
were paid.
(d) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this article, the
franchising authority may, pursuant to a petition for special relief filed
with the FCC, request the FCC to examine a cable operator's cost-ofservice
rate application, and such procedures and deadlines as specified
by rule or order of the FCC shall control.
C. Decision of the franchising authority.
(1) The franchising authority shall issue a written opinion when:
(a) The rate application is not approved, in whole or in part, by the
franchising authority.
(b) The rate application is approved by the franchising authority over the
objection(s) of any interested party.
(2) The franchising authority may, but is not required to, issue a written opinion
when the rate application is approved and there have been no objections filed.
(3) Within 10 days of issuance of an opinion, the franchising authority shall
provide notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the jurisdiction of
the franchising authority, which notice shall contain at a minimum that:
(a) The franchising authority has reached a decision on the rate application
and announcing that decision.
(b) The manner in which interested parties may review and/or obtain copies
§ 178-104 CABLE TELEVISION § 178-104
178:9
of the opinion.
(c) The right of interested parties to take an appeal from the opinion of the
franchising authority.
(d) The deadline for taking any such appeal.
D. Disapproval of the rate application.
(1) Rate reduction.
(a) Current rates. If the franchising authority shall issue an opinion
disapproving the current rates of the cable operator(s) for the basic
service tier or for rates for the equipment and installation necessary to
receive the basic service tier, the franchising authority may order a
reduction in the current rates for the basic service tier and/or for the
equipment and installation necessary to receive the basic service tier. The
prospective rate adjustment may be set at: (i) a level consistent with the
FCC adopted maximum permitted rates; (ii) another rate, based on review
of a cost-of-service rate application; or (iii) another rate consistent with
FCC rules.
(b) Proposed rates. If the franchising authority shall issue an opinion
disapproving of any proposed rate increase, the franchising authority
may:
[1] Prescribe a reasonable rate to be charged by the cable operator(s)
instead of the proposed rate. The prescribed rate may not be lower
than the maximum permitted rate unless a cost-of-service rate
application has been submitted by the cable operator(s) and the
franchising authority determines that the cost-of-service analysis
justifies a lower rate.
[2] Advise the cable operator(s) of a rate level to which it would not
object if a modified rate application were resubmitted.
(2) Refunds. The franchising authority may order a refund, if:
(a) The cable operator fails to comply with a rate decision by the franchising
authority. The refund period may be retroactive to the effective date of
the rate order issued by the franchising authority.
(b) The franchising authority determines in its initial review of the current
rates that they exceed the maximum permitted rates and are unsupported
by a cost-of-service rate application. In such instance, the refund period
may be retroactive to September 1, 1993, or one year prior to the date on
which the cable operator(s) implement(s) the prospective rate adjustment,
whichever is shorter.
(c) The franchising authority: (i) has issued an order permitting it to take an
additional 90 or 150 days to consider a rate application; and (ii) has
directed the cable operator(s) to keep an accurate account of all amounts
received by reason of the rate in issue and on whose behalf such amounts
§ 178-104 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 178-104
178:10
§ 178-105. Enforcement.
§ 178-106. Ratemaking appeals.
Appeals of all ratemaking decisions by the franchising authority may be taken to the
FCC by the cable operator(s), subscribers or other interested parties.
were paid; but (iii) failed to issue an opinion during that time period,
causing the rates to become provisionally effective, and the franchising
authority later finds all or a portion of the rates to be unreasonable. In
such instance, the refund period may be retroactive to the date of the order
and ending on the date on which the cable operator(s) implements the
prospective rate reduction or one year, whichever is shorter.
(3) Before any refund order shall become effective, the franchising authority must
send notice to the cable operator(s) and provide said cable operator(s) a
maximum of 30 days to submit additional information to the franchising
authority as to why the refund should not be ordered. At the end of said period,
the franchising authority shall either confirm, amend or rescind said refund
order.
(4) Refunds shall include interest computed at applicable rates published by the
Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and additional tax payments.
(5) If any proposed rate increase has gone into effect due to inaction of the
franchising authority to issue an order stating a need for additional time, the
franchising authority has no right to order a refund.
(6) Any violation of any order issued hereunder shall be considered a violation of
this article.
A. Cumulative remedies. Where this article provides alternative penalties or remedies,
they shall be cumulative, and the imposition of one penalty or remedy shall not
prevent the franchising authority from invoking any other penalty or remedy
provided herein.
B. In addition to all other rights and remedies provided herein, the franchising
authority shall have all rights and remedies afforded under the franchise agreement.
C. Unless otherwise provided, any person convicted of violating any provision of this
article, including any order issued or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder,
shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $600 and costs for each offense and,
in default of payment thereof, may be imprisoned for not more than 30 days. Each
day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
A. Appeals must be filed within 30 days of the date of public release of the franchising
authority's opinion.
B. Opposition to an appeal must be filed within 15 days after the filing of the appeal
and must be served on the party appealing.
C. Replies to oppositions shall be filed within seven days of the filing of an opposition
and served on all parties.
§ 178-104 CABLE TELEVISION § 178-107
178:11
§ 178-107. Other matters. [Amended 3-25-1997 by Ord. No. 97-03]
A. Cable programming service rates.
(1) The franchising authority is hereby authorized to file complaints with the FCC
on behalf of itself and/or any subscriber(s) who files a complaint with the
franchising authority for those cable programming service rates solely
regulated by the FCC.
(2) The decision to file a complaint with the FCC by the franchising authority
shall be in the sole discretion of the franchising authority.
(3) Any such complaint filed by the franchising authority shall be in conformity
with the rules of the FCC.
(4) The franchising authority shall not file a complaint unless within 90 days after
a rate increase in cable programming service rates becomes effective it
receives no less than two complaints from subscribers.
(5) No formal review or adjudication by the franchising authority of any such
complaint is permitted.
B. Information to be included in billing.
(1) A cable operator(s) shall provide the following information to subscribers on
monthly bills:
(a) The name and mailing address of the franchising authority.
(b) The FCC community unit identifier for the cable system.
(2) A cable operator(s) shall provide notice to the franchising authority at least 30
days in advance of any change in rates for cable programming service or
associated equipment.
§ 178-107 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 178-107
178:12
ARTICLE II
Franchise Regulations
[Adopted 3-25-1997 by Ord. No. 97-04 (Ch. 13, Part 7, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 178-201. Regulatory authority.
Pursuant to the power and authority granted to the franchising authority under the
Cable Act of 1992 and pursuant to its general powers and authority as a township of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to act for the general welfare of its citizenry, the
franchising authority hereby exercises regulatory power over the payments and late
charges which may be imposed by a cable operator on subscribers or applicants for
services and/or equipment provided or to be provided by the cable operator.
§ 178-202. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person or entity wishing to subscribe for cable services from the
cable operator within the geographic boundaries of the franchising authority.
CABLE ACT OF 1992 — The Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1992.
CABLE OPERATOR — Each cable television operator who is or becomes a party to a
franchise agreement with the franchising authority.
DUE DATE — The date when a bill submitted by a cable operator to a subscriber for
services or equipment provided shall be due for payment.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — The agreement between a cable operator and the
franchising authority pursuant to which a cable operator is granted a franchise to offer
cable television services to subscribers.
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY — Township of Middletown.
LATE CHARGES — Any and all charges and/or penalties assessed or levied by the
cable operator against a subscriber for the nonpayment, late payment or insufficient
payment of a bill from the cable operator.
SUBSCRIBER — A customer of the cable operator receiving cable television service
within the geographic boundaries of the franchising authority.
§ 178-203. Payment.
The due date for any amounts due a cable operator for services and/or equipment shall
not be less than 20 calendar days from the date a bill was sent by the cable operator to
the subscriber.
A. Extension of the due date to next business day. If the due date falls on a Sunday,
bank holiday or other day when the offices of the cable operator are not open to the
general public and/or when first class mail service is not delivered by the United
States Postal Service, the due date shall be extended to the next business day or next
day of first class mail delivery, whichever is first.
§ 178-201 CABLE TELEVISION § 178-203
178:13
§ 178-204. Application of partial payments among several bills.
In the absence of written instructions, a bill payment received by the cable operator
which is insufficient to pay a balance due both for prior service and for service billed
during the current billing period shall first be applied to the balance due for prior service.
§ 178-205. Subscriber billing practices.
B. Date of payment by mail. For a remittance by mail, in person or at an authorized
bill payment location, payment shall be deemed to have been made on the date
when entered into the cable operator's billing system.
C. Cable operator's customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at
least during normal business hours and will be conveniently located within the
cable operator's local franchise area.
A. Cable operator shall notify each of its subscribers, at the time of installation and
annually thereafter through written service information, of its billing practices. The
service information shall describe the cable operator's billing practices, including,
but not limited to, the following: frequency of billing, time periods upon which
billing is based, charges for late payments or returned checks, payments required
necessary to avoid liability for such services, and procedures to be followed in the
event of a billing dispute.
B. Cable operator shall have a written description of billing and collection policies and
procedures which shall, at a minimum, incorporate the provisions of this section.
All bills shall be rendered monthly, unless service was provided for less than one
month. The cable operator shall promptly refund any subscriber who has
voluntarily interrupted cable service and returned equipment, but no later than the
earlier of 45 days or the customer's next billing cycle, with a refund check or credit
on his or her monthly bill for the period(s) during which service was voluntarily
interrupted and equipment returned. Cable operator may charge any such subscriber
a reconnection charge.
C. The subscriber bill shall contain the following information presented in plain
language and format:
(1) Name and address of cable operator.
(2) The period of time over which each chargeable service is billed, including
prorated periods as a result of the establishment and termination of service.
(3) A fully itemized list of rates and charges levied for programming services,
equipment provided, and other services or items offered, and a report of all
activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and
credits.
(4) The amount of the bill for the current billing period, separate from any
balance.
(5) Cable operator's telephone number, and a statement that the subscriber may
call this number with any questions or complaints about the bill.
§ 178-203 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 178-205
178:14
§ 178-206. Billing procedures and discontinuance of service.
§ 178-207. Procedures for resolution of billing disputes.
(6) The date on which payment is due from the subscriber.
D. The cable operator shall provide all subscribers and the Township written notice no
less than 30 days prior to any proposed change in these policies. No change of any
rate or change subject to regulation by the Township shall be effective upon the
Township's written disapproval within the thirty-day period.
A. A bill shall not be considered delinquent until at least 45 calendar days have elapsed
from the mailing of the bill to the subscriber and payment has not been received by
the cable operator, provided that no bill shall be mailed more than 15 calendar days
prior to the date services covered by such bill commence, except in cases where a
subscriber requests advance billing.
B. The cable operator shall not physically or electronically discontinue service for
nonpayment of bills rendered for service until the subscriber is delinquent in
payment for service and at least eight calendar days have elapsed after mailing to
the subscriber a separate written notice of impending discontinuance (for which
postage is paid by the cable operator), addressed to such person at the premises
where the subscriber requests billing.
C. Notice of service discontinuance must clearly state the amount in arrears,
reconnection charges, if applicable, and the date by which such payments must be
made, the location of service center(s) where such payment may be made and the
telephone number for information as to where each payment center is located where
such payment may be made.
D. Receipt of a subsequently dishonored negotiable instrument in response to a notice
of discontinuance shall not constitute payment, and the cable operator shall not be
required to issue an additional notice prior to discontinuance.
A. Cable operator shall have a written billing dispute resolution process which, at a
minimum, incorporates the provisions of this section. The billing dispute resolution
procedure shall be initiated once a subscriber contacts either the cable operator's
department which handles billing questions or the Township's Board of
Supervisors, in writing, so long as such contact occurs within 30 days from the date
of receipt of the bill by the subscriber. If the subscriber contacts the Board, the
Board shall notify the cable operator, by mail, by telephone or by electronic means
that the dispute resolution procedures have been initiated, and the cable operator
shall then contact the subscriber to discuss the dispute.
B. The cable operator shall promptly undertake whatever review is necessary to
resolve the dispute and shall notify the subscriber and the Board of Supervisors of
the results of the review as soon as it is completed, but in no case later than 20
business days after receipt from the subscriber of the billing dispute, problem or
complaint notification.
C. The cable operator shall notify the subscriber and the Board of Supervisors in
writing of its proposed resolution of the billing dispute.
§ 178-205 CABLE TELEVISION § 178-208
178:15
§ 178-208. Basis for refund.
A refund of the advance payment shall be due a subscriber under the following
conditions:
§ 178-209. Late charges.
§ 178-210. Refund orders.
A. Termination or discontinuance of service. Any termination or discontinuance of all
or a portion of the service being received by the subscriber and any return of all or
part of any equipment being leased from the cable operator by the subscriber shall
be the basis for a return of the advance payment attributed to such service and
equipment.
B. In the event of substandard delivery of video or audio programming or other lawful
communication service for any reason, other than force majeure as defined at § 7.8
of the Cable Television Franchise Agreement or due to a problem solely caused by
a subscriber, or with the prior consent of the Township, and such loss shall continue
for a period greater in duration than four hours during any one calendar day, then
grantee, upon request of the subscriber, shall reduce the invoice of that subscriber
for the month in which such substandard delivery or loss shall have occurred on a
pro rata time basis; in the event it shall continue beyond 24 hours, then by the
fraction 1/30 multiplied by the number of calendar days during which such
substandard delivery or loss shall have occurred.20
A. No late charge shall be imposed unless payment is made more than 45 days after
the due date, or unless the payment from the subscriber is for less than the full
amount of the bill from the cable operator, in which case the late charge may only
be assessed against the unpaid portion of the bill.
B. No late charge shall be imposed which shall exceed the rate of 1% per month of the
unpaid balance then due the cable operator.
C. No late charge shall be imposed for the costs of rebilling the subscriber as a result
of nonpayment, late payment or less than full payment of the amount then due the
cable operator.
A. The franchising authority may order a refund of any advance payment and/or late
charges if the cable operator failed to comply with the provisions of this article. The
refund period shall be retroactive to the date when the first late charges and/or
advance payment were imposed.
B. Before any refund order shall become effective, the franchising authority shall send
notice to the cable operator and provide said cable operator a maximum of 30 days
to comment on said order. Upon the expiration of said thirty-day period, the
franchising authority shall consider any comments which may have been submitted
and shall confirm, amend or rescind said refund order.
20. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 178-208 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 178-211
178:16
§ 178-211. Noncompliance.
A repeated and verifiable pattern of noncompliance with any provision of this article,
after cable operator receipt of due notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure, may be
termed a material violation of this article.
§ 178-212. Remedy of noncompliance violations.
A. The Township may make a written demand on the cable operator that it remedy
alleged noncompliance violations in any of the following ways:
(1) An informal meeting may be held.
(2) An administrative hearing may be held.
(3) The Township may order the cable operator to correct or remedy the
noncompliance.
B. If the Township determines that the noncompliance was a violation, the Township
may:
(1) Assess monetary damages against the cable operator.
(2) Order appropriate rebates to subscribers.
(3) Order appropriate refunds to subscribers.
(4) Pursue any other legal or equitable remedy.
§ 178-211 CABLE TELEVISION § 178-212
178:17

ARTICLE III
Customer Service Standards
[Adopted 6-25-2002 by Ord. No. 02-06 (Ch. 13, Part 7A, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 178-301. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CABLE ACT OF 1992 — The Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act, Pub. L. 102-385, 106 Stat. 1460 (1992).
CABLE OPERATOR — Each cable television operator who is or becomes a party to a
franchise agreement with the franchising authority.
CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS—Those standards governing customer service
which are prescribed by the FCC existing on the effective date of this article and as may
be hereafter amended and may be enforced by the franchising authority, including those
set forth at 47 CFR 76.309 as of the effective date of this article.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY — The Township of Middletown, Bucks County,
Pennsylvania.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — The agreement between a cable operator and the
franchising authority pursuant to which the cable operator was granted a franchise to
offer cable television services to subscribers.
SUBSCRIBER—A customer of the cable operator(s) receiving cable television service
within the geographic boundaries of the franchising authority.
§ 178-302. Customer service standards.
A. Within 90 days of receipt by the cable operator of written notice from the
franchising authority of the franchising authority's intention to monitor and enforce
the customer service standards adopted by the FCC, the cable operator shall comply
with said standards.
B. At the next billing cycle after receipt of said notice, as to its existing subscribers,
and at or prior to the time of installation for new subscribers, the cable operator
shall provide its subscribers with notice of its customer service standards and shall
provide said subscribers with the name of the franchising authority and contact
person for said franchising authority that the subscriber should contact to report any
violation or alleged violation of said customer service standards.
C. The franchising authority, upon receipt of a complaint of an alleged violation of the
customer service standards, or upon discovery of a violation on its own accord,
shall provide notice of the same to cable operator, which may respond thereto
within 10 days of said notice.
D. Any failure of cable operator to cure a violation of the customer service standards
within such time as shall be set by the franchising authority or to timely respond to
a notice from the franchising authority regarding a violation shall be a violation of
this article.
§ 178-301 CABLE TELEVISION § 178-303
178:19
§ 178-303. Enforcement.
A. Cumulative remedies. Where this article provides alternative penalties or remedies,
they shall not prevent the franchising authority from invoking any other penalty or
remedy provided herein.
B. In addition to all other rights and remedies provided herein, the franchising
authority shall have all rights and remedies afforded under the franchise agreement.
C. Unless otherwise provided, any person convicted of violating any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $500 plus costs for each
offense. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense, and each violation with respect to a subscriber shall be a separate offense.
§ 178-303 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 178-303
178:20
Chapter 190
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Technical Code Review Board — See Ch. 15, Art. I.
Fire Marshal — See Ch. 62, Art. II.
Firesafety inspections — See Ch. 249.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 440.
§ 178-303 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS § 178-303
190:1

ARTICLE I
Fire Prevention Code
[Adopted 8-12-2003 by Ord. No. 03-17; amended in its entirety 7-13-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-0621 (Ch. 5, Part 3, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 190-101. Adoption of International Fire Code.
§ 190-102. Additions, insertions and changes. [Amended 2-19-2019 by Ord. No.
19-01]
A. The 2015 International Fire Code, as specified by the Uniform Construction Code,
including all appendixes, is hereby adopted as the International Fire Prevention
Code of Middletown Township, with the revisions and additions set forth herein, to
prescribe minimum standards, requirements and controls to safeguard life, property
and public welfare from hazardous conditions, especially fire and explosions. Each
and all of the regulations, provisions, terms and penalties of the aforesaid code are
incorporated herein and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this article, with
the additions and changes prescribed herein. [Amended 2-19-2019 by Ord. No.
19-01]
B. Three copies of the aforesaid International Fire Code shall be available for public
inspection and use during normal business hours in the office of the Middletown
Township Fire Marshal.
A. The following sections of the 2015 International Fire Code are hereby revised as
follows:
(1) The term "fire code official" within the 2015 International Fire Code shall be
revised throughout to be referred to as the "Municipal Fire Official."
(2) Change Section 101.1, General, title. Insert "Middletown Township, Bucks
County, Pennsylvania" as the name of the jurisdiction.
(3) Change Section 103.1, General. Delete the entire section and insert in its place
the following language:
103.1 General. The Department of Fire and Emergency Management is
established within the jurisdiction under the direction of the Municipal Fire
Official. The function of the department shall be fire suppression and
emergency management, and implementation, administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this code. The department director will be
herein referred to as the "Municipal Fire Official."
(4) Change Section 103.4, Liability. Delete the entire section and insert in its place
the following language:
21. Editor's Note: This ordinance deleted all references to the "2003 Edition" in Ord. No. 03-17.
§ 190-101 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS § 190-102
190:3
103.4 Liability. The Township of Middletown shall indemnify, save
harmless and defend any fire official, officer or employee charged with
enforcement of this code, while acting for the municipality and within the
scope of their authority, for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of office
duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an
act for and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal
representative of the Township until the final termination of proceedings. The
Fire Code Official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action,
suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this
code, and any officer of the Department of Fire and Emergency Management,
acting in good faith or without malice, shall be free from liability for acts
performed under any of its provisions or by reason of act or omission in the
performance of official duties in connection therewith.
(5) Change Section 103.4.1, Legal defense. Delete the entire section and insert in
its place the following language:
103.4.1 Legal defense. The liability of the Township of Middletown shall
be limited to that imposed under the statutes and common law of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; Township of Middletown assumes no
liability under this code for any damage to persons or property by reason of
the inspection or reinspection of buildings, structure or equipment authorized
herein or failure to inspect or reinspect such building, structures or equipment
or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any building, structure or
equipment authorized herein.
(6) Change Section 104.1, General authority and responsibilities, general. Delete
entire text and insert in its place the following language:
104.1 General authority and responsibilities, general .It shall be the duty
and responsibility of the Office of Fire and Emergency Management or the
duly authorized representatives to enforce the International Fire Code herein
set forth. The designated enforcement officer of this code is herein referred to
as the "Municipal Fire Official."
(7) Change Section 104.2, General authority and responsibilities, applications and
permits. Add, on line three, after the word "permits" and before the word "for"
"and registration."
§ 190-102 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 190-102
190:4
(8) Change Section 104.10, Fire investigation. Delete the entire section and insert
in its place the following language:
104.10 Fire investigation. The office of Fire and Emergency Management
in Middletown Township will have the responsibility for investigating all
fires of value loss, hazardous materials incidents explosions, bomb threats
and bomb incidents explosions or other hazardous conditions within the
boundaries of Middletown Township. It shall also be the office of the Fire
and Emergency Management responsibility to ensure compliance with the
National Fire Protection Association Codes and International Fire Code.
(9) Change Section 104.11, Authority at fires and other emergencies. Delete the
entire section and insert in its place the following language:
104.11 Authority at fires and other emergencies. The Fire Marshal, fire
chief or officer of the department at the scene of a fire or other emergency
involving the protection of life or property, or any part thereof, shall have
the authority to direct such operation as necessary to extinguish or control
any fire, perform any rescue operation, investigate the existence of suspected
or reported fires, gas leaks or other hazardous conditions or situations, or
take any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of duty. In the
exercise of such power, the Fire Marshal and Emergency Manager fire chief
or designee is authorized to prohibit any person, vehicle, vessel or thing from
approaching the scene, and is authorized to remove, or cause to be removed
or kept away from the scene, any vehicle, vessel or thing that could impede
or interfere with the operations of the fire department and, in the judgment of
the Fire Marshal and Emergency Manager fire chief, or designee, any person
not actually and usefully employed in the extinguishing of such fire or in the
preservation of property in the vicinity thereof.
(10) Change Section 104.11.1, Barricades. Delete the entire section and insert in its
place the following language:
104.11.1 Barricades. The Fire Marshal and Emergency Manager fire chief or
office of the department at the scene of an emergency is authorized to place
ropes, guards, barricades or other obstructions across any street, alley, place
or private property in the vicinity of such operation so as to prevent accidents
or interference with the lawful efforts of the fire department to manage and
control the situation and to handle fire apparatus.
(11) Change Section 105.1.1, Permits, permits required. Add, on line one, as the
first word, before the word "Permits," "Registration and."
(12) Add Section 106.5, Permits, payment of fees. Insert entire text using the
following language:
106.5 Payment of fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees for such
permit, as designated in this article or by later resolution of the Board of
Supervisors, shall have been paid.
(13) Change Section 108 to read "Board of Appeal."
§ 190-102 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS § 190-102
190:5
(14) Change § 108.1, Board of Appeals to "Technical Code Review Board of
Appeals."
(15) Add Section 108.1.1, Membership of the Board. Insert entire text using the
following language:
108.1.1 Membership of the board. See the Technical Code Review Board
of Appeals (Chapter 15, Article I).
(16) Change Section 1082.3, Qualifications. Delete the entire section and insert in
its place the following language:
108.3. Qualifications of board members. See the Technical Code Review
Board of Appeals (Chapter 15, Article I).
(17) Add Section 108.4, Application for Appeal. Insert entire text using the
following language:
108.4 Application for appeal. Any person aggrieved by the issuance,
transfer, refusal, suspension, revocation or cancellation of any permit or
registration or by any notice, order or action of the Fire Official may appeal
to the Technical Code Review Board of Appeals within 30 days after being
given notice of the decision, action, or order of the Fire Official. The appeal
shall be taken by filing with the Director of Planning and Zoning, in triplicate,
a letter addressed to the Board, describing the action appealed from and
stating the reason why the applicant considers the Fire Official's action
improper. Within 30 days after filing of the appeal, the Technical Code
Review Board shall hold a hearing on the appeal.
(18) Change Section 108.5, Variances. Said section is hereby amended by the
addition of the following sentence in said section:
The Board may authorize, in writing, a variance from the terms of the
adopted Fire Prevention Code when, because of the special conditions, undue
hardship would result from the literal enforcement and the work authorized
by the variance complies substantially with the purpose of such code.
Recommendations by the Municipal Fire Official as to the variance and its
terms shall be considered by the Board.
(19) Change Section 109.4, Violations, penalty for violations. Delete the entire text
and insert in the place the following language:
109.4 Penalty for violations. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
of the provisions of this code or failing to comply with an order issued
pursuant to any section hereof shall, upon conviction thereof before a
Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000
per violation per day and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that a violation continues after service or notice shall be considered
a separate offense as provided for in the code.
(20) Add Section 109.4.2, as follows:
§ 190-102 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 190-102
190:6
109.4.2 Recovery of abatement of costs. Recovery of abatements costs: The
continuance and maintenance of any condition in violation of this code or
requiring Department staff is hereby declared to be an emergency, planned
event, nuisance, prejudicial to the public health and safety of the Township,
and the Board of Supervisors may abate such a nuisance and collect the costs
thereof together with a penalty of 10% of such costs in a manner provided by
law for the collection of municipal claims or by action in assumpsit without
filing the claim or by seeking relief by a bill in equity.
(21) Change Section 202, General Definitions, by inserting "Amusements" as to a
use or activity under "[BG] Assembly Group A-5."
(22) Change Section 304, Combustible waste material, by removing the heading
"Combustible Waste Material" and replacing it with "Combustible Waste
Material and Vehicle Wrecking/Junkyards."
(23) Change Section 304.1, Waste accumulation prohibited. On line one, insert the
words "or flammable" after the word "combustible" and before the word
"waste."
(24) Change Section 304.1.1, Waste materials. At the end of line seven, insert the
sentence: "A vehicle wrecking yard, junkyard or waste material handling plant
shall be located so not as to represent a serious exposure hazard to adjoining
or adjacent premises."
(25) Add Section 307.6, as follows:
307.6 Prohibited open burning. Open burning that is offensive or
objectionable because of smoke or odor emissions or when atmospheric
conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous shall be
prohibited.
(26) Add Section 404.5, as follows:
404.5 Emergency trauma (bleeding). Kits that are approved by the
Municipal Fire Official will be provided by the business for a minimum of
one kit per 700 persons.
(27) Add Section 404.5.1, as follows:
404.5.1 Bleeding control training. Approved training is required for the
bleeding control training.
(28) Change Section 502, Definitions, fire land. On line one after the word
"passageway" and before the word "developed," insert the words "of sufficient
size."
(29) Add Section 503.7, Fire lanes, designation. Insert the following language:
§ 190-102 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS § 190-102
190:7
503.7. Fire lanes, designation. The Fire Official, after consultation with
the Chief of Police and Township Manager of Middletown Township, shall
designate certain areas of the Township as vehicular fire lanes. Said
designation shall be described in writing and shall be supplemented by
attaching to said writing a map or plan of the development or area in which or
on which such lanes are established. The owner thereof shall be duly notified
by certified mail. Fire lanes shall have a minimum width of 18 feet (5,486
mm) and shall be lettered and posted in accordance with a specification set
forth by the Municipal Fire Official.
(30) Add Section 503.7.1, Fire lanes, enforcement. Add the following:
503.7.1 Fire lanes, enforcement. The fire lanes shall be kept or maintained
free from any form or manner of obstruction or interference which does or
might hamper, interfere or impede the full, complete, free and rapid dispatch
and movement of emergency vehicular equipment and apparatus over, on or
through any fire lane. The Middletown Township Police Department and/
or the Fire Official and/or his designees shall enforce the provisions of the
obstructed fire lanes as herein set forth.
(31) Change Section 505.1, Address identification. Delete the entire section and
insert in its place the following language:
505.1 Address identification. New and existing buildings shall be provided
with approved address identification. The address identification shall be
legible and placed in a position that is visible from the street or road fronting
the property. Address identification characters shall contrast with their
background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical
letters. Numbers shall not be spelled out. Each character shall be not less
than four inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch
(12.7 mm) for residential, 10 inches high with minimum stroke width of one
inch for commercial. Where required by the Municipal Fire Official, address
identification shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate
emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road and the
building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other
sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address identification
shall be maintained.
(32) Change Section 507.5.1.1, Hydrant for standpipe systems. Delete the entire
section and insert in its place the following language:
507.5.1.1 Hydrant for standpipe systems. Buildings equipped with a
standpipe system installed in accordance with Section 905 shall have a fire
hydrant within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of the fire department connections.
Exception. The distance shall be permitted to exceed 50 feet (15,240 mm)
where approved by the Municipal Fire Official.
(33) Add Section 603.10, Chimneys and heating appliances, as follows:
§ 190-102 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 190-102
190:8
603.10 Chimneys and heating appliances. Installation and maintenance
of boilers and/or chimneys in Levittown-style homes. The installation and
maintenance of new, oil-fired, hot-water-heating boilers and chimneys,
including the type of boiler and/or chimney and methods of installation
found in the Middletown Township Levittown homes known as the
"Pennsylvanian," "1956 Jubilee," "Large and Small Country Clubber" and
"Colonial Styles," shall be in accordance with the Standard 85-8
specifications on file with the Township Fire Official or with any additional
specifications approved by the Technical Code Review and Appeals Board of
Middletown Township in accordance with Section 603.10.
(1) Suggested replacement installation specification for new, oil-fired, hotwater-
heating boilers in Levittown, Pennsylvania, "Pennsylvanian" style
homes.
(2) Suggested replacement installation specification for new, oil-fired, hotwater-
heating boilers in Levittown, Pennsylvania, "Jubilee 1956" style
homes.
(3) Suggested replacement installation specification for new, oil-fired, hotwater-
heating boilers in Levittown, Pennsylvania, "Large Country Clubber"
style homes.
(4) Suggested replacement installation specification for new, oil-fired, hotwater-
heating boilers in Levittown, Pennsylvania, "Small County Clubber"
style homes.
(5) Suggested replacement installation specification for new, oil-fired, hotwater-
heating boilers in Levittown, Pennsylvania, "Colonial" style homes.
In the event of a conflict between the specification booklet and other adopted
codes, the most restrictive language shall prevail.
(34) Add Section 603.10.2 as follows:
603.10.2 Approval of other installations. The Technical Code Review and
Appeals Board of Middletown Township may approve additional
specifications for the installation of new, oil-fired, hot-water-heating boilers,
including the type of boiler or method of installation, in accordance with the
following procedure:
(1) Any person seeking to obtain approval for oil burner equipment and/or a
method of installation of oil burner equipment shall present such a request,
in person or in writing, to the Technical Code Review and Appeals Board.
(2) The meeting of the Technical Code Review and Appeals Board at
which such presentation will be made shall be advertised by the Board in
a newspaper of general circulation in the manner in which public notice of
public meetings are advertised by the Township.
(3) The Middletown Township Fire Official may make any appropriate
recommendations, suggestions or comments to the Technical Code Review
and Appeals Board concerning any such presentation by any person with
respect to the Board's decision or any oil burner equipment and/or any
method of installation.
§ 190-102 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS § 190-102
190:9
§ 190-103. Adoption of fire control measures and regulations. [Amended
9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 14-05; 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 19-01]
(4) Upon approval by the Technical Code Review and Appeals Board of the
new oil burner equipment and/or new method of installation, that approved
new oil burner will be added to the Standard 85-8 specification booklet as an
additional approved oil burner for the particular style Levittown house for
which it is approved, and any approved new methods of installation, with all
schematic drawings, as well as other drawings, shall be set forth in writing
and made part of the aforesaid specification booklet in the same form as the
specifications set forth in Section 603.10 hereinabove.
(35) Add Section 603.10.3 Emergency installations.
603.103 Emergency installations. In the event that the owner of one of
the aforesaid-style Levittown homes requests a permit for the installation of
an oil-fired, hot-water-heating boiler which is not in accordance with the
aforesaid approved specifications, and the Municipal Fire Official determines
that the request is due to an emergency situation in which the home is without
heat due to an inoperable or unsafe boiler, then in that event the Municipal
Fire Official may approve an alternate method of installation or type of
boiler equipment in accordance with Section 104.9 of this code. Any such
emergency installation shall be permanent unless otherwise specified by the
Municipal Fire Official.
(36) Section 907.2.9 Group R-2. Remove the entire text and insert the following
text:
907.2.9 Group R-2. A fire alarm system shall be installed in all new and
existing Group R-2 occupancies.
A. There is hereby adopted by the Township of Middletown the fire control measures
and regulations as set forth hereinbelow for the purpose of controlling conditions
which could impede or interfere with the fire-suppression forces:
(1) Compliance with orders. A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply
with any lawful order or direction of the Fire Official or to interfere with the
compliance attempts of another individual.
(2) Vehicles crossing fire hose. A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any
unprotected fire hose of the Fire Department when laid down on any street,
alley, way, private drive or any other vehicular roadway without the consent
of the Fire Official in command of said operation.
(3) Definition of authorized emergency vehicle. "Authorized emergency vehicles"
shall be restricted to those which are defined and authorized under the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(4) Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicle. Upon the
approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, giving audible and visual
signal, the operator of every vehicle shall immediately drive the same to a
§ 190-102 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 190-103
190:10
position as near as possible and parallel to the right-hand edge or curb of the
street or roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in that
position until the authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles shall have passed,
unless otherwise directed by the Fire Official or police officer.
(5) Vehicles following fire apparatus. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any
vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle, to follow closer than 500 feet to any
fire apparatus traveling in response to an emergency call or to drive any
vehicle within the block or immediate area where fire apparatus has stopped in
answer to an emergency call.
(6) Unlawful boarding or tampering with Fire Department equipment. A person
shall not without proper authorization from the Fire Official in charge of said
Fire Department emergency cling to, attach himself to, climb upon or into,
board or swing upon any Fire Department emergency vehicle, whether the
same is in motion or at rest, or sound the siren, horn, bell or other soundproducing
device thereon, or manipulate or tamper with, or attempt to
manipulate or tamper with, any levers, valves, switches, starting devices,
brakes, pumps or any equipment or protective clothing on or a part of any Fire
Department emergency vehicle.
(7) Damage, injury: Fire Department equipment, personnel. It shall be unlawful
for any person to damage or deface or attempt or conspire to damage or deface
any Fire Department emergency vehicle at any time or to injure or attempt to
injure or conspire to injure Fire Department personnel while performing their
duties.
(8) Blocking fire hydrants and Fire Department connections.
(a) It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or
restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any Fire Department connection
for the pressurization of any fire-suppression systems, including fire
hydrants and Fire Department connections that are located on public or
private streets and access lanes or on private property.
(b) If upon expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation
obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the Municipal Fire
Official or designee may cite or shall proceed to remove same. Any cost
incurred in the performance of necessary work shall be paid from the
municipal treasury on certification of the Fire Official and with the
approval of the Manager, and the legal authority of the municipality shall
institute action for the recovery of such costs.
(9) Hydrant use approval. A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant
intended for use of the Fire Department for Township-approved purposes
unless such person first secures a permit for such use from the Municipal Fire
Official or the water company having jurisdiction. This subsection shall not
apply to the use of such hydrants by a person employed by, and authorized to
make such use by, the water company having jurisdiction.
(10) Public water supply. The Fire Official shall recommend to the Township
Manager the location or relocation of new or existing fire hydrants and the
§ 190-103 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS § 190-103
190:11
placement or replacement of inadequate water mains located upon public
property and deemed necessary to provide an adequate fire flow and
distribution pattern. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or removed from
service until approved by the Municipal Fire Official.
(11) Yard systems. All new and existing shipyards, oil storage plants, lumberyards,
amusement or exhibition parks and educational or institutional complexes and
similar occupancies, and uses involving high fire or life hazards and which are
located more than 150 feet from a public street or which require quantities of
water beyond the capabilities of the public water distribution system shall be
provided with property-placed fire hydrants. Such fire hydrants shall be
capable of supplying fire flows as required by the Municipal Fire Official and
shall be connected to a water system in accordance with accepted engineering
practices. The Municipal Fire Official shall designate and approve the number
and location of fire hydrants. The Municipal Fire Official may require the
installation of sufficient fire hose and equipment, housed in accordance with
the approved rules, and may require the establishment of a trained fire brigade
when the hazard involved requires such measures. Private hydrants shall not
be placed into or removed from service until approved by the Fire Official.
(12) Maintenance of fire-suppression equipment. A person shall not obstruct,
remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or fire appliance
required to be installed or maintained under the provisions of the Fire
Prevention Code except for the purpose of extinguishing a fire, for training or
testing purposes, recharging or making necessary repairs or when permitted to
do so by the Fire Official. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as herein
permitted, it shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purpose for which
it was removed has been accomplished. Defective and nonapproved fire
appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the Fire
Official.
(13) Sale of defective fire extinguishers. A person shall not sell, trade, loan or give
away any form, type or kind of fire extinguisher which is not approved by the
Municipal Fire Official, or which is not in proper working order, or the
contents of which do not meet the requirements of the Code. The requirements
of this subsection shall not apply to the sale, trade or exchange of obsolete or
damaged equipment for junk when said units are permanently disfigured or
marked with a permanent sign identifying the unit as junk.
(14) Street obstructions. A person or persons shall not erect, construct, place or
maintain bumps, fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses or
any other type of obstruction in or on any street within the boundaries of the
municipality. The word "street" as used in this article shall mean roadway
accessible to the public for vehicular traffic, including, but not limited to,
private streets or access lanes as well as public streets and highways within the
boundaries of the Township.
(15) Fire (heat and smoke) detection and suppression systems. Fire (heat and
smoke) detection and suppression systems are required in accordance with the
following schedule:
§ 190-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 190-103
190:12
§ 190-104. National Fire Protection Association standards. [Amended 2-19-2019
by Ord. No. 19-01]
The Township will use National Fire Protection Association ("NFPA") codes, standards
and practices referenced in the Uniform Construction Code (including the codes
encompassed therein such as the 2015 International Plumbing Code), and the 2015
(a) Less than 3,500 square feet. A simplified detection system in accordance
with NFPA 72 is required. This type of system must have a minimum of
two detectors interconnected to an audible and visual alarm inside the
property and a flashing or rotating blue light visible from the street and in
the vicinity of the front door outside the property, with pull stations at the
exit doors.
(b) Three thousand five hundred one to 4,999 square feet. A supervised hardwired
detection system in accordance with NFPA 72 is required in all
rooms and spaces except closets less than 24 square feet. The detectors
must be interconnected to an audible and visual alarm inside the property
and a flashing or rotating blue light visible from the street and in the
vicinity of the front door outside the property, with pull stations at the
exit doors.
(c) Five thousand to 9,999 square feet. A supervised, monitored, addressable
hard-wired fire detection system in accordance with NFPA 72 is required
in all rooms and spaces except closets less than 24 square feet. The
detectors must be interconnected to an audible and visual alarm inside the
property and a flashing or rotating blue or clear light visible from the
street and in the vicinity of the front door outside the property, with pull
stations at the exit doors.
(d) Ten thousand square feet and above. A monitored fire-suppression
system in accordance with NFPA 13, 13R and 13D is required. If this is
the sole type of fire detection within the building (no smoke or heat
detection system) an audible, visible notification appliance and pull
stations at the exit doors must be connected to the suppression system and
placed inside the property.
B. All plans should be in accordance with the current year of the International Codes,
NFPA, and ANSI standards on accessibility. All fire alarm systems shall be
installed in accordance with NFPA 72 and International Fire Code (IFC) mostcurrent
edition.
C. At the completion of a job, a written certification letter is required stating
compliance with the applicable codes and standards; if the system is a monitored
system, provide who will be monitoring and servicing the system; three after-hour
emergency contacts for the property must be provided and a copy of the NFPA 72
certification test(s).
D. An annual system certification is required for all occupancies in Middletown
Township. All fire system and sprinkler systems require a permit for Middletown
Township.
§ 190-103 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS § 190-104
190:13
International Fire Code in the manner directed by such codes.
§ 190-105. State law and other regulations.
§ 190-106. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this article, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances and/
or codes in force immediately prior to the enactment of this article, are intended as a
continuation of such ordinances and codes and not as new enactments. The provisions of
this article shall not affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit
or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any
offense under authority of any of the repealed ordinances.22
A. In all matters that are regulated by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
or by regulations of departments or agencies of the commonwealth promulgated by
authority of law, such laws or regulations, as the case may be, shall control where
the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the provisions of this article.
This article shall control in all cases where the state requirements are not as strict as
those contained herein.
B. Whenever the provisions or requirements of this article are in conflict with other
provisions or requirements of the ordinances of the Township of Middletown, the
most restrictive or those imposing the higher standards shall govern except as
otherwise provided herein.
22. Editor's Note: Former § 190-107, Annual apartment inspections for fire code compliance, added 2-19-2019 by Ord. No.
19-01, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 3-15-2021 by Ord. No. 21-04. See now Ch. 377, Rental
Property and Transient Dwellings, Art. II, Apartment Inspections.
§ 190-104 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 190-106
190:14
ARTICLE II
Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 04-04]
§ 190-201. Election to administer and enforce.
Middletown Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 through
7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
§ 190-202. Adoption of uniform code.
On August 12, 2003, the Board of Supervisors passed Ordinance No. 03-17, which
adopted the International Fire Code and all future editions and amendments by reference,
with certain additions, changes and/or modifications, along with certain codes, standards
and promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association. The adoption of this article
will in no way revoke or replace or amend the provisions of Ordinance No. 03-17 that
are equal to or exceed the minimum requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.
Ordinance No. 03-17 and its subsequent amendments and future editions, are herein
incorporated by reference into this article and is attached hereto as Exhibit A.23
§ 190-203. Building Code of Township.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained at 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 to 405, as
amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as
the Municipal Building Code of Middletown Township.
§ 190-204. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within the Township of Middletown shall
be undertaken in any of the following ways, as determined by the governing body of this
municipality from time to time by resolution:
A. By the designation of an employee of the Township to serve as the municipal code
official to act on behalf of the Township;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or third-party agencies
to act on behalf of the municipality;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint administration and
enforcement of this act through an intermunicipal agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the administration and
enforcement of this act on behalf of the Township;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of structures other than onefamily
or two-family dwelling units and utility and miscellaneous use structures.
23. Editor's Note: See Art. I, Fire Prevention Code, of this chapter.
§ 190-201 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS § 190-205
190:15
§ 190-205. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Township Board of
Supervisors in conformity with the requirements of the relevant provisions of the Code,
as amended from time to time, and for the purposes set forth therein. A member
of the Board of Appeals shall be qualified by training and experience to pass on
matters pertaining to building construction. Training and experience may consist of
licensure as an architect or engineer, experience in the construction industry, and training
or experience as an inspector or plan reviewer. If at any time enforcement and
administration is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of
Appeals is established by joint action of the participating municipalities.
§ 190-206. Effect on existing ordinances.
§ 190-207. Fees.25
Fees assessable by the Township for the administration and enforcement undertaken
pursuant to this article and the code shall be established by the governing body by
resolution from time to time.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were adopted by the
Township on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal or exceed the requirements of
this code, shall continue in full force and effect until such time as such provisions
fail to equal or exceed the minimum requirements of the code, as amended from
time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in effect as of the
effective date of this article and whose requirements are less than the minimum
requirements of the code are hereby amended to conform with the comparable
provisions of the code.
C. The rescission or preemption does not apply to ordinances in effect on July 1, 1999,
or reenactments of simultaneously repealed ordinances which were originally
adopted before July 1, 1999, which contain provisions which meet or exceed the
Uniform Construction Code under Section 303(b)(1) of the Act, 35 P.S.
§ 7210.303(b)(1).
D. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of this Township not governed by
the code shall remain in full force and effect, including, but not limited to, those
ordinances and rules or regulations of Middletown Township for Levittown homes
and the policy relating to fire (heat and smoke) detection and suppression systems.
See a copy of the Fire (Heat and Smoke) Detection and Suppression System Policy
attached hereto as Exhibit B.24
24. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the Township offices.
25. Editor's Note: Fees for permits involving building, plumbing, electrical, signs and zoning and all related facilities and
equipment are set forth in the Schedule of Fees on file in the Township Municipal Building and available to be viewed
on the Township's website at www.middletownbucks.org.
§ 190-205 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 190-207
190:16
ARTICLE III
Sanitary Sewer Connections
[Adopted 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17-08]
§ 190-301. Definitions.
A. As used in this article, the following words shall have the meaning indicated, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
CESSPOOL—An underground container designed and intended for the temporary
storage of wastewater and water-carried wastes.
GRINDER PUMP SYSTEM — A system of pipes, pumps and other facilities
designed and intended to assist in the collection and conveyance of wastewater and
water-carried wastes from the interior of a structure to the sanitary sewer system
serving the property. A grinder pump system shall be designed so as to collect
and convey wastewater and water-carried wastes from and through the interior
plumbing of a structure to a holding tank that is part of the grinder pump system.
Once the wastewater and water-carried waste within the holding tank reaches a
specified level, a pump will activate that grinds any and all waste into fine slurry,
and then pumps the wastewater and water-carried wastes to the sanitary sewer
system serving the property.
NOTICE — Any written notice provided for or required under this article may be
made and/or delivered either by personal service made at the subject property, or
by registered mail, return receipt requested, sent to the last known address of the
property owner.
SANITARY SEWER — A system of pipes and other collection and conveyance
facilities designed and intended to transport or convey wastewater and watercarried
wastes, including but not limited to human water-carried wastes, from both
residential and nonresidential structures to sanitary sewage treatment and disposal
facilities.
SANITARY SEWER LATERAL — A pipe or pipes designed and intended to
transport or convey wastewater and water-carried wastes (excluding surface
drainage water) from the interior of a structure and connecting into the sanitary
sewer system serving the property.
SEPTIC TANK — See cesspool.
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and other collection and conveyance
facilities designed and intended to transport or convey only surface drainage waters
to stormwater collection and management facilities and/or to drainage channels,
tributaries, creeks, streams, lakes, and/or ponds.
SURFACE DRAINAGE WATERS — Diffuse waters originating from rain, sleet,
melting snow or other similar natural sources, which runs off or from public and/or
private property and public and/or private streets and into storm sewers, drainage
channels, tributaries, creeks, streams, lakes, and/or ponds.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middletown, its officers, directors, employees,
designees, agents and assigns.
§ 190-301 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS § 190-302
190:17
§ 190-302. Sanitary sewer connections required.
§ 190-303. Discharge of certain substances into sanitary sewer prohibited.
No property owner shall contribute or discharge, or cause to be contributed or
discharged, directly or indirectly, any pollutant, wastewater or water-carried waste that
will interfere with the operation or performance of any sanitary sewer system. Any and
all contributions and/or discharges into any sanitary sewer system shall comply, in all
respects, with the current specifications, rules, and regulations of the Township and/or
A. Every owner of improved property within the Township that abuts or adjoins any
street, road, lane, alley, paper street, or any other public highway or right-of-way in
which sanitary sewer collection and/or conveyance facilities are located, or that is
otherwise accessible to such a sanitary sewer system, upon written notice of the
availability of sanitary sewer collection and/or conveyance services and facilities
from the Township and/or from the applicable municipal authority or other operator
of the subject sanitary sewer system and/or facilities for the subject property, shall
connect such property to the subject sanitary sewer collection and/or conveyance
facilities and/or system in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
applicable municipal authority or operator of such sanitary sewer system and/or
facilities.
B. As sanitary sewer collection and/or conveyance services and facilities shall, from
time to time, become available to improved properties within the Township limits
for which such sanitary sewer systems or facilities are previously unavailable, or as
unimproved properties already accessible to such a sanitary sewer systems become
improved, then each and every owner of such properties, upon written notice of the
availability of sanitary sewer collection and/or conveyance services and facilities
from the Township and/or from the applicable municipal authority or other operator
of the subject sanitary sewer system and/or facilities for the subject property, shall
likewise connect such property to the subject sanitary sewer collection and/or
conveyance facilities and/or system in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the applicable municipal authority or operator of such sanitary sewer system and/or
facilities.
C. Whenever the Township and/or applicable municipal authority or other operator of
a sanitary sewer system located and operating within the Township shall have given
such written notice as is set forth in this section to the owners of properties located
within the Township, it shall thereafter be unlawful for the owner of that subject
property to operate, employ, utilize, use or maintain upon that subject property a
cesspool, septic tank, vault, privy or similar receptacle designed or intended for
holding, storing and/or disposing of wastewater, water-carried waste, and/or human
waste, and/or to connect and/or discharge any such cesspool, septic tank, vault,
privy or similar receptacle into any sanitary sewer system or storm sewer system.
No owner of an improved property within the Township shall construct and/or
install a cesspool, septic tank, vault, privy or similar receptacle designed or intended
for holding, storing and/or disposing of wastewater, water-carried waste, and/or
human waste on, in or upon any property that abuts or adjoins any street, road, lane,
alley, paper street, or any other public highway or right-of-way in which sanitary
sewer collection and/or conveyance facilities are located, or any property that is
otherwise accessible to such a sanitary sewer system.
§ 190-302 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 190-303
190:18
of the applicable municipal authority or operator of such sanitary sewer system and/or
facilities for the same as may be in effect from time to time.
§ 190-304. Grease interceptors required.
§ 190-305. Discharge of stormwater through sewer laterals prohibited.
A. In any and all structures in which grease-laden waste is generated, including but not
limited to structures containing restaurants, hotel kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias,
school cafeterias, or other similar food preparation and/or grease-laden waste
generating areas of the same, a grease interceptor shall be required to receive any
and all drainage, wastewater and water-carried waste from any and all such areas of
such structures. Food waste grinders shall not discharge to a building drainage
system through a grease interceptor.
B. Grease interceptors shall be installed and maintained in an accessible location, and
shall remain accessible and unobstructed at all times.
C. Grease interceptors shall be cleaned not less than two times per week, or at such
frequency as may be determined necessary in the discretion of the Township and/or
of the applicable municipal authority or operator of the sanitary sewer system and/
or facilities serving the subject property. Property owners shall maintain an ongoing
written log or record of all grease interceptor cleanings for a period of not less than
24 months.
D. Grease interceptors shall be subject to inspection at the discretion of the Township
and/or of the applicable municipal authority or operator of the sanitary sewer
system and/or facilities serving the subject property to insure compliance with this
section. The Township may from time to time establish, by resolution, an annual
fee associated with the inspection of grease interceptors.
E. For all properties and/or structures identified in this section, grease interceptors
shall be required for all new or existing connections to the sanitary sewer system,
which such connections shall also be in conformance with the International
Building Plumbing Code, as adopted by the Township, without exception.
A. A property owner is solely responsible, in all respects, for the proper installation,
operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of any and every sanitary sewer
lateral located on a property.
B. No property owner may permit the discharge of stormwater into the sanitary sewer
system, and all property owners shall maintain the sanitary sewer laterals connected
to their buildings and structures in such fashion as to prevent the infiltration of
stormwater into the sewer system.
C. All private building sewer laterals shall be fitted with vent caps which are
manufactured to fit the type and size of vent pipe affixed to the lateral, and which
shall provide a tight seal against the inflow of stormwater under high precipitation
conditions. Vent caps must be set a minimum of four inches above grade, but not
less than a height sufficient to preclude the flow of stormwater into the vent.
D. Cleanout caps on sanitary sewer laterals shall be appropriately fitted and secured to
§ 190-303 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS § 190-305
190:19
§ 190-306. Violations and penalties.
Any person, organization, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District
Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $100 and not more than $600, plus costs, and in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day or part of each day during which a violation occurs or
continues. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section of this article
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. The sum
herein forfeited shall be considered a penalty.
provide a tight seal against inflow of stormwater under high precipitation
conditions.
E. All lateral joints shall be tight and all pipes shall be sound to prevent exfiltration by
wastewater or infiltration by groundwater or stormwater.
F. A sanitary sewer lateral pipe shall be free of any structural defects, cracks, breaks,
rodent holes, or missing portions thereof, and the grade or pitch of such lateral shall
be uniform without sags or offsets.
G. Area drains, foundation drains, roof leaders, sump pumps or other direct
connections into a sanitary sewer lateral that allow stormwater or groundwater to
enter into that sanitary sewer lateral are prohibited.
H. Sanitary sewer laterals may flow by either gravity or by pressurized systems, such
as a grinder pump system.
I. Sanitary sewer laterals and grinder pump systems shall be subject to inspection at
the discretion of the Township and/or of the applicable municipal authority or
operator of the sanitary sewer system and/or facilities serving the subject property
to insure compliance with this section. Further, the Township may inspect or
require proof of inspection of any building sewer lateral connection, in order to
insure the integrity of the connection and compliance with this section, prior to the
issuance of any use and occupancy permit for any property and/or any structure
located thereupon. The Township may from time to time establish, by resolution,
an annual fee associated with the inspection of sanitary sewer lateral connections.
§ 190-305 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 190-306
190:20
Chapter 196
CONTRACTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction standards — See Ch. 190.
§ 190-306 CONTRACTORS § 190-306
196:1

ARTICLE I
Licensing of Contractors
[Adopted 11-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-30 (Ch. 13, Part 6, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 196-101. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Middletown Township Contractor
Licensing Ordinance."
§ 196-102. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
The masculine includes the feminine, the singular includes the plural, and the plural
includes the singular.
CONTRACT — An agreement, whether oral or written and whether contained in one
or more documents, between a contractor and an owner or another contractor for the
performance of work, including all labor, services and materials to be furnished and
performed thereunder.
CONTRACTOR — Any person, other than a bona fide employee of the contractor,
who undertakes or offers to perform construction, repair, reroofing, remodeling,
rehabilitation, demolition, paving, electrical and any other residential or nonresidential
construction or demolition work in the Township, whether as general contractor,
subcontractor, specialty contractor or home improvement contractor with respect to the
property owner.
LICENSE YEAR—The twelve-month period beginning the first day of January of each
year.
OWNER — Any property owner, tenant or other person who orders, contracts for, or
purchases the services of a contractor, or any person entitled to the work of a contractor
pursuant to a contract, gift or otherwise.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association, corporation,
trust or other legally cognizable entity.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middletown.
§ 196-103. Enforcement.
The Building Inspector or his authorized representatives shall administer and enforce the
provisions of this article.
§ 196-104. Compliance required.
No person shall act as a contractor in the Township except in compliance with the
provisions of this article. Any person, including an owner, who willfully aids a
contractor or participates with a contractor in violating any provisions of this article is in
violation of this article. The provisions of this article may not be waived by agreement.
§ 196-101 CONTRACTORS § 196-105
196:3
§ 196-105. Applicability of license.
A license issued pursuant to this article shall not be construed to authorize the licensee
to perform any particular type of work or type of business which is reserved to qualified
licensees under other provisions of state or local law.
§ 196-106. License required; application; issuance; renewal.
§ 196-107. Exceptions.
A. For the license year beginning January 1, 1992, and each license year thereafter,
every person desiring to continue to engage in or hereafter to begin to engage in the
business of acting as a contractor in the Township shall, on or before the first day
of January of the license year or prior to commencing business in such license year,
make application for a license to act as a contractor in the Township.
B. Such application shall be made by the completion of an application furnished by the
Building Inspector and the payment of the prescribed license fee. Each application
must contain the information required hereinafter by this article and must present
satisfactory proof of insurance. Each application for a license shall be signed by the
applicant if a natural person, and in the case of an association or a partnership, by a
member or partner thereof, and in the case of a corporation, by an officer thereof.
C. Each authorized successful applicant shall be issued a license, which license shall
be in the form of a wallet-sized card and in the form of a vehicle bumper sticker.
Every licensed contractor, while actually acting as a contractor in the Township,
shall carry said license card with him and shall display it to the Building Inspector
or his representatives upon request to do so. Every licensed contractor shall at all
times display his bumper sticker license on the rear bumper of the vehicle he
primarily uses in his activities as a contractor.
D. All contractors' licenses shall expire at midnight on December 31 of each license
year unless the license is revoked or suspended prior thereto under the terms of this
article. A person with an unexpired license which has not been revoked or
suspended during the current license year who makes application for a license for
the following license year need not complete an application form, but must only
submit the required license fee and, if he qualifies for the following license year, he
will be issued a new license card and bumper sticker for the following license year.
A. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the official transactions of any
authorized representative of the government of the United States, any state or
commonwealth of the United States, any political subdivision of any state or
commonwealth or any agency or instrumentality of the foregoing governments;
provided, however, that no person engaged by the representative of any of the
foregoing shall act as a contractor in the Township unless such person shall first
have complied with and have been licensed under the provisions of this article.
B. No contractor's license shall be required of any person when acting in a particular
capacity or particular type of transaction as follows:
(1) A person who performs labor or services for a contractor for wages or salary.
§ 196-105 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 196-107
196:4
§ 196-108. Insurance required.
§ 196-109. License fees. [Amended 10-27-1992 by Ord. No. 92-11]
(2) A person who is required by other state or local law to attain standards of
competency or experience, and who must obtain licensing under such other
state or local law as prerequisite to engage in a craft or profession, and who is
acting exclusively within the scope of such craft or profession for which he is
currently licensed pursuant to such other law.
(3) The provisions of this article shall not be interpreted as to require licensing for
small repairs or other minor construction work which is not performed for
compensation and is done by the owner and/or his family or friends in selfhelp
on the owner's property.
A. No contractor's license shall be issued unless the applicant files a certificate of
insurance with the Building Inspector at the time of license application. The
certificate of insurance shall contain a provision that coverages afforded under the
policy will not be canceled until at least 15 days' prior written notice of such
cancellation has been given to the Township of Middletown. The certificate of
insurance must evidence policies of insurance, maintained at the expense of the
applicant, for public liability, property damage, products liability, completed
operations and worker's compensation, each of which must have a single
occurrence limit of at least $100,000. Additional blasting and demolition liability
insurance coverage shall be determined by the Building Inspector at the time of
application and shall be reasonably based on the nature and the extent of the
applicant's proposed operations.
B. All types and limits of insurance for which certificates are presented at the time of
application, and based upon which a license is issued, shall be maintained
throughout the license year, or the license will be suspended or revoked as
hereinafter set forth in this article. The Building Inspector must be advised of any
change in an insurance carrier during a license year.
A. At the time of application for a new license or for the renewal of a current license,
the applicant shall pay an annual license application fee to the Township of
Middletown. The amount of the annual application fee shall be established from
time to time pursuant to resolution of the Board of Supervisors.26 No fee or portion
thereof shall be returned to a successful or unsuccessful applicant. There shall not
be a prorated reduction in the license fee if application is made during the license
year or suspended or revoked during the license year; provided, however, a person
shall be required to pay only one license fee per year under this article regardless of
the number of jobs or the number of trade areas in which the contractor will provide
services.
B. In addition, every person licensed in a specific construction trade, such as
plumbing, mechanical, sign construction and like trades, in which the Township
currently requires a license and imposes a registration or license fee, shall be
26. Editor's Note: Township fee schedules are on file in the Township Municipal Building and available to be viewed on the
Township's website at www.middletownbucks.org.
§ 196-107 CONTRACTORS § 196-109
196:5
§ 196-110. Contents of application. [Amended 12-27-1992 by Ord. No. 92-11]
§ 196-111. Notification of changes.
Every contractor licensee shall, within 10 days after a change in ownership, directors,
officers, management, address or trade name, notify the Building Inspector of such
required to be licensed as a contractor pursuant to this article, provided that each
such person shall only be required to pay one license or registration fee per year
regardless of the number of licenses, including plumbing, mechanical and sign
construction, required by the Township.
A. Upon submission of a proper application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall,
within a period of 30 days following the receipt of the application, issue or refuse
to issue the appropriate contractor's license to the applicant. If issuance of a license
is denied, the Building Inspector shall mail to the unsuccessful applicant a written
statement setting forth the reason or reasons for the denial within the aforesaid
thirty-day period.
B. The application for a license shall be in printed form, provided to the applicant by
the Township, and shall require a written answer to all questions contained thereon.
Failure to answer all questions on the application form shall mean that the applicant
is not entitled to consideration of his application until he has answered all questions.
The application form shall be signed by the applicant under oath. The information
requested on the application form shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) The names of owners, partners, directors and officers of the applicant, and the
business address and trade name of the applicant.
(2) A statement as to whether or not any municipalities have refused to issue or
have revoked any similar contractor's licenses to the applicant within two years
prior to the date of the application. In the event that there has been such a
denial or revocation, the applicant must explain in writing the reasons for such
denial or revocation.
(3) A listing of all jobs performed within the preceding three-month period, but at
a minimum a listing of the last 10 jobs performed by the contractor, along with
a statement of the location of the jobs and the names, addresses and telephone
numbers of the party or parties who contracted with the applicant for such jobs.
In addition, the applicant shall specify in detail his areas of competence and all
proposed work activities.
(4) A listing of all convictions within two years prior to the date of the application
for any crimes or offenses under any federal or state criminal statute or
common law criminal offense, or for violation of any Township ordinance, so
long as such convictions were for crimes or offenses related to the applicant's
work or contracts as a contractor. The term "conviction" shall include guilty
pleas and pleas of nolo contendere. If any such conviction exists, the applicant
shall give in writing the caption, court and term number of the proceeding
leading to the conviction. The applicant shall also explain, in writing, the
nature of the conviction.
§ 196-109 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 196-111
196:6
change.
§ 196-112. Refusal to issue or renew license.
No license shall be issued or renewed under the following circumstances:
§ 196-113. Revocation of license.
The Building Inspector shall revoke any license issued under the provisions of this
article under the following circumstances:
§ 196-114. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
A. If the applicant falsely answered any question or questions contained on the
application form.
B. If the applicant has been convicted within two years prior to the date of the
application for any crimes or offenses under any federal or state criminal statute or
common law criminal offense or for violation of any Township ordinance so long
as such convictions were for crimes or offenses related to the applicant's work as a
contractor. The term "conviction" shall include guilty pleas and pleas of nolo
contendere.
A. If the licensee falsely answered any question or questions contained on an
application for licensing or renewal of licensing previously submitted to the
Building Inspector.
B. If the licensee fails to maintain, during the license year, the policies of insurance
required under the provisions of this article.
C. If the licensee violates any of the terms or provisions of the Building Code of the
Township of Middletown or any terms or provisions of this article.
D. If the licensee violates any condition or requirement of a building permit, sewer
construction permit or highway permit issued by the Township of Middletown.
E. If the licensee willfully deviates from or disregards any plans or specifications for
any contracting job in any material respect without first obtaining the consent of the
owner, in writing, to any such change and without first notifying the Building
Inspector of any such change.
F. If the licensee does any business through any person who is subject to the licensing
requirements of this article and who is not licensed as required by this article.
G. If the licensee conducts a contractor's business in the Township under any name
other than that under which he is licensed.
H. If the licensee fails to comply with an order, demand or requirement lawfully made
by the Township under the authority of this article or any other Township
ordinance.
A. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article or who fails to correct a violation or institute a remedial action as ordered by
§ 196-111 CONTRACTORS § 196-114
196:7
§ 196-115. Conflicting ordinances.
Whenever the requirements of this article are in conflict with other requirements of the
ordinances of the Township of Middletown, the most restrictive or those imposing the
higher standards shall govern.
the Code Enforcement Officer or who violates a provision or fails to comply with
any requirements of this article or any of the other applicable provisions of the
Code of the Township of Middletown, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement
of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section of this article
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
B. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the Township
Solicitor from initiating appropriate actions or proceedings at law or in equity to
effect the purpose of this article.
§ 196-114 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 196-115
196:8
ARTICLE II
Responsibility of Contractors and Developers Awarded Public Contracts
[Adopted 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 06-05; amended in its entirety 5-7-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-02]
§ 196-201. Purpose and intent; effect on other provisions.
§ 196-202. Qualified, responsible contractor and developer requirements.
A. To effectuate the purpose of selecting responsible contractors and developers for
public contracts and to protect the Township's investments in such contracts,
prospective contractors, subcontractors and developers should be required to meet
preestablished, clearly defined, minimum standards relating to contractor and
developer responsibility, including requirements and criteria concerning technical
qualifications, competency, experience, adequacy of resources, including
equipment, financial and personnel, and satisfactory records regarding past project
performance, safety, compliance with the law and business integrity.
B. Due to the critical impact that skilled construction craft labor has on public works
projects, and due to the limited availability of skilled construction craft labor, it is
necessary to require contractors, subcontractors and developers, as a condition of
bidding, to demonstrate their training and qualifications such as through
participation in established, formal apprenticeship training programs, for the
purpose of promoting successful project delivery, cost-effectiveness and workforce
development.
C. The Township also recognizes that it is beneficial to the local community to ensure
that firms receiving public contracts provide adequate wages and benefits to their
employees and utilize fair business, employment and training practices that have a
positive impact on local communities affected by such contracts.
D. Therefore, the Township shall require compliance with the provisions of this article
by business entities seeking to provide services to the Township as specified herein.
E. The requirements of this article are intended to supplement, not replace, existing
contractor and developer qualification and performance standards or criteria
currently required by law, public policy or contracting documents. However, in the
event that any of the provisions of this article conflict with any law, public policy
or contracting documents of the Township, this article shall prevail.
A. All contractors, subcontractors and developers of any tier who perform
construction, alteration, and/or renovation work on any public facility or public
work project, which work is valued at an amount equal to or greater than $25,000,
shall meet all of the requirements of this article.
B. All contractors, subcontractors and developers of any tier shall have sufficient
capabilities in all respects to successfully perform the contracts on which they are
engaged, including the necessary experience, equipment, technical skills, training
and qualifications and organizational personnel and financial resources, as well as
a record of successful past performance and compliance with all statutes,
ordinances, regulations or policies of all governmental and regulatory agencies with
§ 196-201 CONTRACTORS § 196-202
196:9
§ 196-203. Contractor/developer responsibility certifications.
jurisdiction over said contractors, subcontractors and developers and over the
Township.
A. As a condition to the award of a public works contract subject to this article, a firm
that seeks the award of a contract to perform the services of a general contractor,
construction manager, general contractor, other lead or prime contractor, or
developer shall submit a contractor/developer responsibility certification at the time
it submits its bid or proposal for a contract.
B. The contractor/developer responsibility certification shall be completed on a form
that the Township provides and shall reference the project for which the bid or
proposal is being submitted by name and contract or project number.
C. In the contractor/developer responsibility certification the general contractor,
construction manager, general contractor, other lead or prime contractor, or
developer shall confirm the following facts regarding past performance and work
history and current qualifications and performance capabilities:
(1) The firm has not been debarred by any federal, state or local government
agency or authority in the past three years.
(2) No officer, director, owner or managerial employee of the firm has been
convicted of a felony relating to construction, maintenance, service or repair
contracting industries.
(3) The firm has not defaulted on any project in the past three years.
(4) The firm has not had any type of business, contracting or trade license revoked
or suspended by any government agency or authority in the past three years.
(5) The firm has not been found in violation of any other law relating to its
development or contracting business, including, but not limited to, wage or
hour laws, environmental laws, antitrust laws, licensing laws or tax laws, the
Pennsylvania Human Relations Act, 43 P.S. § 951, et seq., the Occupational
Safety and Health Act, 29 U.S.C. § 651, et seq., the Pennsylvania Minimum
Wage Law, 43 P.S. § 333.101, et seq., the Pennsylvania Wage Payment and
Collection Law, 43 P.S. § 260.1, et seq., the Pennsylvania Unemployment
Compensation Law, 43 P.S. § 751, et seq., and the Pennsylvania Workers
Compensation Act, 77 P.S. § 1, et seq., by a final decision of a court or
government agency authority in the past three years.
(6) The firm has all technical qualifications and resources, including equipment,
personnel and financial resources, to perform the referenced contract, or will
obtain same through the use of qualified, responsible subcontractors.
(7) The firm has been incorporated and conducting business in the trade or craft
for which it is bidding for at least three years. The term "conducting business"
shall mean having completed projects either the same or substantially similar
to the project for which it is bidding. If queried on this paragraph, the firm
shall produce legal documents, photographs and references as to the longevity
§ 196-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 196-203
196:10
of its business. The Township Manager or the Board of Supervisors or its
designee shall conduct this review.
(8) The firm or its subcontractor's employees shall be in the United States legally,
and a list of all possible employees and their citizenship/legal standing shall be
supplied to the Township Manager on a monthly basis.
(9) The firm participates in a Class A apprenticeship program for each separate
trade or classification in which it employs craft employees and shall continue
to participate in such program or programs for the duration of the project or
contract. Such apprenticeship program must be registered with the United
States Department of Labor or the Pennsylvania Apprenticeship and Training
Council and must have graduated apprentices to journeyperson status for each
of the past five years. To permit development of recently registered programs,
the graduation requirement of this provision shall not apply to: an
apprenticeship training program registered within the past five years; or an
apprenticeship program registered within the past 10 years, if the program
provides apprenticeship training for a craft or trade that was not recognized as
an apprenticeship craft or trade by the U.S. Department of Labor or the
Pennsylvania Apprenticeship and Training Council at the time that the
program was registered.
(10) To demonstrate compliance with § 196-203C(9), the firm shall provide, as an
attachment to the Responsible Contractor/Developer Certification, appropriate
documentation including a list of all trades or classifications of craft
employees it will employ on the project, together with documentation
verifying that:
(a) The firm participates in the requisite apprenticeship program for each
such trade or classification listed; and
(b) Each craft employee to be used on the project for the duration of the
contract is a participant in or graduate of such apprenticeship program.
D. The Township may require any other additional information it deems necessary to
evaluate a prospective contractor's or developer's technical qualifications, resources
and performance capabilities. The Township may require that such information be
included in a statement of qualifications and experience as an attachment to the
contractor responsibility certification.
E. In the contractor/developer responsibility certification, the submitting firm shall
stipulate that if it receives a notice of intent to award contract it will provide the
Township with a subcontractor list and subcontractor information as specified
herein.
F. If the submitting firm is or was in the past five years related to any other company
or business entity that provided or provides contractual services in the construction,
maintenance, service or repair industries, whether as a parent company, subsidiary
or any other business relationship, it shall submit a detailed written explanation of
such relationship and provide a contractor/developer responsibility certification for
the related company if requested.
§ 196-203 CONTRACTORS § 196-203
196:11
§ 196-204. Notice of intent to award contract.
§ 196-205. Subcontractor lists; subcontractor responsibility certifications.
§ 196-206. Execution of contractor/developer and subcontractor responsibility
G. If any person or entity that is a shareholder, owner or partner of the submitting firm
owns an interest of 20% or more in another entity that provides or has provided
contractual services in the construction, maintenance, service or repair industries, it
shall submit a detailed written explanation of such relationship and provide a
contractor/developer responsibility certification for such other entity if requested.
H. The Township may require that contractor/developer responsibility certifications
and other information required by this article be submitted electronically.
I. The Township may charge firms submitting bids or proposals a reasonable fee to
defray costs for processing and evaluating contractor/developer responsibility
certifications and related information and documents.
A. Consistent with § 196-203A of this article, the Township shall open and consider
only those bids by firms that have submitted a contractor/developer responsibility
certification. It shall then issue a notice of intent to award contract to the firm
offering the lowest responsive bid or, in the case of competitive proposals, the firm
offering the most advantageous proposal.
B. Such notice shall be issued as soon as practicable after bids or proposals are
submitted and shall stipulate that the contract award will be conditioned on the
issuance of a written contractor/developer responsibility determination, as required
by this article.
A. Within 14 days of receiving such a notice of intent to award contract, a prospective
awardee shall submit to the Township a subcontractor list containing the names of
all subcontractors it will use for the referenced project, their addresses and a
description of the work each listed subcontractor will perform on the project.
B. At the time a prospective awardee submits its subcontractor list it shall also submit
subcontractor responsibility certifications for all listed subcontractors to the
Township. Subcontractor responsibility certifications shall be executed by the
respective subcontractors and shall contain the same information and
representations required in contractor/developer responsibility certifications.
C. A construction manager, general contractor, other lead or prime contractor, or
developer shall not be permitted to use any subcontractor on procurement contracts
subject to this section which is not on the subcontractor list, unless it demonstrates
compelling reasons for using an unlisted subcontractor and obtains prior written
approval from the Township.
D. The Township shall not approve an unlisted subcontractor, unless it executes a
subcontractor responsibility certification as required by this article at least 30 days
prior to commencing work. This thirty-day requirement may be waived in
emergency situations. Any such certification shall be made available to the public
as specified in § 196-208C of this article.
§ 196-203 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 196-206
196:12
certifications.
§ 196-207. Contractor/developer responsibility determination.
A. Contractor/developer and subcontractor responsibility certifications shall be
executed by a person who has sufficient knowledge to address all matters in the
certification and shall include an attestation stating, under the penalty of perjury,
that all information submitted is true, complete and accurate.
B. If it is subsequently determined that a contractor/developer or subcontractor
responsibility certification contains false or misleading material information that
was provided knowingly or with reckless disregard for the truth, or omits material
information that was omitted knowingly or with reckless disregard of the truth, the
firm for which the certification was submitted shall be prohibited from performing
work for the Township for a period of three years and shall be further subject to any
other penalties and sanctions, including contract termination, that are available to
the Township under law. A contract terminated under these circumstances shall
further entitle the Township to withhold payment of any monies due to the firm as
damages.
A. Once a notice of intent to award contract has been issued, the Township shall
undertake a thirty-day agency review to determine whether the prospective awardee
is a qualified, responsible contractor or developer in accordance with the
requirements of this article and other applicable laws and regulations.
B. As part of this agency review, the Township shall ensure that the contractor/
developer responsibility certification, subcontractor list and subcontractor
responsibility certifications, as required by this article, have been submitted and
properly executed.
C. The Township may further conduct any other inquiry to independently verify that
the prospective awardee and its listed subcontractors have the technical
qualifications and performance capabilities necessary to successfully perform the
contract and has a sufficient record of compliance with the law and business
integrity to justify the award of a public contract. In conducting such inquiries, the
Township may seek information from firms which have submitted responsibility
certifications, prior customers of such firms, or from any other relevant source. In
conducting this evaluation, the Township may also consider relevant information
on any business entities that are found to be related to the firm.
D. In the event that the Township determines that a prospective subcontractor does not
meet the qualification standards included in the subcontractor responsibility
certification or does not otherwise qualify as a responsible firm, it shall inform the
general contractor, construction manager, other lead or prime contractor, or
developer and permit it to self-perform the work of the subcontractor or substitute
another subcontractor which meets the requirements of this article.
E. In the event that a subcontractor is disqualified under this article, the general
contractor, construction manager, other lead or prime contractor, or developer shall
not be permitted to make any type of contractual claim against the Township on the
basis of a subcontractor disqualification.
§ 196-206 CONTRACTORS § 196-207
196:13
§ 196-208. Public review process.
§ 196-209. Severability.
F. If at the conclusion of its internal review the Township determines that all
responsibility certifications have been properly completed and executed and if it
concludes that the qualifications, background and responsibility of the prospective
awardee and the firms on its subcontractor list are satisfactory, it shall issue a
written contractor/developer responsibility determination verifying that the
prospective awardee is a qualified, responsible contractor or developer. The
contractor/developer responsibility determination shall be issued within 30 days
from the date the notice of intent to award contract is issued. This responsibility
determination may be revoked or revised in any manner at any time during the
public review process set forth in § 196-208 of this article in the event the Township
obtains relevant information warranting any such revocation or revisions. If the
Township determines that a prospective awardee does not meet the qualification
standards of this article, it shall issue a determination stating that it finds the firm
nonresponsible.
A. Beginning on the date that the Township issues a notice of intent to award contract,
it shall provide a fourteen-day public review period, during which time the
contractor/developer responsibility certification, subcontractor list, subcontractor
responsibility certifications and contractor/developer responsibility determination,
as specified herein, shall be subject to immediate public inspection as they become
available in a public document room or on a publicly accessible website. Upon
written request for the same, copies of these records shall be provided to the public
within five business days of such request.
B. During the public review period, any person or organization may protest a
contractor, developer or subcontractor for failing to meet applicable requirements
of this article or for any other legitimate ground by submitting a letter, together with
evidence supporting the protest, to the Township Manager.
C. The Township shall not execute a contract that is subject to this article until all of
the requirements of this article have been fulfilled.
A. If any provision of this article shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable by a court
of competent jurisdiction, any such holding shall not invalidate any other provisions
of this article and all remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
B. The requirements of this article shall not apply to contracts executed prior to the
effective date of this article, except that the exercise of an option on a contract
covered by this article shall be deemed to create a new contract for purposes of this
article.
§ 196-207 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 196-209
196:14
Chapter 200
CURFEW
§ 196-209 CURFEW § 196-209
200:1

ARTICLE I
Curfew
[Adopted 11-18-1980 by Ord. No. 80-23 (Ch. 6, Part 1, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 200-101. Declaration of purpose.
It is hereby declared that the enactment of this article is necessary to secure the public
safety, in that:
§ 200-102. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall have, for the
purpose of this article, the meanings set forth herein:
CUSTODIAN—Any adult person, 21 years of age or older, responsible for the care and
custody of a minor.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business carried on for a profit or
any place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is invited.
GUARDIAN—Any person, other than a parent, who has legal guardianship of a minor.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
PARENT — The natural or adoptive parent of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, highway, road, park, playground, public
building, vacant lot or parking area open to the general public.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middletown.
§ 200-103. Curfew for minors.
A. A serious situation has been created by a substantial increase in the number and in
the seriousness of acts committed by minors against persons and property within
the Township of Middletown, and this has created a menace to the preservation of
public peace, safety, health and welfare.
B. The increase in juvenile delinquency has been caused in part by minors who are
permitted to remain in public places and in certain establishments during the night
hours without adult supervision.
C. The problem of juvenile delinquency can be reduced by regulating the hours during
which minors may remain in public places and in certain establishments without
adult supervision and by imposing certain duties and responsibilities upon the
parents or other adult persons who have care and custody of minors.
A. It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain idle or play in or upon any public place
or any establishment or to wander or stroll upon public streets or rights-of-way
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, except that, on
Fridays and Saturdays, the hours shall be 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. of the
following day.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following minors:
§ 200-101 CURFEW § 200-103
200:3
§ 200-104. Enforcement and penalties.
§ 200-105. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13;
6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section of this article
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(1) Any minor who is accompanied by his parent, guardian or custodian.
(2) Any minor who is on an errand or other legitimate business directed by his
parent, guardian or custodian.
(3) Any minor who is engaged in lawful employment during the aforesaid hours.
A. Any police officer who finds a minor violating § 200-103 shall obtain the
information from such minor that is required in order to issue a citation to the
minor. The minor shall thereupon be instructed to proceed to his home forthwith. A
copy of the citation and a written notice shall be mailed to the parent, legal
guardian, or custodian of the minor by the Chief of Police, advising of the violation
of § 200-103. [Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No.
09-04]
B. If the minor fails to heed the direction of a police officer to proceed to his home
forthwith, then the minor shall be taken to the Police Department and the parent,
guardian or custodian of such minor shall be notified to come and take charge of
the minor. If the parent, guardian or custodian cannot be located or fails to come
and take charge of the minor, the juvenile authorities shall be contacted to
determine the further disposition of the minor.
C. If a person suspected of violating § 200-103 refuses to satisfactorily identify
himself to a police officer, that person shall be taken to the Police Department,
where the police shall attempt to identify the suspect. If it is determined that the
suspect is a minor, then the parent, guardian or custodian of such minor shall be
notified to come and take charge of the minor. If the parent, guardian or custodian
cannot be located or fails to come and take charge of the minor, the juvenile
authorities shall be contacted to determine the further disposition of the minor.
§ 200-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 200-105
200:4
ARTICLE II
Daytime Curfew
[Adopted 6-29-2000 by Ord. No. 00-11 (Ch. 6, Part 7, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 200-201. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COMPULSORY SCHOOL AGE — As defined by the Public School Code of 1949,
the period of a child's life from the time the child's parents elect to have the child enter
school until the age of 17 years. The term shall not include any child who holds a
certificate of graduation from a regularly accredited senior high school.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business carried on for profit or
any place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is invited.
GUARDIAN—Any person, other than a parent, who has legal guardianship of a student
or is a person in a parental relation having control or charge of any student.
HOME EDUCATION PROGRAM — A program conducted, in compliance with the
School Code, by the parent or guardian or such person having legal custody of the child
or children.
PARENT — The natural or adoptive parents of a student.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, highway, road, park, playground, public
building, vacant lot or parking area open to the general public, including the interior of
any motor vehicle being operated upon or parked upon or standing in or upon any such
areas.
SCHOOL—Any institution, public or private, authorized and/or certified by the School
Code.
SCHOOL ATTENDANCE OR TRUANCY OFFICER — Person or persons employed
by the School District, in accordance with the Public School Code of 1949, as amended,
whose duties shall be to enforce the provisions of the Public School Code of 1949, as
amended, for compulsory attendance.[Added 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 07-05]
SCHOOL CODE — The Public School Code of 1949, as amended.
SCHOOL DAY — The time period of any day that students are required to attend
school.
SCHOOL TERM — The period of time elapsing between the opening of schools in the
fall of one year and the closing of schools in the spring of the following year.
STUDENT — Any person of compulsory school age.
TOWNSHIP — Middletown Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
UNAUTHORIZED ABSENCE — Any absence from school by a student which is not
excused or permitted by school authorities.
VOCATION EDUCATION PROGRAM — A program conducted in compliance with
the School Code, the purpose of which is to fit an individual to pursue effectively a
recognized profitable employment.
§ 200-201 CURFEW § 200-202
200:5
§ 200-202. Curfew for students.
§ 200-203. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful for any student required by the School Code to attend school to
remain in or play in or upon any public place or at any establishment or to wander
or stroll upon public streets or rights-of-way when such student is required by the
School Code to attend school during the school day.
B. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any student who:
(1) Has attained the age of 16 years and who is regularly engaged in any useful
and lawful employment or service during the time the schools are in session
and who holds an employment certificate issued according to law.
(2) Has been examined by an approved mental health treatment facility or by a
person certified as a school psychologist or psychological examiner and has
been found to be unable to profit from further public school attendance and
who has been reported to the Board of School Directors and excused in
accordance with the regulations prescribed by the State Board of Education.
(3) Has attained the age of 15 years and is engaged in farm work or domestic
service in a private home on a permit issued by the School Board or the
designated school official of the school district of the student's residence, in
accordance with regulations which the Superintendent of Public Instruction is
hereby authorized to prescribe.
(4) Has attained the age of 14 years and is engaged in farm work or domestic
service in a private home on a permit issued as provided in Subsection B(3) of
this section and who has satisfactorily completed, either in public or private
schools, the equivalent of the highest grade of the elementary school
organization prevailing in the public schools of the district in which he resides,
if the issuance of such permit has first been recommended by the District
Superintendent of Schools having supervision of the schools of the district
where such child resides or by the principal of the private school where such
child is enrolled and the reason therefor has been approved by the
Superintendent of Public Instruction.
(5) Is engaged in a home education program.
(6) Is engaged in a vocational education program and is out of school pursuant to
the guidelines of such program.
A. Any person who shall fail to comply with this article shall, on summary conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $300 and to pay court costs. Failure
to pay fine or perform community service will result in referral to juvenile
probation and not in the issuance of an arrest warrant.
B. The student must appear at a hearing established by the Magisterial District Judge.
C. In lieu of or in addition to any other sentence imposed under this section, the
Magisterial District Judge may order the student to perform community service for
a period not to exceed six months.
§ 200-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 200-203
200:6
§ 200-204. Enforcement. [Amended 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 07-05]
D. A first-time offender who maintains perfect attendance for a period of 30 days
following his/her offense may be permitted to have the citation issued under this
article dismissed.
A. Any school attendance officer, truancy officer or police officer who finds a student
violating this article may obtain the information from such student that is required
in order to issue a citation to the student. A copy of the citation and/or written notice
shall be provided to the parent or guardian of the student by the school attendance
officer, truancy officer or police officer or their designee, advising of the violation.
The student should then be transported to school.
B. Any school attendance officer, truancy officer or police officer who is notified by a
parent, guardian or person in parental relation of a student who willfully refuses to
attend school shall obtain permission from the parent, guardian or person in parental
relation to enter the residence of the parent, guardian or person in parental relation
and issue a citation for the violation of the article to the student and return the
student to the public school in which the student is or should be enrolled.
C. If a person suspected of violating this article refuses to satisfactorily identify
himself to a school attendance officer, truancy officer or police officer, that person
may be temporarily detained to permit the school attendance officer, truancy officer
or police officer reasonable opportunity to determine his/her identify. If it is
determined that the suspect is a student subject to compulsory school attendance,
then the parent or guardian of such student shall be notified and, unless requested
by such parent, guardian or person in parental relation to place said student in a
school other than the public school, the student may be placed in the public school
in which the student is or should be enrolled.27
27. Editor's Note: Original § 705 of the 2009 Code, Effective date, amended 2-27-2001 by Ord. No. 01-03 and 10-1-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-14, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-18-2003 by Ord. No. 03-21.
§ 200-203 CURFEW § 200-204
200:7

Chapter 208
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 320. Warrantless arrest — See Ch. 481.
§ 208-101. Disorderly conduct prohibited.
Disorderly conduct, as defined in the Pennsylvania Crimes Code of 1972 (18 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 5503), is hereby prohibited within the Township of Middletown. A person is guilty of
disorderly conduct if he:
§ 208-102. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each section of this chapter
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Engages in fighting or in threatening, violent or tumultuous behavior.
B. Makes unreasonable noise.
C. Creates a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act which serves no
legitimate purpose of the actor, provided that, as used in this section, the word
"public" means affecting or likely to affect persons in a place to which the public or
a substantial group has access. Among the places included are streets, alleys and
sidewalks, transport facilities, schools, prisons, apartment houses, places of
business or amusement, any neighborhood, or any premises which are open to the
public.
§ 200-204 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 208-102
208:1

Chapter 242
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
§ 242-101. Discharge of firearms prohibited.
Except in necessary defense of person and property and except as provided in § 242-103
of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to use, fire or discharge any gun or
other firearm within the Township of Middletown.
§ 242-102. Restrictions on use of air rifles, bow and arrows, similar devices.
[Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle, air pistol, spring gun, spring
pistol, BB gun, bow and arrow, or similar device, or any implement that is not a firearm
but which impels a pellet of any kind with a force that can reasonably be expected to
cause bodily harm, at any place within the Township of Middletown, except as provided
in § 242-103 of this chapter and except on a target range which is properly constructed
to trap or stop the projectile and appropriately buffered from adjacent properties so as
not to pose a threat to the safety and welfare of the neighborhood, as ascertained by the
Chief of Police.
§ 242-103. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:
§ 242-104. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each section of this chapter
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Persons licensed to hunt in this commonwealth while actually engaged in hunting
where permitted under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
B. Members of any organization incorporated under laws of this commonwealth
engaged in target shooting upon the grounds or property belonging to or under the
control of such organization; and
C. Any law enforcement officers when used in the discharge of their official duties.
§ 208-102 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS § 242-104
242:1

Chapter 249
(RESERVED)
§ 242-104 (RESERVED) § 242-104
249:1

Chapter 254
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction standards — See Ch. 190.
Soil erosion, sedimentation and grading control — See Ch.
411.
Stormwater management and earth disturbance — See Ch.
430.
Stormwater management for Neshaminy Creek
watershed — See Ch. 431.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 440.
Zoning — See Ch. 500.
§ 242-104 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 242-104
254:1

ARTICLE I
Authority
§ 254-101. Statutory authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage of the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,28 delegated the responsibility to
local governmental units to adopt floodplain management regulations to promote public
health, safety, and the general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Middletown does hereby order as follows.
28. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 254-101 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 254-101
254:3

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 254-201. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 254-202. Applicability.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation to undertake, or
cause to be undertaken, any construction or development anywhere within the Township
of Middletown unless a permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 254-203. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in effect in
identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full
force and effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive. If there is any
conflict between any of the provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 254-204. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter shall be
declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision shall not affect the remaining
portions of the Ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this
purpose the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 254-205. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent
or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units, and
its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on accepted engineering methods
of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made
or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This
chapter does not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas or that land
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of Middletown or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 254-201 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 254-205
254:5

ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 254-301. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
§ 254-302. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is undertaken within
any area of the Township of Middletown.
§ 254-303. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Director of Building & Zoning is hereby appointed to administer and enforce
this chapter and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The
Floodplain Administrator may 1) fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in
these regulations; 2) delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these
regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other
employees; or 3) enter into a written agreement or written contract with another
agency or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these
regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall
not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the participation
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of
Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Township Manager.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been determined
that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with the
requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
application for the permit to determine if all other necessary government permits
required by state and federal laws have been obtained, such as those required by the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);29 the
Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);30
the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);31 and the U.S.
Clean Water Act, § 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this
determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any development permit,
the Floodplain Administrator shall review the history of repairs to the subject
building, so that any cumulative substantial damage concerns can be addressed
before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in
29. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
30. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
31. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 254-301 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 254-303
254:7
§ 254-304. Application procedures and requirements.
compliance with the information provided on the permit application and with all
applicable municipal laws and ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections
during and upon completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall have the
authority to enter any building, structure, premises or development in the identified
floodplain area, upon presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does not comply
with the permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has
been a false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain
Administrator shall revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board of
Supervisors for whatever action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records associated
with the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, finished
construction elevation data, permitting, inspection and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a biennial
report to FEMA concerning community participation in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
I. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments of the
Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person identified. However,
the ultimate responsibility lies with the person identified in the Floodplain
Ordinance as the Floodplain Administrator/Manager.
J. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34 Pa. Code
and the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and the 2009 International
Residential Code (IRC) or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the Floodplain
Administrator on forms supplied by the Township of Middletown. Such application
shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) The name and address of the contractor.
(4) The site location, including address.
(5) A listing of other permits required.
(6) A brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a breakout
of flood-related cost and the market value of the building before the flood
damage occurred where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the proposed
§ 254-303 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 254-304
254:8
construction as well as any existing buildings or structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or partially within
any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits shall provide all the necessary
information in sufficient detail and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator
to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and
conform with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and
ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used; and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment, and
other service facilities have been designed and located to prevent water entry
or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other pertinent
information as may be required by the Floodplain Administrator to make the above
determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch being
equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and other
improvements, including the location of any existing or proposed
subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, identified
floodplain areas, and, if available, information pertaining to the floodway
and the flow of water, including direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, drawn at
suitable scale, showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based upon
North American Vertical Datum of 1988.
§ 254-304 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 254-304
254:9
§ 254-305. Review of application by other agencies and individuals.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or development
in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval may be submitted by
the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g.,
Planning Commission, Municipal Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
(b) The elevation of the base flood.
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa. Code, the
2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing measures
and corresponding elevations.
(b) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed development
within any identified floodplain area (see § 254-401), when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, will not cause any
increase in the base flood elevation.
(c) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect,
which states that the proposed construction or development has been
adequately designed to withstand the pressures, velocities, impact and
uplift forces associated with the base flood. Such statement shall include
a description of the type and extent of floodproofing measures which
have been incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(d) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with § 254-503F,
Storage, and § 254-504, Development that may endanger human life,
including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or substances
referred to in §§ 254-503F and 254-504 which are intended to be
used, produced, stored or otherwise maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the design of the
proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous
materials or substances listed in § 254-504 during a base flood.
(e) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's "Planning Module for Land Development."
(f) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the municipality
based upon the estimated cost of the proposed construction as determined by the
Floodplain Administrator.
§ 254-304 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 254-306
254:10
§ 254-306. Changes to application, permit or plans.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes of any kind
shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other
documents submitted with the application without the written consent or approval of the
Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any such change shall be in writing and shall be
submitted by the applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 254-307. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard which shall
be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard
shall show the number of the permit, the date of its issuance, and be signed by the
Floodplain Administrator.
§ 254-308. Start of construction; time limits.
§ 254-309. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within 180 days
after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work shall also be completed
within 12 months after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire
unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The
issuance of development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The "actual start of construction" means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the
applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Floodplain
Administrator to approve such a request and the original permit is compliant with
the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the time the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized municipal
representative determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has
been a violation of any provisions of this chapter, or of any regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, the Floodplain Administrator shall give notice of such alleged
violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
§ 254-306 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 254-309
254:11
§ 254-310. Appeals.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance.
(3) Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for the
performance of any act it requires.
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may require;
provided, however, that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been
properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has been
served with such notice by any other method authorized or required by the
laws of this state.
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or
provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order
of direction of the Floodplain Administrator or any other authorized employee of
the municipality shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction, shall
pay a fine to Township of Middletown of not less than $25 nor more than $600 plus
costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby
reserved, including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this chapter.
The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of or noncompliance with this
chapter shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All
such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or any
structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated in
noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the Board of Supervisors to be
a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain Administrator
concerning the administration of the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after
the decision, determination or action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the appeal in
accordance with the Municipal Planning Code and any other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may seek relief
therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this state, including the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.32
32. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 254-309 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 254-310
254:12
ARTICLE IV
Floodplain Areas
§ 254-401. Identification.
§ 254-402. Description.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of Township of Middletown, classified as special flood hazard areas
(SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated March 21, 2017, and issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or the most recent revision
thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study; and
(2) Any community-identified flood hazard areas.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and
amendments, are hereby adopted by Township of Middletown and declared to be a
part of this chapter.
A. The Floodway Area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the FIRM as
floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without increasing
the water surface elevation by more than one foot at any point. This term shall also
include floodway areas which have been identified in other available studies or
sources of information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development, shall be permitted unless it
has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed
in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed
encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development shall be
allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM
included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been
provided.
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE
Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base
flood elevations have been provided and a floodway has been delineated.
(2) AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
§ 254-401 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 254-402
254:13
§ 254-403. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of Supervisors
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the
need for such revision. However, prior to any such change to the special flood hazard
area, approval must be obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but
not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, a community
shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting
technical or scientific data. See § 254-501B for situations where FEMA notification is
required.
§ 254-404. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an initial
determination shall be made by the Township of Middletown, and any party aggrieved
by this decision or determination may appeal to the Board of Supervisors. The burden of
elevations have been provided but no floodway has been determined.
(a) No permit shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any AE Area/District without floodway unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development
would not, together with all other existing and anticipated development,
increase the BFE at any point.
(b) No new construction or development shall be located within the area
measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse,
unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the FIRM
included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base flood elevations have
been provided. For these areas, elevation and floodway information from other
federal, state, or other acceptable sources shall be used when available. Where other
acceptable information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be determined
by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain area
which is nearest the construction site. In lieu of the above, the municipality may
require the applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall
certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical
concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient
detail to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality.
D. Community-identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas where Township of
Middletown has identified local flood hazard or ponding areas, as delineated and
adopted on a Local Flood Hazard Map using best available topographic data and
locally derived information such as flood of record, historic high-water marks, soils
or approximate study methodologies. These areas include but are not limited to any
natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, canal, waterway, gully or
ravine in which water flows in a definite direction continuously or intermittently.
§ 254-402 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 254-404
254:14
proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 254-405. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other corporate boundary
changes are proposed or have occurred, the community shall review flood hazard data
affecting the lands subject to boundary changes. The community shall adopt and enforce
floodplain regulations in areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes
which meet or exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 254-404 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 254-405
254:15

ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 254-501. General requirements.
§ 254-502. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any
watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such
action have been notified by the municipality, and until all required permits or
approvals have first been obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any
watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity will not reduce or impede
the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation
of any watercourse.
B. When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments: any
development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within the floodway; or
any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone AE without a designated
floodway which will cause a rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation;
or alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing
culverts and bridges), the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to permitting the
encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map change and
prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a community shall provide
evidence to FEMA of the adoption of floodplain management ordinances
incorporating the increased base flood elevations and/or revised floodway
reflecting the post-project condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community shall provide
as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map revision upon receipt of
such certifications in accordance with 44 CFR 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within any identified
floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions
contained in this chapter and any other applicable codes, ordinances and
regulations.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to
or above the regulatory flood elevation.
§ 254-501 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 254-502
254:17
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on the FIRM,
any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated up to or above the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 254-402C of this chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009
International Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential
Code (IRC), or the most recent revisions, thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa.
Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be utilized, where they are
more restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated up to or above the regulatory flood elevation or
be designed and constructed so that the space enclosed below the regulatory
flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the FIRM, any
new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated or completely floodproofed up to or above the
regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with § 254-402C of this
chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with the W1 or
W2 space classification standards contained in the publication entitled "Flood-
Proofing Regulations" published by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect which states that the proposed design and methods of construction
are in conformance with the above-referenced standards.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009
International Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential
Code (IRC), or the most recent revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa.
Code (Chapters 401 through 405 as amended) shall be utilized, where they are
more restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Basements are prohibited.
(2) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements) which will
be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental
§ 254-502 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 254-502
254:18
storage in an area other than a basement shall be designed and constructed
to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose
of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed
space" also includes crawl spaces.
(3) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or
devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that
would constitute a substantial improvement as defined in this chapter must comply
with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance
requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National Register of
Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the
Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption
from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need not be
elevated or floodproofed to remain dry but shall comply, at a minimum, with the
following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation but shall be
limited to the parking of vehicles or to the storage of tools, material, and
equipment related to the principal use or activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 500 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least obstruction to
the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory flood
elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as furnaces,
heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the entry
and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the
§ 254-502 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 254-502
254:19
§ 254-503. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and development
proposed within any identified floodplain area:
walls. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other coverings
or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
A. Fill.
(1) Within any identified floodplain area the use of fill shall be prohibited. If a
variance is obtained it must be per the Engineer's approval and is in accordance
with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions apply. If fill is
used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all points;
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall not be
permitted;
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance to
erosion, scouring, or settling;
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless substantiated
data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and approved by the
Floodplain Administrator; and
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow
of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall ensure proper
drainage along streets and provide positive drainage away from buildings. The
system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto
adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities and systems
shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent the discharge
of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
§ 254-502 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 254-503
254:20
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state and local
regulations for such systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be
located so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a
flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No. 348,
"Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages," and the International
Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems,
shall be located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance
of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than one foot
below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in times of
flooding could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and not listed in
§ 254-504, Development that may endanger human life, shall be stored at or above
the regulatory flood elevation or floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures shall be
designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the
flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow and
height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be securely
anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to
the flooring grain, without causing structural damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine
or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed
and constructed of materials that are water-resistant and will withstand
inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
§ 254-503 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 254-503
254:21
§ 254-504. Development that may endanger human life.
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described in Subsection
A below shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply (§ 254-504B, C and D):
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine
or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine or water-resistant
paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the base flood
elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be dropped from
above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units, and
other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be located
below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent
the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into
floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems
in the event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and specifications
contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as amended, and not limited to
the following provisions shall apply to the above and other sections and subsections
of this chapter, to the extent that they are more restrictive and supplement the
requirements of this chapter:
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof: Sections
801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612 and 3402 and Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109 and R322 and Appendix E and Appendix
J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,33 and the
regulations adopted by the Department of Community and Economic Development
as required by the Act, any new or substantially improved structure which will be
used for the production or storage of any of the following dangerous materials or
substances; or will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply
33. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 254-503 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 254-504
254:22
of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject to the
provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable provisions. The
following is a list of materials and substances that are considered dangerous to
human life:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides)
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated
Sodium
Sulphur and sulphur products
B. Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved structure
of the kind described in Subsection A above shall be prohibited within the area
measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
C. Within any Floodway Area, any structure of the kind described in Subsection A
above shall be prohibited. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area,
any new or substantially improved residential structure of the kind described in
Subsection A above shall be elevated to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2
feet above base flood elevation and built in accordance with §§ 254-501, 254-502
and 254-503.
D. New or substantially improved nonresidential structure.
(1) Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind described in
Subsection A above shall be built in accordance with §§ 254-501, 254-502 and
254-503, including:
(a) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up to at
§ 254-504 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 254-504
254:23
§ 254-505. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals in identified floodplain areas
(including community-identified flood hazard areas) where base flood elevation data
are not available shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses
that determine base flood elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be
prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision and Letter of Map Revision. Submittal requirements
and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
§ 254-506. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during the
course of a base flood.
(2) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards
for completely dry floodproofing contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing
Regulations" (United States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended
March 1992), or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
A. Within any Floodway Area/District, manufactured homes shall be prohibited. If a
variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the
following provisions apply.
B. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be prohibited
within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
C. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured homes, and
any improvements thereto, shall:
(1) Be placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least 1 1/2
feet above base flood elevation; and
(3) Be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
(4) Have all ductwork and utilities, including HVAC/heat pump, elevated to the
regulatory flood elevation.
D. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation instructions as provided by the manufacturer. Where the
applicant cannot provide the above information, the requirements of Appendix E of
the 2009 International Residential Building Code or the "U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code Chapters
401 through 405 shall apply.
E. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the 2009 IBC and
the 2009 IRC, or the most recent revisions thereto, and 34 Pa. Code, as amended,
§ 254-504 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 254-506
254:24
§ 254-507. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
where appropriate and/or applicable to units where the manufacturer's standards
for anchoring cannot be provided or were not established for the proposed units'
installation.
A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; and
C. Be removed from the floodplain when a flood warning is issued; or meet the permit
requirements for manufactured homes in § 254-506.
§ 254-506 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 254-507
254:25

ARTICLE VI
Prohibited Activities
§ 254-601. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the Department of
Community and Economic Development to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act,34 the following activities shall be prohibited within any identified
floodplain area:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities, or the construction,
enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of
the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision, or substantial improvement to an existing
manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision.
34. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 254-601 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 254-601
254:27

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 254-701. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements to be made
to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement is made to any existing
structure, the provisions of § 254-702 shall apply.
§ 254-702. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to an existing
structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within any
identified floodplain area that would cause any increase in base flood elevation
(BFE). In A Area/District(s), BFEs are determined using the methodology in
§ 254-402C.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an
existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value shall
constitute a substantial improvement and shall be undertaken only in full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa. Code, as
amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
D. Within any Floodway Area/District (see § 254-402A), no new construction or
development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
E. Within any AE Area/District without floodway (see § 254-402B), no new
construction or development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
F. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an
existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its market value, shall
be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest extent possible.
G. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind that meets
the definition of "cumulative substantial damage" shall be undertaken only in full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 254-701 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 254-702
254:29

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 254-801. Grant of relief authorized.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in an exceptional
hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner, the Zoning Hearing Board
may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of the requirements.
§ 254-802. Procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 254-310 and the following:
(1) No variance shall be granted within any identified floodplain area that would
cause any increase in BFE. In A Area/District, BFEs are determined using the
methodology in § 254-402C.
(2) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other
requirements pertaining specifically to development that may endanger human
life (§ 254-504).
(3) No variance shall be granted for prohibited activities (Article VI).
(4) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to
provide relief.
(5) In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare and to achieve the objectives of this
chapter.
(6) Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board shall notify the
applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(7) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will neither.
[1] Result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense;
nor
§ 254-801 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 254-802
254:31
[2] Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public or conflict
with any other applicable state or local ordinances and regulations.
(8) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be
maintained by the Township of Middletown. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to the
FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed and
constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the one-percent-annual-chance
flood.
§ 254-802 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 254-802
254:32
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 254-901. Interpretation of terms.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter shall be
interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
§ 254-902. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same lot with, and
of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD—A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or one-percent-annualchance
flood).
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base flood as it
passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in cubic feet per second
(cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all
sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls
and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human
habitation.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Flood-related damages sustained by a
structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market
value of the structure before the damages occurred.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures; the placement of manufactured
homes; streets and other paving; utilities; filling, grading and excavation; mining;
dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of
land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION—A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or
the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
§ 254-901 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 254-902
254:33
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate
Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial
or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse, and/
or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface waters from any
source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real
estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that includes all
of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce floodplain regulations.
It will always include the area identified as the special flood hazard area on the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Study but may include additional areas
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained
by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing
to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district
preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which have been
approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with
historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior;
or
(1)
(2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
D.
§ 254-902 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 254-902
254:34
identified by the community. See §§ 254-401 and 254-402 for the specifics on what
areas the community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area, used solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage, in an area other than a
basement area is not considered the lowest floor of a building, provided that such
space is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable
nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes park
trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site
for more than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after March 21, 2017, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. Any construction started after December 4, 1979, and before March 21, 2017,
is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided that the
start of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation,
firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity
whatsoever, which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after the community's initial
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated December 4, 1979, whichever is later, and,
as such, would be required to be compliant with the regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the community's
initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated December 4, 1979, whichever is later,
and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with the regulations of the National
Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis.
B. Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal projections.
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck.
§ 254-902 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 254-902
254:35
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION—The base flood elevation (BFE) or estimated
flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a freeboard safety factor of
1 1/2 feet.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain subject to a
one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the FIRM as
Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION—Includes substantial improvement and other proposed
new development and means the date the permit was issued, provided that the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days after the date of the permit and shall be completed
within 12 months after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is
granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any
work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any
means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes
in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by
the court for distribution to heirs, or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot
development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market
value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term
includes structures which have incurred substantial damage or cumulative substantial
damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state
or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe
living conditions.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 254-902 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 254-902
254:36
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code adopted
by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new construction in
all municipalities, whether administered by the municipality, a third party or the
Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial buildings,
the code adopted the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building
Code (IBC), by reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state
floodplain construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain
management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant
with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other
development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5)
is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 254-902 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 254-902
254:37

ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 254-1001. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on March 21, 2017, and shall remain in force until
modified, amended or rescinded by Township of Middletown, Bucks County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 254-1001 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 254-1001
254:39

Chapter 264
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Towns Against Graffiti funding — See Ch. 108.
§ 254-1001 GRAFFITI § 254-1001
264:1

ARTICLE I
Graffiti
[Adopted 10-28-1997 by Ord. No. 97-17 (Ch. 10, Part 4, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 264-101. Scope.
This article shall be known as the "Graffiti Ordinance of the Township of Middletown"
and shall apply to all graffiti occurring within the limits of this jurisdiction.
§ 264-102. Definitions.
The following words, terms or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section.
BROAD-TIPPED INDELIBLE MARKER — Any felt-tipped marker or similar
implement which contains fluid which is not water-soluble and which has a flat or angled
writing surface 1/2 inch or greater.
CONSENT — Voluntary agreement by a person.
GRAFFITI — Every name, identification, description, crude drawing, announcement,
display, illustration, insignia or symbol (including any letter, word, numeral, emblem
or combination thereof), other than advertising which is otherwise provided for by
Township ordinances, which, without authorization, is marked, written, drawn, painted,
scratched or affixed directly to or upon any subject or structure.
MINOR — A person who has not reached the age of 18 years of age.
OWNER — Any and all persons with legal and/or equitable title to real property in the
Township.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
PROPERTY—Any real estate, including improvements thereon, and tangible property,
including, but not limited to, newsboxes, newsstands, utility poles, public telephones,
tree planters and other items of street furniture.
§ 264-103. Marking graffiti.
No person shall make graffiti of any type on any building, structure or tangible personal
property.
§ 264-104. Possession of graffiti instruments.
No minor shall have in his or her possession any aerosol container of spray or broadtipped
indelible marker while on any public property, highway, street, sidewalk or park,
or while on any private property unless the owner or person in possession of the property
knows of the minor's possession of the aerosol container or marker and has consented to
the minor's possession while on his or her property.
§ 264-105. Removal of graffiti required.
No person owning or occupying any property within the Township of Middletown shall
§ 264-101 GRAFFITI § 264-105
264:3
permit any graffiti to accumulate or otherwise remain on any property so as to be visible
to the public.
§ 264-106. Notice to remove.
Upon discovery of graffiti, any authorized person shall issue written notice to the owner,
occupant or other responsible agent of any premises whereon graffiti is present in
violation of the provisions of this article, directing and requiring such person to remove
such graffiti. In the event that graffiti is not removed within 10 days from the date of
mailing of this first notice, a second notice to remove and request for consent to allow
the Township to enter upon the property for the purpose of graffiti removal at the owner's
expense shall be issued.
§ 264-107. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
A. Any person who shall violate, fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding $1,000 and costs and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation of this
article continues shall be considered a separate offense.
B. If the owner, occupant or other responsible agent of the property fails to remove
graffiti or give consent for removal within 10 days after the second notice of
violation has been issued, the Township may proceed to remove the graffiti itself or
by contract.
C. Except where the legal fees, administrative and filing costs exceed the cost of
removal, a bill for costs of removal shall be delivered to the property owner,
occupant or other responsible agent and, in the event of nonpayment, the Township
may file a lien against the property in the amount of such costs. Liability for costs
of removal shall be in addition to liability for any fine imposed.
§ 264-105 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 264-107
264:4
ARTICLE II
Sale of Instruments
[Adopted 10-28-1997 by Ord. No. 97-18 (Ch. 13, Part 11, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 264-201. Definitions.
The following words, terms or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section.
BROAD-TIPPED INDELIBLE MARKER — Any felt-tipped marker or similar
implement which contains fluid which is not water-soluble and which has a flat or angled
writing surface 1/2 inch or greater.
GRAFFITI — Every name, identification, description, crude drawing, announcement,
display, illustration, insignia or symbol (including any letter, word, numeral, emblem
or combination thereof), other than advertising which is otherwise provided for by
Township ordinances, which, without authorization, is marked, written, drawn, painted,
scratched or affixed directly to or upon any subject or structure.
MINOR — A person who has not reached the age of 18 years of age.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
§ 264-202. Sale to minors prohibited.
No person or firm shall sell, cause to be sold, furnish or convey to any person under
the age of 18 years of age any aerosol container of spray paint or broad-tipped indelible
marker.
§ 264-203. Display of spray paint and markers.
Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial
establishment selling aerosol containers of spray paint or broad-tipped indelible markers
shall:
§ 264-201 GRAFFITI § 264-203
264:5
§ 264-204. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate, fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000
and costs and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
A. Place a sign in clear public view at or near the display of such product substantially
in the following form:
"Graffiti is a crime. Any person defacing real or personal property not his or
her own with paint or any other liquid or device is guilty of a summary offense
punishable by a fine or imprisonment. Punishment may be in the form of
community service or cleanup, at the discretion of the Magisterial District Judge."
B. Place a sign in the direct view of such persons responsible for accepting customer
payment for aerosol containers of spray paint or broad-tipped indelible markers
substantially in the following form:
"It is a violation of the law to sell aerosol containers of spray paint or broad-tipped
indelible markers to persons under 18 years of age. This offense is punishable by
a fine or imprisonment. Punishment may be in the form of community service or
cleanup, at the discretion of the Magisterial District Judge."
C. Store or cause such aerosol containers or marker pens to be stored either:
(1) In the direct line of sight from the cash register work area or any other work
area that is normally continuously occupied while the store is open;
(2) Under continuous electronic or mechanical surveillance or control; or
(3) In a place not accessible to the public in the regular course of business without
employee assistance, pending legal sale of such markers or paint containers.
§ 264-203 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 264-204
264:6
Chapter 271
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency Management Organization — See Ch. 34. Municipal claims and attorneys' fees — See Ch. 316.
§ 264-204 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 264-204
271:1

ARTICLE I
Reimbursement for Cleanup Costs
[Adopted 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 06-06]
§ 271-101. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUSINESS —Any person or persons, nonprofit corporation, corporation or partnership
or other entity engaged in the buying, selling, storing, transferring, transporting and/or
manufacturing of properties, merchandise, chemicals, fuels or goods.
INCIDENT — Any action that occurs from the buying, selling, storing, transferring,
transporting and/or manufacturing of properties, merchandise, chemicals, fuels, goods.
Any chemical, industrial, commercial or transportation accident, fire alarm, explosion,
bomb threat, contamination, power failure, natural resource shortage or other condition
which threatens or causes substantial property damage, human suffering and hardship or
loss of life, which causes the Township of Middletown to deploy resources or expend
funds.[Amended 7-24-2007 by Ord. No. 07-0835]
PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE — County bridge, state highway, Township street, any
navigable waterway or any other roadway or watercourse owned by a governmental unit.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Individual(s) who the Township code or police officer,
after hearing and reviewing all relevant evidence, determines is the cause of the
incident.[Added 7-24-2007 by Ord. No. 07-08]
§ 271-102. Cost of incidents. [Amended 7-24-2007 by Ord. No. 07-08]
A. The responsible party or business on whose premises an incident occurs shall bear
all costs that occur as a direct or consequential result of such incident. In the event
an incident occurs during transportation on a public thoroughfare, or in delivery to
an entity other than a responsible party or business as defined in § 271-101
hereinabove, the entity which or who owns or had custody and/or control of the
vehicle and/or substance involved in the incident shall bear all costs that occur as a
direct or consequential result of such incident. Nothing contained herein shall
prevent such responsible party or business or entity from recovering any incurred
or subsequent costs from a third party whose negligence may have caused such
incident.
B. In the event that any person undertakes, either voluntarily or upon order of the
Middletown Township Emergency Management Organization or other Township
official, to clean up or abate the effects of an incident, the Middletown Township
Emergency Management Organization may take such action as is necessary to
supervise or verify the adequacy of the cleanup or abatement. The responsible party
or business or entity described in § 271-102A hereinabove shall be liable to the
Township for all costs incurred as a result of such supervision or verification.
C. For the purpose of this section, costs of an incident shall include, but are not limited
to, the following:
35. Editor's Note: This ordinance replaced the definition of "accident" with this definition of "incident" and also changed
all references in this article from "business" to "responsible party or business" and from "accident" to "incident."
§ 271-101 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 271-102
271:3
§ 271-103. Most restrictive requirements apply.
Whenever the requirements of this article are in conflict with other requirements of the
ordinances of Middletown Township, the most restrictive or those imposing the higher
standards shall govern.
§ 271-104. Violations and penalties.
If a responsible party does not comply with § 271-102E of this article and is found by a
court of competent jurisdiction to have violated that section, upon conviction, said party
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of no more than $1,000 and no less than $300 plus court
costs and attorney's fees. Each twenty-four-hour period that the responsible party does
not comply with § 271-102E shall constitute a separate offense. This fine shall be in
addition to any judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction for the underlying
costs of cleanup as defined in § 271-102D of this article.
(1) Expenses incurred by police, fire and/or emergency medical services.
(2) Actual labor costs of Middletown Township personnel, including benefits and
administrative overhead.
(3) Costs of consultants or others preparing reports concerning the incident.
(4) Costs of equipment operations.
(5) Costs of materials obtained directly by the Township.
(6) Cost of any contractual labor and materials for cleanup and/or abatement.
(7) Costs of the Township Solicitor and/or Township Engineer connected with the
incident.
D. The costs of such incident as set forth in § 271-102C hereinabove shall be
determined by the Township Manager or his/her designee.
E. Such costs for all emergency services rendered shall be paid directly to the
Township through the office of the Middletown Township Emergency
Management Organization within 30 days from the date on which the Township
issues an invoice for such charges.
§ 271-102 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 271-104
271:4
Chapter 283
INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Reimbursement for cleanup of hazardous materials — See
Ch. 271, Art. I.
Municipal claims — See Ch. 316.
§ 271-104 INSURANCE § 271-104
283:1

ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-18 (Ch. 7, Part 3, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 283-101. Treasurer's certificate.
No insurance company, association or exchange ("insurer") doing business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage
to a structure located within the Township of Middletown where the amount recoverable
for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the insurer
is furnished by the Township's Treasurer with a certificate pursuant to § 508(b) of the
Insurance Company Law of 1921, as amended by Act 98 of 1992 and Act 93 of 1994,
and unless there is compliance with the procedures set forth in § 508(c) and (d) of the
Act.36
§ 283-102. Delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or other charges.
§ 283-103. Loss in excess of 60% of limits of liability.
When all Township claims and Township expenses have been paid pursuant to
§ 283-102, or where the Treasurer has issued a certificate described in § 282-102B
indicating that there are no Township claims or Township expenses against the property,
the insurer shall pay the claim of the named insured; provided, however, if the loss
agreed upon by the named insured and the insurer equals or exceeds 60% of the
A. Where there are delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against the
property ("Township claims"), or there are expenses which the Township has
incurred as costs for the removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure
on the property ("Township expenses"), the Township Manager shall immediately
render a bill for such work, if he/she has not already done so.
B. Upon written request of the named insured, which request must specify the tax
description of the property, the name and address of the insurer and the date of
receipt by the insurer of a loss report of the claim, the Township Treasurer shall
furnish a certificate within 14 working days after the request to the insurer; the
certificate (or at his discretion an oral notification confirmed in writing) either:
(1) Stating that there are no unpaid Township claims or Township expenses
against the property; or
(2) Specifying the nature and amount of such claims or expenses, accompanied by
a bill for such amounts. Taxes, assessments, penalties and user charges shall
be deemed delinquent for this purpose if a lien could have been filed for such
claims under applicable law.
C. Upon receipt of a certificate and bill pursuant to Subsection B(2) of the preceding,
the insurer shall transfer to the Treasurer an amount from the insurance proceeds
sufficient to pay such sums prior to making payment to the named insured, subject
to the provisions of § 283-103 below.
36. Editor's Note: See 40 P.S., § 638.
§ 283-101 INSURANCE § 283-103
283:3
aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building or structure, the
following procedures must be followed:
A. The insurer shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the Township Treasurer,
in the aggregate, $2,000 for each $15,000 of such claim or fraction thereof.
B. If at the time a loss report is submitted by the insured such insured has submitted to
the insurer, with a copy to the Township, a contractor's signed estimate of the cost
of removing, repairing or securing the building or other structure less than the
amount calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the insurer shall transfer to
the Treasurer from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate. If
there is more than one insurer, the transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis
by all insurers insuring the building or other structures.
C. Upon receipt of the above-described portion of the insurance proceeds, the
Treasurer shall do the following:
(1) Place the proceeds in a separate fund to be used solely as security against the
total Township expenses anticipated by the Township to be required in
removing, repairing or securing the building or structure as required by this
article. Such costs shall include, without limitation, any engineering, legal or
administrative costs incurred by the Township in connection with such
removal, repair or securing or any proceedings relating thereto.
(2) Mail to the named insured, at the address received from the insurer, a notice
that the proceeds have been received by the Township and that the procedures
under this section shall be followed.
(3) After the transfer, the named insured may submit to the Township a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure, in which event the Treasurer shall, if such estimate
is deemed by the Treasurer to be reasonable, return to the insured the amount
of the funds transferred to the Township in excess of that required to pay the
Township expenses, provided the Township has not commenced to remove,
repair or secure the building or other structure, in which case the Township
will complete the work.
(4) Pay to the Township Manager for reimbursement to the Township general
fund the amount of the Township expenses paid by the Township.
(5) Pay the remaining balance in the funds (without interest) to the named insured
upon receipt of a certificate issued by the Building Inspector or Director of
Licenses and Inspections that the repair, removal or securing of the building or
other structure has been completed in accordance with all applicable codes and
regulations of the Township.
D. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the Township to
recover any deficiency in the amount of Township claims or Township expenses
recovered pursuant to this article or to insurance proceeds by an action at law or
equity to enforce the codes of the Township or enter into an agreement with the
named insured with regard to such other disposition of the proceeds as the
Township may deem reasonable.
§ 283-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 283-104
283:4
§ 283-104. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or insurer who violates the provisions of this
article or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements hereof shall be liable,
upon summary conviction, to fines and penalties not exceeding $1,000, in addition to
any other recovery allowed by law, which fines and penalties may be collected by suit
or summary proceeding brought in the name of the Township before any Magisterial
District Judge or recovered as debts of the like amount are now by law recoverable.
§ 283-104 INSURANCE § 283-104
283:5

Chapter 301
MASSAGE PARLORS
§ 301-101. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings ascribed to them:
ALTERNATIVE THERAPY — The practice of an individual who uses touch to affect
the energy systems, acupoints, qi meridians or channels of energy of the human body
while engaged within the scope of practice of a profession with established standards and
ethics. Such practices include: acupressure, Asian bodywork therapy, polarity therapy
bodywork, qigong, Reiki, shiatsu and tui na; reflexology; the practice of an individual
who uses touch, words and directed movement to deepen awareness of existing patterns
of movement in the body and to suggest new possibilities of movement, while engaged
within the scope of practice of a profession with established standards and ethics; and/
or any massage-like activity that does not meet the definition of "massage therapy" set
forth hereinafter.
ALTERNATIVE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT — Any place where alternative
therapy is administered for the payment of a fee or other compensation or consideration
but not including a hospital, nursing home, medical clinic or the office of a physician,
surgeon, physical therapist, chiropractor or osteopath currently licensed as such by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any place in the Township where massage therapy is
administered for the payment of a fee or other compensation or consideration, but
not including a hospital, nursing home, medical clinic or the office of a physician,
surgeon, physical therapist, chiropractor or osteopath currently licensed as such by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
MASSAGE THERAPY — The application of a system of structured touch, pressure,
movement, holding and treatment of the soft tissue manifestations of the human body
in which the primary intent is to enhance the health and well-being of the client
without limitation, except as provided in this chapter. The term includes the external
application of water, heat, cold, lubricants or other topical preparations, lymphatic
techniques, myofascial release techniques and the use of electromechanical devices
which mimic or enhance the action of the massage techniques. The term does not
include: the diagnosis or treatment of impairment, illness, disease or disability; a medical
procedure; a chiropractic manipulation, adjustment, physical therapy mobilization;
manual therapy; therapeutic exercise; electrical stimulation; ultrasound or prescription
of medicines for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic, physical therapy,
occupational therapy, podiatry or other practice of the healing arts is required, or any
other area licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
REGULATED ESTABLISHMENT — Any place in the Township requiring a license
under this chapter.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA — The genitals, pubic area, anus or perineum of any
person, and the vulva and breasts of a female.
THERAPY ROOM — Any separate area within a massage therapy establishment or
§ 283-104 MASSAGE PARLORS § 301-101
301:1
alternative therapy establishment where services are to be rendered.
§ 301-102. License requirements; fee.
A. License requirements for massage parlors. Requirements for the issuance of a
license as a massage parlor are as follows:
(1) All massage parlors must register with and be licensed by the Township. All
massage therapists practicing massage therapy at a massage parlor must be
licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The owner and/or operator
of a massage parlor shall register their business as well as all massage
therapists and provide copies of the licenses issued by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for all massage therapists to the Township on a fully completed
application provided by the Township. The application must be filed, in
person, by the person seeking the license during regular business hours. The
owner and operator of the massage parlor shall have an ongoing obligation to
update the names of all massage therapists practicing in the establishment and
all other persons employed by the massage parlor. The license fee for such
license shall be $100 or as determined from time to time by resolution of
Council.
(2) All massage parlors must provide proof that all other required business
licenses have been obtained and provide confirmation from the taxing entity
that arrangements have been made for the payment of required business
privilege tax, local service tax and/or earned income tax for its employees.
B. License requirements for alternative therapy establishments. Requirements for the
issuance of a license as an alternative therapy establishment are as follows:
(1) All alternative therapy establishments must register with and be licensed by
the Township. The owner and/or operator of an alternative therapy
establishment shall register their business on a fully completed application
provided by the Township. The application must be filed in person by the
person seeking the license during regular business hours. The owner and
operator of the alternative therapy establishment shall have an ongoing
obligation to update the names of all employees. The license fee for such
license shall be determined from time to time by resolution of Council.
(2) All alternative therapy establishments must provide proof that all other
required business licenses have been obtained and provide confirmation from
the taxing entity that arrangements have been made for the payment of
required business privilege tax, local service tax and/or earned income tax for
their employees.
C. Investigation. Applications for licenses for massage parlors or alternative therapy
establishments shall be referred to the Middletown Township Police Department,
which shall cause an investigation to be made and report the findings to the Director
of Building and Zoning. Applicants shall cooperate with any investigation
conducted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and shall permit access to the
proposed place of business and facilities in conjunction with such investigation. In
addition, each applicant for licenses for massage parlors or alternative therapy
§ 301-101 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 301-102
301:2
§ 301-103. Massage parlor and alternative therapy establishment premises
minimum requirements.
Every massage parlor and alternative therapy establishment shall meet the following
requirements.
establishments applicants must submit the following for themselves and all
employees:
(1) Two forms of identification issued by either the federal or state government
with at least one containing a photograph.
(2) FBI criminal background check per the directions at the FBI website (must be
the sealed and unopened envelope from the FBI).
(3) Signed release permitting Middletown Township Police Department to
conduct a local records check.
D. Granting of license. Within 60 days of the receipt of an application, required
documents set forth above and fee, the Middletown Township Police Chief or his
or her designee shall either grant or deny the license applied for by the applicant.
The license shall be granted, provided that the regulated establishment meets all
minimum requirements set forth hereafter, and the applicant, and all employees
thereof, have not been convicted of or entered a plea of guilty to any felony or have
a felony charge currently pending or has forfeited bail or have been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of Section 5902 of the Crimes Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5902, pertaining to prostitution
and related offenses, or any law of any jurisdiction involving prostitution and
related offenses.
A. Only employees of the respective regulated establishment may offer and provide
services to clients. Independent contractors are specifically prohibited.
B. Regulated establishments may commence operation no earlier than 7:00 a.m. The
hours of operation shall extend no later than 9:00 p.m.
C. All licenses issued by the Township or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be on
display and available for inspection. Price rates charged for any and all therapies
shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available for view
and no charges may be made other than in accordance with such posted rates.
D. No person under the age of 18 years of age shall be permitted to enter or remain on
the premises or receive any massage parlor or alternative therapy unless
accompanied at all times by a parent or legal guardian.
E. There shall be an adequate supply of clean towels, linens and coverings. Towels,
linens and coverings shall not be used by or on more than one patron unless they
have first been laundered and disinfected. Disposable towels, linens and coverings
shall not be used by or on more than one patron. Soiled towels, linens and coverings
shall be deposited in approved receptacles; disposable items shall not be deposited
in the same receptacle as nondisposable items.
F. Instruments used in administering therapies shall not be used on more than one
§ 301-102 MASSAGE PARLORS § 301-103
301:3
patron unless they have first been disinfected. Table pads and reusable table
coverings shall be disinfected after each use.
G. Therapy rooms shall be at least 50 square feet of floor area and shall maintain a
light level of no less than 20 footcandles as metered at three feet above the surface
of the floor. (For illustrative purposes only, such light level is equivalent to light
from a single forty-watt fluorescent lightbulb in the fifty-square-foot room.) Such
rooms shall be accessible only by a door incapable of being locked from either the
exterior or the interior.
H. The owner or duly authorized manager shall be on duty at all times during the hours
a regulated establishment is open for business.
I. The sale and/or the serving of alcoholic beverages shall be strictly prohibited at all
times unless duly licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
J. Animals, except for guide and service animals, shall not be permitted within the
premises.
K. All employees must be at all times fully clothed in clean and opaque clothing that
fully covers the body from the shoulders to the thighs and is no shorter than six
inches above the knee.
L. No patron or persons, other than employees of the regulated establishment, shall
remain on the premises more than one hour after closing. The premises shall not be
used as a dwelling unit and may not have a stove in the premises.
M. Employees shall wash their hands immediately prior to and subsequent to the
administration of any therapies and shall observe hygiene practices as set forth in
the Pennsylvania Massage Law, 63 P.S. § 627.1 et seq., and accompanying
regulations in Chapter 20 of the Pennsylvania Code.
N. It shall be unlawful for any person providing therapies to place their hands upon,
touch, fondle or otherwise have any physical contact with, including massaging, a
sexual or genital area of any other person or to offer to so touch any person in a
sexual or genital area.
O. It shall be unlawful for any employee of a regulated establishment to expose their
sexual or genital area to any customer or other person.
P. For the purposes of ascertaining violations of this chapter and conducting routine
inspections, federal, state and county officials, Code Enforcement Officer(s), health
inspectors, building inspectors, the Fire Marshal or duly authorized fire code
inspectors of the Township, or police officers of the Middletown Township Police
Department shall have the right of entry into the premises of any massage parlor or
alternative therapy establishment during the hours that such regulated establishment
is open for business or occupied during such hours as permitted above.
Q. In the event that the Township Police have probable cause to believe that a
regulated establishment is operating in violation of this chapter, they may inspect
the premises of the regulated establishment for purposes of ensuring compliance
with this chapter during any time it is open for business or otherwise occupied.
§ 301-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 301-104
301:4
§ 301-104. Sale or transfer of license.
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable or assignable.
§ 301-105. Revocation of license.
Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter is subject to revocation for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Said license may be revoked by
the Middletown Township Police Chief or their designee after notice of the basis for
such revocation. The license holder shall have the right to appeal from such proposed
revocation to Council and request a hearing. Notice of revocation shall be given, in
writing, and shall be served at least 10 days prior to the effective date of the revocation
by certified mail, by personal service on the license holder or by posting the notice upon
the entrance to the regulated establishment. The notice shall advise the license holder of
the right to appeal the revocation. A hearing shall be held before Council and the license
holder shall have the right to be represented at such hearing and to produce evidence.
§ 301-106. Expiration of license.
All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall expire one year after
the date of issuance. No later than 60 days before the expiration, licensees shall make
application for renewal of said license.
§ 301-107. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the refusal or revocation of a license as provided under this chapter,
any violation of this chapter shall be enforced by action brought before a District
Justice in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person, firm or corporation who shall
violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 10 days.
Each day that a violation of this chapter continues, or each section of this chapter which
shall be found to have been violated, shall constitute a separate offense. For purposes of
this chapter, the doing of any act or thing prohibited by any provision of this chapter,
or the failure to do any act or thing as to which any provision of this chapter creates an
affirmative duty, shall constitute a violation of this chapter punishable as herein stated.
§ 301-108. Time for compliance.
Massage parlors and alternative therapy establishments operating in the Township as of
the time of the effective date of this chapter shall have 60 days from said effective date
in which to apply for a license as required by this chapter.
§ 301-109. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby
repealed to the extent necessary to resolve the inconsistency.
§ 301-110. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. If any provision of this
§ 301-104 MASSAGE PARLORS § 301-110
301:5
chapter is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional,
such determination shall have no effect on the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 301-110 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 301-110
301:6
Chapter 305
MEETING HALL, MUNICIPAL
§ 305-101. Control and management.
The Township Municipal Building Meeting Hall shall be under the general control and
supervision of the Township Manager of the Township of Middletown, subject to the
terms and provisions of this chapter and other rules and regulations which may be
enacted by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 305-102. Permitted uses.
The Municipal Building meeting rooms are hereby made available to the community
and its organizations as hereinafter defined subject to the provisions of this chapter and
existing lease agreements. For the purpose of setting forth the restrictions and limitations
under which use of the meeting rooms is granted, organizations wishing to use such
facilities are hereby divided into four classes or types.
A. Type "A" shall be any organization which is a duly constituted agency of the
Township of Middletown performing official Township governmental functions,
including the Board of Supervisors and all subsidiary advisory bodies. Type "A"
shall include volunteer emergency services groups serving Middletown Township;
volunteer athletic organizations serving the youth of Middletown Township; any
authority, agency or organization in which the Township has membership
appointed by the Board of Supervisors; and any association of employees of the
Township of Middletown. Type "A" shall not include official governmental
agencies of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the county or
any school district.
B. Type "B" shall be any organization, club, association or group of Township
residents constituting at least 10% of said organization's total membership or with
at least 10 members who are Township residents, and whose purposes are of a civic,
educational, political, social, cultural, recreational, charitable or religious nature.
C. Type "C" shall be any organization which is a duly constituted agency or school
district performing official governmental functions of the United States, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the County of Bucks or any of the political
subdivisions or jurisdictions in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
D. Type "D" shall be any organization of a commercial or profit-making nature or any
other organization not specifically referenced in classes or types "A," "B" and "C"
hereinabove. Meeting rooms shall not be used or reserved by any organization of
Type "D," which type or class shall also include any individual or group seeking to
use such facilities for private purposes, such as weddings, receptions, parties, etc.
E. Refusal power. The Township Manager is hereby granted the authority to refuse the
use of the Township meeting rooms to any lessee when, in his opinion, such use
would not be to the best interest of the public. The Township Manager or his
authorized representative is granted the authority to forbid entrance to or to eject
any objectionable or disorderly persons. Each lease for the use of meeting rooms
§ 301-110 MEETING HALL, MUNICIPAL § 305-102
305:1
§ 305-103. Application; reservation; deposit.
shall contain a clause whereby the lessee waives any claim for damages against the
Township, the Board of Supervisors, and Township employees and representatives
for any such action.
A. Organizations of Type "A" shall be given absolute priority in the use of the meeting
rooms over all other organizations and without payment of any lease fee, providing
they make the necessary reservations with the office of the Township Manager.
Every lease agreement made with any organization other than those of Type "A"
shall provide for cancellation upon 30 days' notice by the Township Manager in the
event that the meeting room is required by a Type "A" organization. Furthermore,
such lease shall also provide for cancellation upon 24 hours' notice for the purpose
of allowing an organization of Type "A" to use the meeting rooms in the case of an
emergency.
B. Application for use of the meeting rooms by any organization of Types "B" and "C"
shall be made at the office of the Township Manager to such employee as the
Township Manager shall designate, and such employee shall keep a record of all
leases and for what purpose the meeting rooms are reserved. If the reservation is for
meetings to be held over a period of less than six months, applicants must pay the
established lease fee in advance at the time of application. If the reservation is for
meetings to be held over a period of six months or more, applicants must pay at
least 50% of the fee in advance and the remaining 50% by noon of the day on which
the building is reserved. Applications for the use of said meeting rooms by
organizations of Types "B" and "C" shall be filed and acted upon in order of their
filing, and the Township Manager or his authorized representative shall make no
deviation therefrom. No organization of Type "B" or "C" may reserve any rooms
other than the meeting rooms, and such rooms may not be reserved for regular
periodic use more frequently than once per calendar month, except at the discretion
of the Township Manager. No such organization may reserve a meeting room for a
longer period in advance than 12 months.
C. No organization renting any meeting room shall grant or permit any concession of
a commercial nature at its meetings.
D. All applications by organizations of Types "B" and "C" shall be made in writing on
a lease agreement form provided by the Township, in which the applicant shall
agree to be bound by all provisions of this chapter. In addition, the lessee must
provide a certificate of insurance naming Middletown Township as additional
insured, demonstrating general liability insurance coverages in the amount of
$250,000 per incident. The provision of the certificate of insurance may be waived
at the discretion of the Township Manager.
E. The lessee, by entering into said lease agreement and providing said certificate of
insurance, shall thereby waive any claim against and shall indemnify, save and hold
harmless the Township of Middletown and its Board of Supervisors, employees and
representatives for any damages to the premises, fittings, equipment and furnishings
of the Municipal Building and its surrounding property during the time the premises
are used or occupied under said lease and against claims of any and all persons for
injury to persons or damage to property occasioned by or in connection with the use
§ 305-102 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 305-103
305:2
§ 305-104. Lease fees.
Organizations of Type "A" shall not be charged a lease fee. Organizations of Types
"B" and "C" shall pay a lease fee for use of the meeting rooms in accordance with the
applicable Township of Middletown Fee Schedule as may be set by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors from time to time.37 Although included in the Type "C" class of
organizations, elected representatives of federal, state and county political subdivisions
conducting town meetings and/or informational meetings to benefit the general public
shall not be required to pay any lease fee. No extra fee shall be charged to organizations
conducting meetings at which the organization charges an admission fee, but all such
organizations shall comply with the Township's Entertainment Tax Ordinance (Chapter
448, Article III).
§ 305-105. General rules and regulations.
All organizations (hereinafter "lessee") leasing the meeting rooms shall be responsible
for the conduct of their members, guests and spectators and for the compliance of the
latter with the following rules and regulations:
of the premises by lessee.
A. All persons attending a meeting of any organization other than those constituting
official agencies of the Township of Middletown performing official Township
governmental functions shall remain in the meeting rooms, vestibule, or lavatory
areas.
B. No person shall cause damage to any of the property of the Township within or
without the meeting rooms. Damages shall result in charges based upon time and
materials required to return the building or grounds to their proper condition.
C. No person shall possess, carry, sell, distribute or consume any intoxicating
beverage or controlled substance as defined in the Pennsylvania Crimes Code, Title
18 Pa.C.S.A.
D. Gambling and/or other conduct detrimental to the public interest is not permitted in
or on any Township building and/or grounds.
E. Any lessee serving refreshments shall completely clean up and remove all debris
and refuse caused by the serving of such refreshments. Kitchen facilities are not
available for use.
F. Buildings, grounds and equipment shall be left in clean and orderly condition.
Failure to do so will result in charges based upon time and materials required to
return same to its proper condition.
G. Smoking shall not be permitted in the meeting rooms or other areas of the building.
Smoking is permitted outside the building, but no cigarette or cigar butts shall be
permitted to fall upon the ground, parking areas or walkways, and all smokers shall
utilize the trash receptacles provided.
37. Editor's Note: Township fee schedules are on file in the Township Municipal Building and available to be viewed on the
Township's website at www.middletownbucks.org.
§ 305-103 MEETING HALL, MUNICIPAL § 305-105
305:3
H. The custodian's services shall be reimbursed directly by the Township, and no
gratuities shall be offered or paid to him by any lessee.
I. No lessee shall bring into the rooms from the outside any equipment, decorations,
props, signs or similar material except under the express conditions and
arrangements made for such purpose with the Township Manager as to the extent,
time, location and manner of use of such materials. The use of electrical extension
cords is prohibited.
J. Any lessee who shall violate or fail to comply with any of these regulations may
have its lease terminated without notice by the Township Manager.
K. Types "B" and "C" groups shall vacate the premises by 12:00 midnight.
§ 305-105 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 305-105
305:4
Chapter 312
MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building standards — See Ch. 190.
Solid waste — See Ch. 418.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 440.
Zoning — See Ch. 500.
§ 312-101. Purpose.
This chapter shall not supersede or replace those provisions of the Middletown
Township Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 500) and the Middletown Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter 440) but shall be construed in connection
with those ordinances. If there is any conflict between the provisions of this chapter
and the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and/or Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, the most restrictive provision shall prevail.
§ 312-102. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HEALTH AUTHORITY—The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
and the Bucks County Department of Health.
LICENSE or PERMIT—Written approval as required by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection and as required by the Bucks County Department of Health
and as required by the Middletown Township Board of Supervisors, authorizing a person
to operate and maintain a mobile home park.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent
occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units designed to be joined into
one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives
at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking
and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the
necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon
of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PAD — That part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the
placement of a mobile home, appurtenant structures or additions.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so
designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home lots for the placement
thereon of mobile homes.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association or
government entity; including a trustee, a receiver, an assignee or a similar representative.
§ 305-105 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 312-102
312:1
SERVICE OR RECREATIONAL BUILDING — A structure housing operational,
office, recreational, park maintenance and other facilities built to conform to required
local standards.
SEWER CONNECTION — Consists of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the
drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser pipe.
SEWER RISER PIPE — That portion of the sewer lateral which extends vertically to
the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home space.
§ 312-103. Utilities, fire protection and other services.
A. Public water supply system. All mobile home parks shall be provided with a public
water supply system from existing Township facilities or from an on-site facility
constructed by the developer of said park.
(1) Source of supply.
(a) The water supply shall be capable of supplying a minimum of 150 gallons
per day per mobile home, at a rate of at least three gallons per minute
under a minimum pressure of 40 pounds per square inch.
(b) The well or suction line of the water supply system shall be located and
constructed in such a manner that neither underground nor surface
contamination will reach the water supply from any source.
(c) Water supply treatment, if necessary, shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and/or the Bucks County Department of Health.
(2) Water storage facilities. All water storage reservoirs shall be covered,
watertight and constructed of impervious material. Overflows and vents of
such reservoirs shall be effectively screened. Manholes shall be constructed
with overlapping covers, so as to prevent the entrance of contaminated
material. Reservoir overflow pipes shall discharge through an acceptable air
gap.
(3) Water distribution system.
(a) All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with state and local regulations.
(b) The water piping system shall not be connected with nonpotable or
questionable water supplies and shall be protected against the hazards of
backflow or backsiphonage.
(c) The system shall be so designed and maintained as to provide a pressure
of not less than 40 pounds per square inch under normal operating
conditions at service buildings and other locations requiring a potable
water supply.
(d) Main sizes and fire hydrant locations shall meet the specifications of the
Middle States Department Association of Fire Underwriters.
§ 312-102 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 312-103
312:2
(4) Individual water-riser pipes and connections.
(a) Individual water-riser pipes shall be located within the confined area of
the mobile home pad, ensuring the shortest water connection possible and
decreasing susceptibility to water pipe freezing.
(b) The water-riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter of 1/2 inch
and terminate at least four inches above the ground surface. The water
outlet shall be provided with a screw-type cap when a mobile home does
not occupy the site.
(c) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service lines,
valves and riser pipe and to protect risers from heaving and thawing
actions of ground during freezing weather. Surface drainage shall be
diverted from the location of the riser pipe.
B. Public sewer facilities. All mobile home parks shall be provided with public sewer
facilities connected to existing Township sewer lines or to an on-site facility
constructed by the developer of said park.
(1) Individual sewer connections.
(a) Each mobile home lot shall be provided with a least a four-inch inside
diameter sewer riser pipe. The sewer riser pipe shall be so located on each
pad that the sewer connection to the mobile home drain outlet will
approximate a vertical position.
(b) The sewer connection shall have a nominal inside diameter of not less
than four inches and the slope of any portion thereof shall be at least 1/4
inch per foot. All joints shall be watertight and sealed.
(c) All materials used for sewer connections shall be semirigid, corrosiveresistant,
nonabsorbent and durable. The inner surface shall be smooth.
(d) Provisions shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe with a screwtype
watertight plug when a mobile home does not occupy the site.
Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser. The rim of the
riser pipe shall extend at least six inches above ground elevation.
(2) Sewer lines. All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of sufficient depth to
be free of breakage from traffic or other movements and shall be separated
from the park water supply system. All sewer lines shall be constructed of
materials approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and Bucks County Water and Sewer Authority, and they shall have
sealed and watertight joints, except that no bituminous-type sewer pipe shall
be installed.
(3) Sewage treatment and/or discharge.
(a) All proposed sewage disposal facilities shall be approved by the Bucks
County Department of Health and the Department of Environmental
Protection prior to construction, and by such other person as is so
designated by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 312-103 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 312-103
312:3
(b) Sewage facilities shall be sufficient to accommodate in-dwelling laundry
facilities for each mobile home.
(c) Wastewater from any plumbing fixtures or sanitary sewer line shall not
be deposited upon the ground surface in any mobile home park.
C. Utility distribution systems.
(1) All utilities, including telephone, cable, gas, electric, water and sewer, shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with utility company specifications
regulating such systems and shall be underground.
(2) Electrical distribution system.
(a) Every mobile home park shall contain an electrical system consisting of
wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances, with local electric power
company specifications regulating such system.
(b) Individual electrical connections. Each mobile home lot shall be provided
with an approved disconnecting device and over-current protective
equipment. The minimum service per outlet shall be 120/240 volts AC,
100 amperes.
(c) Ground required. All exposed non-current-carrying metal parts of mobile
homes and all other equipment shall be grounded by means of an
approved grounding conductor, run with branch circuit conductors and
other approved methods of grounded metallic wiring. The neutral
conductor shall not be used as an equipment ground for mobile homes or
other equipment.
D. Fire protection.
(1) Fire alarms and instructions. Provisions shall be made for giving a general
alarm in case of fire. A bell, iron hoop or a similar manually operated device
may be used for this purpose. It shall be the duty of the mobile home park
operator, owner and licensee to instruct all tenants on the means of summoning
firefighting apparatus, police and medical help, and on the proper operation of
fire extinguishers.
(2) Litter control. Mobile home park areas shall be kept free from litter, rubbish
and other flammable material.
(3) Fire hydrants. All mobile home parks shall be provided with fire hydrants to
meet the specifications of the Middle States Department Association of Fire
Underwriters, but in any case in sufficient numbers to be within 600 feet of all
existing and proposed structures and mobile homes, measured by way of
accessible streets.
E. Fuel supply and storage.
(1) Liquefied petroleum gas systems.
(a) The design, installation and construction of containers and pertinent
equipment for the storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gases shall
§ 312-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 312-103
312:4
conform to the Act of Pennsylvania Legislation 1951, December 27, P.L.
1793, as it may be amended,38 and to the regulations therefor promulgated
by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry or its successor.
(2) Liquefied petroleum gas systems provided for mobile homes and mobile home
parks, service buildings or other structures when installed in mobile home
parks shall be maintained in conformity with the "Standards for the Storage
and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases" (National Fire Protection
Association, NFPA No. 58); American National Standard Institute, ANSI No.
2108.01; and NFPA No. 501A, "Standards for Mobile Home Parks," and with
the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry, and shall include the following:
(a) Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive
pressures and shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates at a safe
location.
(b) Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off gas.
Such means shall be located outside the mobile home and shall be
maintained in effective operating condition.
(c) All liquefied petroleum gas piping outside of the mobile home shall be
well supported and protected against mechanical injury. Undiluted
liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be conveyed through
piping equipment or systems in mobile homes.
(d) Vessels of at least 12 U.S. gallons and less than 60 U.S. gallons gross
capacity shall be maintained in a vertical position and shall be securely,
but not permanently, fastened to prevent accidental overturning. No
vessel shall be placed any closer to a mobile home exit than five feet and
no closer to any window than three feet.
(e) No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or located inside or
beneath any storage cabinet, carport, mobile home or any other structure.
(3) Fuel oil supply systems.
(a) All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service buildings
and other structures shall be installed and maintained in conformity with
the rules and regulations of the National Fire Protection Association
Standard, NFPA No. 31.
(b) All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile homes
shall be securely, but not permanently, fastened in place.
(c) All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service buildings
and other structures shall have shutoff valves located within five inches
of storage tanks.
(d) All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely placed and shall not
38. Editor's Note: The Act, at 35 P.S. § 1321 et seq., has been repealed in part by Act of 1978, P.L. 1300. See now 35 P.S.
§ 1329.1 et seq.
§ 312-103 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 312-103
312:5
§ 312-104. Miscellaneous requirements.
be less than five feet from any mobile home exit and not less than three
feet from any window.
(e) Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be protected against
physical damage.
F. Refuse handling. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home
park shall be so constructed as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect
breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution and shall comply with the
Bucks County Department of Health's rules and regulations governing mobile home
parks. Collection of garbage and rubbish shall be provided not less frequently than
twice a week, and the collection shall be made at each mobile home lot. Between
collections, garbage and refuse shall be stored in flytight, rodentproof and
watertight containers. All park areas shall be kept free of litter and rubbish at all
times. Refuse storage areas shall be suitably screened by fencing or plant materials.
Junked or abandoned motor vehicles and other similar objects shall not be permitted
to remain on the park premises. It shall be the park owner's duty to effect prompt
removal.
G. Insect and rodent control. Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained
free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and
other measures to control insects and rodents shall conform to the requirements of
the Pennsylvania and/or Bucks County Department of Health's regulations
governing mobile home parks.
H. Delivery of mail and packages. Central delivery of mail and packages shall be
provided within the mobile home park. The site and equipment must be approved
by the local postal manager or postmaster.
I. Controlling sales of necessities to occupants. Mobile home park management shall
not act as middlemen in the sale of necessities, such as fuel oil, milk or other
regularly used commodities, to park occupants, thereby forcing higher than
standard going prices for such commodities.
A. Service buildings. All service buildings shall be constructed in accordance with the
Middletown Township Building Code (Chapter 190, Article II), as amended, and
all other applicable local codes.
B. Skirting. All mobile homes within a mobile home park shall have the space between
the floor of the mobile home and the mobile stand completely enclosed. Such
enclosure may be provided by a permanent masonry foundation or by temporary
materials, commonly called "skirting." Such foundation or skirting shall be:
(1) Compatible in design with the mobile home to which it is attached;
(2) Sufficiently tight and strong to prevent access by small animals but at the same
time provide sufficient ventilation to inhibit interior decay and deterioration;
(3) Totally opaque so that no part of the space between the floor of the mobile
home and the mobile home stand is externally visible; and
§ 312-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 312-104
312:6
§ 312-105. Permits and licenses.
(4) Constructed of materials designed and commonly used for rigidity and
strength as the exterior surface of the mobile home itself.
C. Responsibilities of the park management.
(1) The person to whom a license for a mobile home park is issued shall operate
the park in compliance with this chapter and shall provide full-time
supervision on the premises to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment
in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
(2) The operator and owner shall be responsible for maintaining all common
facilities, including, but not limited to, roads, parking areas, sidewalks and
pathways, common open space, water supply and sewage disposal systems,
and service buildings, in a condition of proper repair and maintenance.
(3) The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile home on
its mobile home lot, which includes securing its stability and installing all
utility connections.
(4) The park management shall give the Zoning Officer free access to all mobile
home lots and service facilities for the purpose of inspection.
(5) The mobile home licensee shall notify, in writing, the Township Supervisors
of the name of the owner of each mobile home in the park and of the arrival
and departure of each mobile home.
A. Permit and license required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter,
extend or operate any mobile home park within the limit of Middletown Township
unless and until he holds a valid license issued by Middletown Township under this
chapter, a certificate of registration issued by the Bucks County Department of
Health in the name of such person for the specific construction, alteration, extension
or operation proposed, and also a permit issued by the Zoning Officer under the
Middletown Township Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 500).
B. Application to Bucks County Department of Health. All applications for certificates
of registration shall be made by the owner of the mobile home park or his
authorized representative in accordance with the Bucks County Department of
Health Rules and Regulations for Mobile Home Park, approved March 2, 1984, as
amended.
C. Application to Middletown Township. Applications for a mobile home park license
shall be filed with the Zoning Officer and the license issued by the Middletown
Township Supervisors. Applications shall be made by the owner, proprietor or
operator of the mobile home park; shall be in writing, signed by the applicant; and
shall contain or be accompanied by the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The location and legal description of the mobile home park.
(3) A complete plan of the park showing compliance with the full and complete
§ 312-104 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 312-105
312:7
terms of this chapter and those of the Bucks County Department of Health
rules and regulations concerning mobile home parks.
(4) Plans and specifications of all roads, buildings and other improvements
constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park.
(5) An approved and recorded subdivision or land development plan pursuant to
the Middletown Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
(Chapter 440), as amended.
(6) Such further information as may be requested by the Middletown Township
Board of Supervisors to enable it to determine if the proposed park will
comply with legal requirements.
(7) A properly approved zoning permit.
(8) Properly signed development and improvement escrow agreements.
D. Inspection and issuance of licenses. The application and all accompanying plans
and specifications shall be filed with the Township Zoning Officer. If the plans and
specifications of the proposed mobile home park are in compliance with this and all
other applicable ordinances and statutes and an approved land development plan,
the Township Supervisors shall approve the application. Upon completion of the
park according to said plans and specifications, the Township Zoning Officer shall
issue the license, which shall be valid for one year. The mobile home park shall not
be occupied without a valid license.
E. Annual licenses. In addition to the initial permits, the operator of a mobile home
park shall apply to the Bucks County Department of Health and to Middletown
Township on or before the 10th day of each year for an annual license to continue
operation of the mobile home park. The Zoning Officer shall issue the annual
license upon satisfactory proof that the park continues to meet the standards
prescribed by state and county agencies having jurisdiction and the standards of this
chapter. The license so issued shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance.
F. Fees. Each application for a new or renewed license hereunder shall be
accompanied by payment of a license and inspection fee in accordance with the
Township's current fee schedule.39 In the event that the Township Engineer or
Zoning Officer is required to perform additional or unusual services in determining
and reviewing said application, the cost of such additional service shall be borne by
the applicant. Such charges shall be levied whether or not the application is
approved.
G. Transfer of ownership. Every person holding a license shall file notice in writing
with the Bucks County Department of Health and the Middletown Township
Zoning Officer within 10 days after having sold, transferred, given away, or
otherwise disposed of any interest in or control of any mobile home park. If the
certificate of registration is transferred by the Bucks County Department of Health,
proof of such transfer shall be furnished to the Zoning Officer forthwith.
39. Editor's Note: Township fee schedules are on file in the Township Municipal Building and available to be viewed on the
Township's website at www.middletownbucks.org.
§ 312-105 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 312-105
312:8
§ 312-106. Inspection and enforcement.
§ 312-107. Maintenance of facilities.
H. Removal of mobile homes. No mobile home in a mobile home park shall be
removed from Middletown Township without first obtaining a permit from the
Middletown Township Tax Collector, as required by the Act of July 8, 1969, P.L.
130, 72 P.S. § 520-407(e).40 Such permit shall be issued upon payment of a fee
shown on the Township's current fee schedule and taxes assessed against the home
and all occupants thereof remaining unpaid at the time permit is requested.
A. Upon notification to the licensee, manager or person in charge of the park, a
representative of Middletown Township may inspect a mobile home park at any
time to determine compliance with this chapter.
B. Inspector. The Zoning Officer is hereby designated as the person to make such
inspections. Another or additional inspector, who shall also be designated as
"zoning officer," may also be authorized to make inspections or additional
inspections, at the discretion of the Supervisors.
C. Authorization to act. Any zoning officer may, at his discretion, give notice of
violation of this chapter and issue notice thereof, without express authority from the
Township Supervisors in each instance. If, upon inspection by a zoning officer or
other representative, it is determined that the mobile home park is not in compliance
with the standard of maintenance described in § 312-107 herein, the licensee shall
be considered to be in violation of this chapter, and the Zoning Officer shall notify
the licensee of the particulars of any such violation.
A. Maintenance bond. The licensee of a mobile home park shall, prior to issuance of
any certificate of occupancy pursuant to final approval of an application, post with
the Township a maintenance bond in a form acceptable to the Township Solicitor
in an amount sufficient to cover for a period of two years the costs of maintenance
of all common facilities, as determined by the Township Zoning Officer or other
representative. The bond shall remain in effect for the duration of the operation of
the mobile home park.
B. The operator and owner shall be responsible for maintaining all common facilities,
including, but not limited to, roads, parking areas, sidewalks or pathways, common
open space, water supply and sewage disposal systems, and service buildings, in a
condition of good repair and maintenance. If upon inspection by a zoning officer or
other representative it is determined that the mobile home park is not in compliance
with this standard of maintenance, the licensee shall be considered to be in violation
of this chapter, and the Zoning Officer shall notify the licensee of the particulars of
any such violation.
C. Failure to maintain. The licensee shall thereafter have 30 days in which to correct
any such violations, except that, if the violation is determined by the Zoning Officer
or other representative to constitute a hazard to the health or safety of the residents
of the mobile home park, he shall order that the violation be corrected forthwith. In
40. Editor's Note: Act 54 of 1969 was repealed by 2010, Oct. 27, P.L. 895, No. 93; see now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8821(d).
§ 312-105 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 312-107
312:9
§ 312-108. Violations and penalties; revocation or suspension of license.
[Amended 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
the event of noncompliance with an order, whether a thirty-day order or an order
to correct violations forthwith, the Township may forfeit the maintenance bond and
use proceeds thereof to effect correction of the violations.
D. Notice of violation and compliance order. Whenever the Zoning Officer determines
that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter or of any regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, the Zoning Officer shall give notice of such alleged
violation of the licensee as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance.
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
(4) Be served upon the licensee or his agent as required by the laws of this
commonwealth.
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, or any part thereof, and with the regulations
adopted pursuant thereto.
E. Revocation. Upon failure of a licensee to comply with the notice of violation and
compliance order provided herein, the Zoning Officer may revoke the license for
the operation of the mobile home park and may give an appropriate cease and desist
order terminating the operation of the park.
F. Appeal. The holder of a license revoked hereunder may appeal the revocation to a
court of competent jurisdiction, provided appeal is made within 30 days after the
date of issuance of the order of revocation.
G. Other remedies. In addition to the other enforcement procedures herein provided,
the Supervisors may institute in the name of the Township any appropriate action
or proceeding to enforce provisions of this chapter to prevent the violation thereof.
A. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District
Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this
chapter continues or each section of this chapter which shall be found to have been
violated shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Revocation or suspension of license. Upon repeated violations by the same licensee,
his rights to the issuance of a license or to continue operation under a license may
be suspended for a fixed term or permanently revoked, after notice and hearing,
subject to the right of appeal to the Bucks County Court of Common Pleas.
§ 312-107 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 312-108
312:10
Chapter 316
MUNICIPAL CLAIMS AND ATTORNEYS' FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 448.
§ 316-101. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCOUNT — Delinquent unpaid taxes, use charges and other items covered by the
Municipal Claims Act.41
ACCOUNT DEBTOR — The taxpayer or other entity liable for the account.
§ 316-102. Schedule of fees.
A. The Township hereby approves the following schedule of attorneys' fees for
services in connection with the collection of compensation for the services set forth
below, all in accordance with the principles set forth in § 7106(a) of the Municipal
Claims Act:42
Legal Services
Time for Services
(hours)
Initial review and sending first demand letter 0.6
File lien and mailing second demand letter 1.5
Prepare writ of scire facias 1.0
Obtain reissued writ 0.5
Prepare and mail letter under Pa. R.C.P. § 237.1 0.3
Prepare motion for alternate service 2.2
Prepare motion for summary judgment and related
judgment
3.2
Prepare writ of execution 1.0
Attendance at sale; review schedule of
distribution and resolve distribution issues
3.0
Services not covered above Hourly amount equal to
Solicitor's regular charges to
Township
41. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
42. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7106(a).
§ 312-108 MUNICIPAL CLAIMS AND ATTORNEYS' FEES § 316-102
316:1
§ 316-103. Collection procedures.
The following collection procedures are hereby established in accordance with 53 P.S.
§ 7106:
§ 316-104. Related action.
The proper officials of the Township are hereby authorized and empowered to take such
additional action as they may deem necessary or appropriate to implement this chapter.
B. The time set forth above shall be billed at the current hourly rate of the Solicitor
with the minimum rate being as set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors from
time to time. [Amended 10-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
C. There shall be added to the above amounts the reasonable out-of-pocket expenses
of counsel in connection with each of these services, as itemized in the applicable
counsel bills, which shall be deemed to be part of the fees.
D. The amount of fees determined as set forth above shall be added to the Township's
claim in each account.
A. At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorneys' fees in connection with
the collection of an account, the Township shall mail or cause to be mailed, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice of such intention to the account
debtor.
B. If within 30 days after mailing the notice in accordance with Subsection A the
certified mail to any account debtor is refused or unclaimed or the return receipt is
not received, then at least 10 days prior to the assessing or imposing such attorneys'
fees the Township shall mail or cause to be mailed, by first class mail, a second
notice to such account debtor.
C. All notices required by this chapter shall be mailed to the account debtor's last
known post office address as recorded in the records or other information of the
Township, or such other address as it may be able to obtain from the County Office
of Assessment and Revision of Taxes.
D. Each notice as described above shall include the following:
(1) The type of tax or other charge, the date it became due, and the amount owed,
including penalty and interest.
(2) A statement of the Township's intent to impose or assess attorneys' fees within
30 days after the mailing of the first notice or within 10 days after the mailing
of the second notice.
(3) The manner in which the assessment or imposition of attorneys' fees may be
avoided by payment of the account.
(4) The place of payment for accounts, and the name and telephone number of the
Township official designated as responsible for collection matters.
§ 316-102 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 316-104
316:2
Chapter 320
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 133.
Animal noise — See Ch. 145.
Zoning — See Ch. 500.
§ 320-101. Prohibited conduct.
A. Definition of noise disturbance. Any sound that endangers the safety or health of
any person, disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities or endangers
personal or real property. The measure of disturbance shall be measured in
accordance with the A-weighted decibel scale which is expressed as "dBA."
(1) In those areas of the Township zoned residential, as defined by Chapter 500,
Zoning, except those instances as defined by § 320-101C(5)(a) of this chapter,
it shall be an excessive noise disturbance if, 30 feet from the place of noise
generation, the dBA exceeds:
75 dBA between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
55 dBA between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
B. Excessive noise and noise disturbance prohibited. It is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and shall be unlawful for any person, firm or business entity to make,
cause, suffer or permit to be made or caused upon a property owned, occupied or
controlled by him or it or upon any public land, street, alley or thoroughfare in
Middletown Township any excessive noises, noise disturbance, or sounds by means
of vehicles, machinery, equipment (including sound-amplification equipment and
musical instruments) or by any other means or methods which are physically
annoying to the comfort of any reasonable person or which are so harsh, prolonged,
unnatural or unusual in their use, time and place as to occasion physical discomfort
or which are otherwise injurious to the lives, health, peace and comfort of the
inhabitants of Middletown Township or any number of residents thereof.
C. Special prohibitions. The following acts and causes thereof are hereby declared to
be nuisances and in violation of this chapter:
(1) Possessing, harboring or keeping an animal or bird which makes any noise
continuously and/or persistently for a period of 15 minutes or more in such a
manner as to disturb or annoy any person at any time of the day or night,
regardless of whether the animal is situated upon private property.
(2) Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio,
television, audio equipment, sound amplifier, musical instrument or similar
device that reproduces or amplifies sound through electric or battery means in
such a manner as to create a noise disturbance or to cause annoyance to
§ 316-104 NOISE § 320-101
320:1
§ 320-102. Exceptions.
The restrictions set forth in § 320-101 hereof shall not apply to any of the following
persons in the vicinity for any person other than the operator of the device.
(3) Loudspeakers and public address systems. Using or operating any
loudspeaker, public address system, or similar device such that the sound
therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a residential real property line.
(4) Performing any construction operation or permitting the operation of any tools
or equipment used in construction, drilling, blasting, demolition, excavation
and extraction of stone or other such activities between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
(5) Repairing, rebuilding, modifying, testing or operating a motor vehicle,
motorcycle, recreational vehicle or powered model vehicle in such a manner
as to cause annoyance to persons across a real property boundary from the
noise source.
(a) All motorcycles built or rebuilt after 1982 and all car engines will be
operated at or below the decibel level of 86 dBA measured 50 feet from
the place of noise generation. The method of measurement of dBA for
this paragraph only shall be established by and in accordance with the
written policy of the Middletown Township Police Department. The
decibel levels of this chapter established in § 320-101A(1) shall not apply
to this paragraph.
(b) All motorcycles driven through Middletown Township must be equipped
with a muffler that meets legal requirements as defined by Pennsylvania
Motor Vehicle Inspection Law.
(6) Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, drill,
sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool or similar device used out of doors
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to cause a
noise disturbance.
(7) Operating or permitting the operation of any motor vehicle or any auxiliary
equipment attached to such a vehicle for a period of longer than five minutes
in any hour while the vehicle is stationary for reasons other than traffic
congestion or emergency work, with the exception of railroad engines which
may idle during a warm-up period not to exceed 20 minutes.
(8) The operation of a snowblower is permitted any time within a twenty-fourhour
period immediately after a snowstorm. Thereafter, the operation of a
snowblower is not permitted in residential areas between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day so as to cause a noise disturbance across
a residential real property boundary.
(9) Burglar alarms sounding, or permitting the sounding of any burglar alarm in
or on any building or motor vehicle, unless such burglar alarm shall terminate
its operation within 10 minutes of its being activated.
§ 320-101 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 320-102
320:2
noise sources:
§ 320-103. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 320-104. Severability; repealer.
A. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an
emergency.
B. Emergency work performed to protect public health or safety, including fire
protection, protection from flood or other disasters, and work performed to provide
electricity, water or other public utilities when public health or safety is involved.
C. Public gatherings, performances and the like for which a permit has been obtained
from the Township.
D. Warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles and/or required for safety
purposes.
E. Vehicles, machinery, appliances and equipment used in the case of emergency
snow removal.
F. A responding police officer or code enforcement official shall have the discretion
to declare that a noise disturbance is reasonable, provided that it does not negatively
impact the health, welfare and safety of Middletown's residents. If a police officer
or code enforcement official declares such incident is reasonable, no citation shall
be issued.
A. Any full- or part-time Middletown Township police officer or Code Enforcement
Officer may issue a summary citation, which shall specify the nature, date and time
of the violation.
B. Any person or business entity, including but not limited to property owner, renter,
user and/or possessor, who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, shall,
upon first summary conviction thereof, be punishable by a minimum fine of no less
than $100. Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
to be a separate and distinct offense. When a second and/or subsequent violations
are committed by the same person or entity within any twelve-month period, the
fine shall be double the amount of the previous fine up to a maximum of $1,000 for
each separate and distinct offense.
C. In addition to the above, the Township may institute an action for injunctive relief
to prohibit or abate any activity in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
A. If any provision of this chapter shall be held invalid, such provision shall be deemed
severable, and the invalidity thereof shall not affect the remaining provisions of this
chapter.
B. All ordinances that conflict with this chapter shall be repealed 30 days after the
adoption of this chapter, to include Ordinance No. 86-20, adopted October 21,
1986, and Ordinance No. 06-09, adopted May 9, 2006.
§ 320-102 NOISE § 320-104
320:3

Chapter 324
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 363.
§ 324-101. Nuisance defined.
§ 324-102. Duty of maintenance of private property.
No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises shall maintain,
keep or permit the maintenance of any nuisance as defined above thereon, nor shall any
such person keep, maintain or permit the maintenance of such premises in a manner
causing a threat or potential threat to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the
Township of Middletown.
§ 324-103. Exterior storage of nonoperating vehicles prohibited.
No person in charge of or in control of premises, whether as owner, lessee, tenant,
occupant or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, discarded
or otherwise nonoperating motor vehicle to remain on such property longer than 10
days, and no person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the Township
for a longer time than 10 days; except that this section shall not apply with regard
to any vehicle in an enclosed building or so located upon the premises as not to be
A. Nuisances. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "nuisance" is defined to mean
any condition, structure or improvement which shall constitute a threat or potential
threat to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the Township of Middletown.
This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping or the depositing on or the scattering
over the premises of any of the following:
(1) Junk, trash, debris, garbage or rubbish.
(2) Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as automobiles,
trucks, mowers, tractors, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, appliances,
cans or containers, or parts thereof.
(3) Any compost pile which is of such a nature as to spread or harbor disease, emit
unpleasant odors or harmful gas, or attract rodents, vermin or other diseasecarrying
pests, animals or insects, provided that the presence of earthworms in
a compost pile shall not constitute a nuisance.
B. Keeping unsanitary matter on premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep
or permit another to keep, upon any premises, deleterious or septic material, unless
such material is retained in containers or vessels which deny access to humans,
flies, insects, rodents and animals.
§ 320-104 NUISANCES § 324-103
324:1
readily visible from any public place or from any surrounding private property. This
chapter shall, further, not apply with regard to any vehicle on the premises of a business
enterprise operated in a lawful place and lawful manner, other than in a residential
district, if said vehicle is an integral part of the operation of such business enterprise;
or with regard to a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a
lawful place and manner by the Township or any other public agency or entity.
§ 324-104. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this chapter and all of its provisions may be accomplished by the
Township in any manner authorized by law, including an action in the courts of equity by
a proper proceeding to enjoin and/or abate any of the above-named violations by action
to be instituted by the Board of Supervisors for that purpose, and in addition, any person
who by reason of another's violation of any provision of this chapter suffers special
damage to himself different from that suffered by other property owners throughout
the Township generally may bring an action to enjoin or otherwise abate an existing
violation.
§ 324-105. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13;
6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each section of this chapter
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 324-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 324-105
324:2
Chapter 337
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Park and Recreation Board — See Ch. 15, Art. II.
Animals — See Ch. 145.
Firearms and weapons — See Ch. 242.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 470.
§ 324-105 PARKS AND RECREATION § 324-105
337:1

ARTICLE I
Park Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 4-17-1990 by Ord. No. 90-6 (Ch. 16, Part 1, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 337-101. Applicability.
All land owned by the Township along any creeks, drainage ditches, streams, other
waterways, open space, park ground, recreation areas, and any other land presently
owned by the Township shall be considered as a park and recreation area for purposes
of this article. All such lands dedicated, given, purchased or received by the Township
in any manner whatsoever after the passage of this article shall be governed by the
regulations herein set forth.
§ 337-102. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or firms, copartnership or
copartnerships, association or associations, or corporation or corporations to use any
Middletown Township park or recreational area unless such person or persons, firm
or firms, copartnership or copartnerships, association or associations, or corporation or
corporations comply strictly with the provisions of this article.
§ 337-103. Prohibited acts. [Amended 7-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-15; 6-22-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-12]
The following enumerated actions or conduct on the part of any natural person or
persons, firm or firms, copartnership or copartnerships, association or associations, or
corporation or corporations in any Middletown Township park or recreation area shall
be unlawful:
A. To build any fire anywhere in any park or recreation area except in the locations
provided for such purposes.
B. To fail to guard any fire at all times.
C. To fail to extinguish any fire before leaving it.
D. To possess, carry, sell, distribute or consume any intoxicating beverage or
controlled substance as defined in the Pennsylvania Crimes Code.
E. To enter or go into any park or recreation area when under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or any narcotic drug or habit-producing drug.
F. To gamble.
G. To do, perform or partake in any obscene or indecent act or actions.
H. To use any abusive, indecent, obscene or threatening language.
I. To do, perform or partake in any type conduct which by its nature would annoy or
disturb any natural person or persons, firm or firms, copartnership or
copartnerships, association or associations, or corporation or corporations properly
using the park or recreation area and/or to use a loudspeaker, public address system
or amplifier within the park system without first obtaining written permission from
§ 337-101 PARKS AND RECREATION § 337-103
337:3
§ 337-104. Permitted acts with authorization. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
The following enumerated actions or conduct on the part of any person or persons, firm
or firms, copartnership or copartnerships, association or associations, or corporation or
corporations in any Middletown Township park or recreation area shall be unlawful
unless specifically authorized in writing by the Middletown Township Manager or his
designee:
the Park and Recreation Board and a permit from the Board of Supervisors, and/or
to play or cause to play any radio, phonograph, tape recorder, television, stereo, etc.,
in a loud or boisterous manner which tends to disturb or annoy any visitor within
the park system.
J. To solicit funds, charge fees or engage in any commercial enterprise whatsoever.
K. To scatter, drop or leave in any portion of a park, except in receptacles provided for
the purpose, any pieces of paper, rags, garbage, glass, tin containers, or other
rubbish.
L. To mark, deface, damage or destroy any building, posters, signs or any other park
or recreation property in any manner whatsoever.
M. "Paintball" or any substantially similar activity involving the use of CO2 or airpowered
paint guns which fire thin-skinned gelatin capsules containing colored
liquid used to mark participants and/or property.
A. To cut, mutilate or remove or destroy in any manner whatsoever any trees,
shrubbery, flowers, seeds, plants or wood.
B. To annoy, strike, injure, maim or kill, trap or catch, any animal, bird, insect or fish
and/or to destroy, remove or alter any nest, lair, den, burrow or habitat of any
wildlife within the park system and/or to drive or pursue any wildlife from the
confines of the park system and/or to introduce any alien species into the park
system.
C. For any organized group or groups to use the park and recreational areas and/or any
gathering or group of people consisting of 20 or more persons, without first
obtaining a permit from the Township Manager or designee, to use the park system.
To obtain a permit, such groups or gatherings must follow the following guidelines:
(1) Application for a permit shall be made upon the official form of the Township
and shall be accompanied by the required fee, except where a free permit may
be issued.
(2) Application for a permit shall be made at the Township Municipal
Administration Office and approved by the Township Manager. Application
and fee must be processed and approved one week in advance of the scheduled
activity.
(3) Permits may be issued to persons for the use of the park system between the
hours of sunset of one day to sunrise of the following day.
§ 337-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 337-104
337:4
(4) Application for permits from persons under the age of 18 years shall be
countersigned by the applicant's parent or legal guardian indicating therein his
or her responsibility for the conduct of the permit user.
(5) The holder of a permit issued by the Township shall be held responsible for
the actions and conduct of the other persons in the group.
(6) All visitors to the park system must comply with all rules and regulations of
the Township Board of Supervisors and the Park and Recreation Board while
within the park system.
D. To carry or use firearms, bow and arrows, traps and lures or any other missiles or
means of catching, trapping or killing animals except in areas specifically
designated for any of these purposes and/or to bring into or upon the park system,
nor have in his or her possession, any type of hatchet, axe, saw or knife while within
the park system. (This section shall not apply to any duly appointed law
enforcement officer while carrying out the duties and responsibilities of his or her
position.)
E. To enter or use any park or recreation area during the period of time between one
hour after sundown and one hour before sunrise, except, in areas where recreational
lighting is provided, such areas may be entered or used until the end of the lighting
period.
F. To use, operate or park any motorized vehicle in any park or recreation area (except
in areas specifically designated for motor vehicles and except for persons mowing
the grass) and/or to operate any vehicle and stop, stand or park such vehicle upon
any roadway, hike path, trail or lane or in any parking area within the park system
in such manner as to form an obstruction to traffic thereon and/or to drive upon or
park upon any trail, maintenance road or lawn within the park system unless the
area is specifically designated as overflow parking area and/or to operate any
vehicle and park in any place within the park system where a "No Parking" sign has
been erected. To operate any vehicle and park in such a manner as to block the exit
or removal of another vehicle within the park system. In conjunction with and in
addition to this section, the Motor Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania and the Motor
Vehicle and Traffic Ordinance (Chapter 470) of Middletown Township shall apply
to all areas of the park system. Bicycles are permitted within the park system on
areas clearly designated for this purpose.
G. To build, erect, plant or cultivate upon lands within the park system or otherwise
use lands within the park system or the contents thereon for any structure, garden,
compost heap or other personal usage without first obtaining written permission
from the Park and Recreation Board and a permit from the Board of Supervisors.
H. To enter any building in the park system that is not open to and regularly used by
the general public.
I. To graze or ride horses in the park system.
J. To destroy, deface, alter or remove any monument, stone marker, bench mark,
stake, post, trail blaze or designation of any boundary line or survey line within the
park system.
§ 337-104 PARKS AND RECREATION § 337-104
337:5
§ 337-105. Park and Recreation Board's responsibilities.
The Park and Recreation Board of the Township of Middletown shall exercise general
supervision over the care, maintenance and replacement of Township property and
equipment in the park and recreation areas.
§ 337-106. Middletown Country Club.
In addition to those prohibitions and restrictions listed in §§ 337-103 and 337-104 above,
the use of sleds, skis and any similar snow-related equipment and devices shall be
entirely prohibited on the property known as the Middletown Country Club.
§ 337-107. Neshaminy Pointe open space. [Added 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 03-04]
This section shall apply to the open space parcel owned by the Township of Middletown
in and about the Neshaminy Pointe subdivision known as Tax Parcel No. 22-033-140
and, for purposes of this section only, is referred to as the "open space." In addition to
those prohibitions and restrictions listed in §§ 337-103 and 337-104 of this article, no
person shall enter or traverse that portion of the open space that abuts Highpointe Circle
and is between the properties located at 977 Highpointe Circle (Tax Map Parcel No.
22-033-093) and 967 Highpointe Circle (Tax Map Parcel No. 22-033-094) due to the
steep topography of that section of open space. A fence shall be erected and maintained
by the Township along that portion of the open space that fronts on and abuts Highpointe
Circle for the purpose of restricting access to the open space, yet not destroying the
viewshed of the open space. Further, signs shall be posted on the fence or immediately
behind it identifying the foregoing restriction on access to the open space through that
location.
§ 337-108. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13;
6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08; 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 03-04]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues
or each section of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute
a separate offense.
K. To swim, boat, bathe or wade in any body of water within the park system unless
said area is specifically designated for such purposes.
L. To fire, discharge or have in possession any rocket, firecracker or other fireworks
and substances of an explosive nature within the park system without first obtaining
a permit from the Board of Supervisors.
M. To bring any domestic animal or fowl into park system property unless the property
is clearly designated for such a purpose and then only when the domestic animal or
fowl is tethered on a six-foot or shorter leash. The provisions of Chapter 145,
Animals, shall also apply.
§ 337-104 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 337-108
337:6
Chapter 341
PAWNBROKERS
§ 341-101. Purposes.
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes: to promote the safety, morals and
general welfare of the inhabitants of the Township of Middletown in their person
and property by holding pawnbrokers accountable for the proper reporting procedures
deemed necessary by the Police Department to assist in recovering the stolen property of
its inhabitants.
§ 341-102. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, minimum requirements for
the promotion of the public safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare shall be
followed. Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than those
of any statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall be
controlling. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose
greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance or
regulation shall be controlling.
§ 341-103. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Middletown Township
Pawnbroker's Ordinance."
§ 341-104. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be construed
throughout this chapter to have the meanings herein indicated. The singular shall include
the plural, and the plural shall include the singular.
APPLICANT — Any individual, partnership, association, business corporation,
nonprofit corporation, common law trust, joint-stock company or any group of
individuals, however organized, applying for a license under this chapter and/or any
person appearing as owner, partner, officer, director, trustee or other official of a
partnership, association, business corporation, nonprofit corporation, common law trust,
joint-stock company or any group of individuals, however organized, on such
application for license under this chapter.
PAWNBROKER — Any person, who:
PAWNBROKING — The business of a pawnbroker as defined in this chapter.
Engages in the business of lending money on the deposit or pledge of personal
property, securities or written evidences of indebtedness;
A.
Purchases personal property with an expressed or implied agreement or
understanding to sell back at a subsequent time at a stipulated price; or
B.
Lends money upon goods, wares or merchandise pledged, stored or deposited as
collateral security.
C.
§ 337-108 PAWNBROKERS § 341-104
341:1
PAWN TICKET — The card, book, receipt or other record furnished to the pledger at
the time loan is granted, containing the terms of the contract for a loan.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, business corporation, nonprofit
corporation, common law trust, joint-stock company or any group of individuals,
however organized.
PLEDGE — An article or articles deposited with a pawnbroker as security for a loan in
the course of his/her business as defined in the preceding definition.
PLEDGER—The person who obtains the loan from a pawnbroker and delivers a pledge
into the possession of a pawnbroker, unless such person discloses that he/she is or was
acting for another, in which case a "pledger" means the disclosed principal.
§ 341-105. License certificate and renewal.
§ 341-106. Regulations.
A. License. Pawnbrokers shall not be authorized to engage in business in the Township
of Middletown until obtaining a pawnbroker's license certificate.
B. License certificate. The license certificates are issued by the Township's
Department of Licenses and Inspections. The license certificate fee is as set from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. The license year begins
October 1 annually. All licenses expire October 1 following the date of issuance
regardless of the date of issuance. The license certificate shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in the office of the licensee so that it will be in full view of the
public at all times. [Amended 10-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03]
C. Renewal of license. All licenses expire on October 1 next following the date of
issuance and must be renewed by the applicant on or before the date of expiration
at the Township Department of Licenses and Inspections for a fee as set from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. [Amended 10-19-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-03]
A. Records required. Pawnbrokers are required to maintain records of all business
transactions. These records are to be kept in the English language. These records
are to be retained for a period of two years after the date of the payment of any loan,
or when the loan is not paid, the records of a pawnbroker shall be retained for a
period of two years after the date of the sale of the pledge. These records will
include, but not be limited to, the make, model, serial number and description,
color, special markings of the pledge as well as the identity of the pledger. Copy of
all pawn tickets containing this information will be remitted to the Middletown
Township Police Department within five working days of the transaction, and the
pledge will be kept in unaltered condition for 10 full working days after report of
its purchase has been filed with the Police Department.
B. Inspection. The pledge will be available for inspection during the 10 working days
following its report by law enforcement officials in the course of their law
enforcement duties. A search warrant shall not be required unless the inspection is
made during hours other than those when the pawnbroker is open for business.
C. Identity of pledger. The pawnbroker shall obtain the following information from
§ 341-104 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 341-106
341:2
§ 341-107. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate, fail, neglect or refuse to comply
with any provision of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before
a Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be subject to a thirtyday
suspension of his/her operating license and/or be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues
or each section of this chapter which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute
a separate offense.
the pledger:
(1) The verified name, date of birth and address of the pledger, requiring proof of
identity from the pledger sufficient to ensure the accuracy of the represented
information.
(2) An accurate physical description of the pledger, including race, gender, eye
and hair color and identifying marks, if any.
D. Business with minors. A pawnbroker shall not accept a pledge from any person
under the age of 18 years.
E. Stolen property. A pawnbroker may seize any property offered in pledge which he/
she has reason to believe is stolen property. The pawnbroker shall issue seizure
receipt to the person presenting such property in pledge and shall immediately
deliver such seized property together with a copy of the seizure receipt to the
Middletown Township Police Department. A pawnbroker must turn over stolen
property taken in pledge upon request to the Middletown Township Police
Department. A property receipt for the pledge will be issued to the pawnbroker by
the Police Department.
§ 341-106 PAWNBROKERS § 341-107
341:3

Chapter 345
PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND TRANSIENT BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 320.
§ 345-101. Definitions. [Amended 7-10-1979 by Ord. No. 79-10; 7-29-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-14]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Township of Middletown or such
other person designated by the Board of Supervisors to administer the provisions of this
chapter.[Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
DOCUMENT — Any identification card, document for minors or temporary/transient
business license issued pursuant to this chapter.
DOCUMENT FOR MINORS — The document required under the provisions of this
chapter for minors under 18 years of age who engage in solicitation, peddling or a
temporary/transient business.
IDENTIFICATION CARD — The document required under the provisions of this
chapter for persons engaged in solicitation or peddling.
NO-SOLICITATION REGISTRY — A list maintained by the Township of those
persons and businesses within the Township who do not wish or desire to be contacted
by persons engaged in any of the various forms of peddling, soliciting and/or temporary/
transient business governed and regulated by this chapter.[Added 6-6-2016 by Ord. No.
16-04]
PEDDLING — The activity of any person who, travelling by foot, wagon, automobile,
motor truck, or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or
from street to street, carries, conveys or transports goods, wares, services or merchandise
for the purpose of selling or offering for sale such goods, wares, services or merchandise
and providing immediate delivery thereof. The word "peddling" shall include the words
"hawking" and "vending."
SOLICITING—The activity of any person who, travelling by foot, wagon, automobile,
motor truck or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house,
or from street to street, seeks, takes or attempts to take contracts or orders for any goods,
wares, services, merchandise or subscriptions for future delivery, whether or not such
individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether
he is collecting advance payment on such sales or not. The term "soliciting" shall further
mean:
The seeking or taking of contracts or orders for home or other building repairs,
improvements and alterations and also orders or contracts for any mechanical,
electrical, plumbing or heating device or equipment for the home.
A.
§ 341-107 PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND TRANSIENT § 345-101
345:1
TEMPORARY OR TRANSIENT BUSINESS — A business conducted from:
TEMPORARY/TRANSIENT BUSINESS LICENSE — The document required under
the provisions of this chapter for persons engaged in a temporary/transient business.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middletown, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 345-102. Registration required; exceptions. [Amended 7-10-1979 by Ord. No.
79-10; 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
B. The seeking of contributions of money, property or any other items.
C. Any activity which directly leads to an act of solicitation as defined in this section.
No designated location or site in the Township, but not including those provided for
and defined under "peddling" or "soliciting";
A.
A motel room or other similar location normally rented on a daily or weekly basis;
or
B.
A store or similar location where the business operator has no written lease or the
term of the basic agreement is for a period of three months or less.
C.
A. No person shall, either in a public or private place or by entering in or upon private
property within the boundaries of the Township, without having first registered and
obtained an identification card or document for minors or temporary/transient
business license from the Chief of Police: [Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No.
08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
(1) Solicit funds for any charitable purpose or any other purpose whatsoever;
(2) Solicit orders, or vend, peddle or hawk any article; or
(3) Engage in any temporary or transient business.
B. This section shall not apply to:
(1) Farmers selling their own products.
(2) Any manufacturers or producers selling or distributing meat and meat products
or milk or dairy products.
(3) Anyone regularly engaged in the distribution of fresh produce.
(4) Anyone regularly engaged in laundry or dry cleaning services or daily or
weekly newspapers.
(5) Commercial travelers or sales agents selling to dealers or retailers in the usual
course of business.
(6) Persons authorized to solicit funds on behalf of volunteer fire companies,
volunteer rescue squads and community youth organizations located in the
Township or adjacent boroughs.
C. Children.
§ 345-101 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 345-102
345:2
§ 345-103. Required conduct. [Amended 7-10-1979 by Ord. No. 79-10; 7-29-1986
by Ord. No. 86-14]
All persons engaging in any solicitation, peddling, vending, hawking or temporary/
transient business must:
§ 345-104. Application for solicitors of funds. [Amended 7-10-1979 by Ord. No.
79-10; 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
Every person who seeks to register for the purpose of soliciting funds shall furnish the
following information, verified by oath or affirmation, to the Chief of Police at the time
of making application for the required identification card:
(1) Children under 16 years of age who are employed or engaged by any
individual, partnership, firm or corporation for the purpose of soliciting funds
for any purpose or soliciting orders or vending, peddling or hawking any
articles shall not be required to obtain an individual identification card. Said
children must, however, comply with and satisfy the provisions of § 345-112B
and C.
(2) The individual, partnership, firm or corporation employing or engaging such
children shall be responsible for and liable for the actions of said children
when soliciting, vending, peddling or hawking.
D. All persons engaging in any solicitation, vending, peddling, hawking or temporary/
transient business must comply with the provisions of this chapter regarding
conduct, whether or not such persons are required to have an identification card or
license. Such provisions are set forth in § 345-103.
A. Immediately vacate the premises upon request by the owners, tenants or person in
charge thereof;
B. Engage in their activity in such a manner so as not to interfere, obstruct or impede
the convenience of the public or pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
C. At all times conduct their activities reasonably and with a view towards the safety
of the community; and
D. At all times conduct their activities in compliance with the provisions of Chapter
500, Zoning, of the Code.
E. Not, at any time, nor in any manner or fashion, contact any person, business or
property identified and/or listed on and/or in the Township no-solicitation registry.
[Added 6-6-2016 by Ord. No. 16-04]
A. Full name of the registrant and local address, if any.
B. Permanent address.
C. If an individual, a statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of any crime and, if so, when, where, the nature of the offense, and
punishment or penalty imposed therefor.
§ 345-102 PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND TRANSIENT § 345-104
345:3
§ 345-105. Application for solicitation of orders, vending, peddling, hawking.
[Amended 7-10-1979 by Ord. No. 79-10; 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009
by Ord. No. 09-04]
Every person who seeks to register for the purpose of taking orders, vending, peddling
or hawking of any articles shall furnish the following information, verified by oath or
affirmation, to the Chief of Police at the time of making application for the required
identification card or cards and document for minors:
D. If a partnership, firm or corporation, a statement meeting the requirement of
§ 345-104C for each person to whom an identification card is to be issued.
E. If a charitable organization, a statement meeting the requirements of § 345-104C
for each person not a resident of the Township or of any borough contained within
the boundaries of the Township to whom an identification card is to be issued.
F. A statement sufficient to show the purpose for which the funds are being solicited.
G. The applicant shall also supply a recent photograph in a size specified for all
persons required to be licensed or registered under this chapter.
A. Full name of the registrant and local address, if any.
B. Permanent address.
C. If an individual, a statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of any crime, and if so, when, where, the nature of the offense and
punishment or penalty imposed therefor.
D. If a partnership, firm or corporation, a statement meeting the requirements of
§ 345-104A(3) for each person to whom an identification card is to be issued.
E. If different from that of registrant, the name and address of the firm or corporation
for or on whose behalf the orders are solicited, or the supplier of the goods involved.
F. If an individual, the name of his employer, if any.
G. If the individual, firm, partnership or corporation engaging in this activity for profit
employs a minor under the age of 18, the following information must also be
supplied:
(1) The name of the minor.
(2) The permanent address of the minor.
(3) The birthdate of the minor.
(4) Evidence that the employer and minor have complied with the applicable
sections of the Act of May 13, 1915, P.L. 286, § 1 et seq., 43 P.S. § 41 et seq.,
as amended.43
H. The nature of the goods, wares or merchandise offered for sale.
43. Editor's Note: 43 P.S. § 41, the Child Labor Law, was repealed by 2012, Oct. 24, P.L. 1209, No. 151, § 29, effective Jan.
22, 2013.
§ 345-104 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 345-105
345:4
§ 345-106. Application for temporary or transient business license. [Amended
7-10-1979 by Ord. No. 79-10; 7-29-1986 by Ord. No. 86-14]
I. The applicant shall also supply a recent photograph (in a size specified) for all
persons required to be licensed or registered under this chapter.
J. Such other information as the Chief of Police may deem necessary for the proper
police protection of the Township.
A. Every person who seeks to register for the purpose of engaging in a temporary/
transient business shall furnish the following information, verified by oath or
affirmation, to the Chief of Police at the time of making application for the required
license: [Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
(1) Full name of the registrant and local address, if any.
(2) Permanent address.
(3) Location of business and present zoning requirements.
(4) If an individual, a statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of any crime, if so, when, where, the nature of the offense and
punishment or penalty imposed therefor.
(5) If a partnership, firm or corporation, a statement meeting the requirement of
§ 345-106A(4) for each person engaged in the operation of said business.
(6) If different from that of the registrant, the name and address of the firm or
corporation for or on whose behalf the orders are solicited or the supplier of
the goods involved.
(7) If an individual, the name of his employer, if any.
(8) If the individual, firm, partnership or corporation engaging in this business
employs a minor under the age of 18, the following information must also be
supplied:
(a) The name of the minor.
(b) The permanent address of the minor.
(c) The birthdate of the minor.
(d) Evidence that the employer and minor have complied with the applicable
sections of the Act of May 13, 1915, P.L. 286, § 1 et seq., 43 P.S. § 41 et
seq., as amended.44
(9) Such other information as the Chief of Police may deem necessary for the
proper police protection of the Township.
B. Every person who seeks to register for the purpose of engaging in a temporary or
transient business which utilizes an outdoor display of any goods, wares or
44. Editor's Note: 43 P.S. § 41, the Child Labor Law, was repealed by 2012, Oct. 24, P.L. 1209, No. 151, § 29, effective Jan.
22, 2013.
§ 345-105 PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND TRANSIENT § 345-106
345:5
§ 345-107. Registration following verification. [Amended 7-10-1979 by Ord. No.
79-10; 7-29-1986 by Ord. No. 86-14; 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-04]
Upon satisfactorily furnishing the information required under § 345-104, 345-105 or
345-106, the applicant shall be registered by the Chief of Police in a book of registration
maintained for that purpose, but such registration may not be effective for 48 hours,
during which time the information given by the applicant may be verified. Thereafter, if
the applicant meets all legal requirements, he shall issue an identification card, document
for minors, or temporary/transient business license to the applicant as provided in
§ 345-108.
§ 345-108. Issuance of identification cards, documents for minors, temporary/
transient license. [Amended 7-10-1979 by Ord. No. 79-10]
merchandise offered for sale by said business shall submit the following
information, verified by oath or affirmation, along with a copy of his application
for a temporary or transient business license, to the Middletown Township Zoning
Officer:
(1) Description of the goods, wares or merchandise to be displayed, including the
type of such articles and approximate number.
(2) A plan of the premises to be used by the business, drawn to scale, showing the
following:
(a) The location of the goods, wares or merchandise to be displayed.
(b) The location of structures, sidewalks, parking areas and signs.
(3) Such other information as the Zoning Officer shall require in order to
determine that the proposed business is in compliance with Chapter 500,
Zoning, of this Code
A. Upon approval of the application as set forth in § 345-107, the Chief of Police shall
issue the following documents, when applicable, containing the following
information: [Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No.
09-04]
(1) Identification card.
(a) Name of individual.
(b) Address of individual.
(c) Sex.
(d) Color.
(e) Height and weight.
(f) Color of hair and eyes.
(g) A recent photograph of the individual.
§ 345-106 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 345-108
345:6
§ 345-109. Suspension and revocation. [Added 7-14-1981 by Ord. No. 81-14;
amended 7-10-1979 by Ord. No. 79-10; 7-29-1986 by Ord. No. 86-14; 12-1-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-13]
(2) Temporary/transient business license.
(a) Name of individual or corporation.
(b) Address of individual or corporation.
(c) Nature of goods, wares or merchandise offered for sale.
(3) Document for minors. If the individual, firm, partnership or association is
engaging in the soliciting, peddling or temporary/transient business for profit
and also employs minors under the age of 18, the applicant shall also be issued
a document setting forth the names, address and birthdays of those minors who
may solicit orders, peddle or engage in the temporary/transient business.
B. The identification cards shall be issued as follows:
(1) If the applicant is an individual, one card to him.
(2) If the applicant is a partnership, firm or corporation, one card each to such
employees as require the same for the proper performance of their duties, upon
submission by the applicant of their names and other required information.
C. At the time of issuance of the temporary/transient business license and the
identification card(s), the Chief of Police shall also issue to the applicant a copy of
the Township no-solicitation registry. The no-solicitation registry shall include the
names, addresses and/or phone numbers of those persons, businesses and/or
properties located within the Township who have placed such information on the
no-solicitation registry in furtherance of their express desire not to be contacted by
persons engaged in any of the various forms of peddling, soliciting and/or
temporary/transient business governed and regulated by this chapter. [Added
6-6-2016 by Ord. No. 16-04]
A. The issuance of any identification card, document for minors or temporary/transient
business license is expressly conditioned on the compliance with all the provisions
of this chapter.
B. Any identification card, document for minors or temporary/transient business
license may be suspended at any time by the Chief of Police should it develop or be
shown that the person to whom the document was issued has violated any of the
conditions set forth in § 345-103. The first violation shall result in suspension for a
period of 30 days; the second violation shall result in suspension for a period of 60
days; and subsequent violation shall result in revocation of said document.
[Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
C. Any document issued under this chapter may be revoked at any time by the Chief
of Police should it develop or be shown that the applicant furnished false
information in his application or should the applicant be arrested or convicted for a
crime involving moral turpitude after the issuance of the document. The document
may also be revoked if the applicant is arrested or convicted for disorderly practices
§ 345-108 PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND TRANSIENT § 345-109
345:7
§ 345-110. Duration of documents; renewal.
§ 345-111. Registration fee and renewal.45 [Amended 3-26-1956 by Ord. No. 58;
7-10-1979 by Ord. No. 79-10; 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
§ 345-112. Possession of card or document required for operation. [Amended
7-10-1979 by Ord. No. 79-10]
while pursuing the activities for which the document was issued and required.
Revocation may also occur as provided in § 345-109B. Any document revoked
because of an arrest pursuant to this section shall be immediately reissued following
acquittal or dismissal of the charges upon which the arrest was made. [Amended
12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
D. At the time of the suspension or revocation of any document issued under this
chapter, written notice shall be given to the holder of said document as to the cause
of the suspension or revocation. Any person whose document is suspended or
revoked may request a prompt hearing before the Board of Supervisors or its
designee. In any such hearing the Township shall have the burden of proving the
cause of the suspension or revocation.
A. All issued identification cards, documents or temporary/transient business licenses
shall be valid for a period of 30 days, but the registrant may make application for a
new document to be issued at any time after the expiration date of an identification
card, document for minors, or temporary/transient license he has previously held;
provided, however, that no more than three temporary/transient business licenses
shall be issued to the same individual, association, corporation or other entity in any
one calendar year.
B. No individual, firm, partnership or corporation whose document has been revoked
shall be eligible for renewal of the document, and no individual whose document
has been suspended shall be eligible for renewal during the term of the suspension.
A. Upon registration in accordance with this chapter, the applicant shall pay to the
Township Treasurer a registration fee as established from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors.
B. The fees established by resolution shall be paid upon each renewal of any
document.
A. No person shall solicit funds or take orders for or vend, peddle, hawk or offer for
sale any goods, wares or merchandise within the limits of the Township without
having in his possession the identification card or document for minors
hereinbefore mentioned.
B. Any minor for which a document for minors is required under § 345-108A(3) shall
not solicit orders for or vend, peddle, hawk or offer for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise within the limits of the Township without having in his possession a
copy of the document for minors hereinbefore mentioned.
45. Editor's Note: Township fee schedules are on file in the Township Municipal Building and available to be viewed on the
Township's website at www.middletownbucks.org.
§ 345-109 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 345-112
345:8
§ 345-113. Limitations on hours of business. [Amended 7-10-1979 by Ord. No.
79-10]
Persons engaging in soliciting or peddling hereunder shall not engage in said activity
before the hours of 9:00 a.m., nor after the hour of 8:30 p.m. on Monday through
Saturday, nor before the hour of 10:00 a.m. nor after the hour of 8:30 p.m. on Sunday.
§ 345-114. Existing regulations not affected.
This chapter shall not amend or repeal any existing ordinance or resolution now in
effect in the Township relating to any permits or licenses now being issued by any other
Township officer, but this chapter is in addition thereto.
§ 345-115. Disposition of monies.
All fines and penalties recovered under this chapter shall be paid to the Township
Treasurer for the general use of the Township.
§ 345-116. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-10-1979 by Ord. No. 79-10;
12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13; 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each section of this chapter
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
C. All other minors for which a document for minors is not required under
§ 345-108A(3) and for which an identification card is not required under
§ 345-102C shall not solicit orders for or vend, peddle, hawk or offer for sale any
goods, wares or merchandise within the limits of the Township without having in
their possession a copy of the identification card issued to the individual,
partnership, firm or corporation by whom the minor was engaged or employed.
D. No person shall engage in any temporary/transient business within the limits of the
Township without having in his possession the temporary/transient business license
hereinbefore mentioned.
§ 345-112 PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND TRANSIENT § 345-116
345:9

Chapter 352
POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS
§ 352-101. Restrictions.
No candidate for any elected Township office shall use the Township of Middletown's
facilities, equipment or materials of any kind whatsoever, either directly or indirectly, to
further or promote his or her political campaign, without prior written approval from the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 352-102. Statutory regulations prevail.
Nothing in this chapter shall supersede the regulations of the Election Code of the State
of Pennsylvania, 25 P.S. § 2601 et seq.
§ 352-103. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation, partnership or entity who violates the provisions of this
chapter, upon being found guilty, may be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $600. A
separate offense shall arise for each day or portion thereof in which a violation is found
to exist.
§ 345-116 POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS § 352-103
352:1

Chapter 358
PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 341. Peddling, soliciting and transient business — See Ch. 345.
§ 358-101. Purposes. [Amended 5-2-2011 by Ord. No. 11-02]
This chapter is enacted to promote and foster the health, protection, safety, morals,
welfare and benefit of the citizens and inhabitants of the Township of Middletown and
the public at large, in their persons and their property, by requiring dealers in precious
metals to undertake certain identification, reporting and recordkeeping procedures
deemed necessary and proper by the Township so as to aid and assist law enforcement
officials, including the Township Police Department, in the investigation of robberies,
burglaries and other thefts occurring within the Township, and so as to aid and assist
law enforcement officials, including the Township Police Department, in the recovery of
property stolen and taken during such robberies, burglaries and other thefts.
§ 358-102. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, minimum requirements for
the promotion of the public safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare shall be
followed. Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than those
of any statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall be
controlling. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose
greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance or
regulation shall be controlling.
§ 358-103. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Middletown Township Precious
Metals Ordinance."
§ 358-104. Definitions. [Amended 5-2-2011 by Ord. No. 11-02]
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be construed
throughout this chapter to have the meaning indicated hereinbelow. The singular shall
include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular.
DEALER IN PRECIOUS METALS — An individual, partnership, association,
corporation (whether nonprofit or for-profit), business entity, or any other group of
individuals, however organized, who or that purchase precious metals, or any individual,
partnership, association, corporation (whether nonprofit or for-profit), business entity,
or any other group of individuals, however organized, who or that act as an agent for
an individual, partnership, association, corporation (whether nonprofit or for-profit),
business entity, or any other group of individuals, however organized, for and/or in the
§ 352-103 PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS § 358-104
358:1
purchase of precious metals.
PRECIOUS METALS —Any item that is and/or that contains gold of 10 karat fineness
or greater, silver and/or platinum, including but not limited to jewelry and silver services.
§ 358-105. License and records of transactions. [Amended 5-2-2011 by Ord. No.
11-02; 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 14-02]
A. Dealers to be licensed. A dealer in precious metals shall be licensed in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Precious Metals Act (P.L. 92, No. 17).46 This license shall be
posted or otherwise prominently displayed so as to be in full view of the public at
all times.
B. Dealers to keep records. A dealer in precious metals shall keep a record of every
transaction involving precious metals. Such records shall completely, accurately
and legibly record the details of every such transaction, set forth on a form that
meets and satisfies all of the requirements for information as set forth in this
section, below, and that is approved by the Office of Attorney General of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Sheriff of Bucks County. The record shall
include, but not be limited to:
(1) The name, address, age, sex, race and driver's license number, if any, of the
seller. The identity of the seller shall be established and verified by requiring
the seller to produce an identification issued by a governmental agency with a
photo of the seller thereon, if available, and at least one other corroborating
means of identification. Otherwise, identification sufficient to reliably
establish the person's true identity shall be required, which item(s) of
identification shall be recorded and photocopied by the dealer in precious
metals. The seller shall be required to sign the form on which is recorded the
information required by this section.
(2) An accurate description of the items of precious metal purchased, including all
names, initials, serial numbers or other identifying marks or monograms on
each item purchased.
(3) A digital photograph of the property purchased that completely, accurately and
legibly depicts the items of precious metal purchased, including, whenever
possible, all names, initials, serial numbers or other identifying marks or
monograms on each item purchased.
(4) The time and date and location of the transaction, which shall be recorded at
the time of the transaction.
C. Records to be maintained by dealer. The records of transactions described in
Subsection B above shall be maintained by the dealer in precious metals for a period
of two years from the date of the transaction and shall be available for inspection at
any time by any law enforcement official.
D. Records to be filed with the Township. A complete, accurate and legible copy of
every such record of transaction described in Subsection B above shall be filed with
46. Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 1931 et seq.
§ 358-104 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 358-105
358:2
§ 358-106. Electronic inventory tracking database systems. [Added 4-21-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-02]
the Middletown Township Police Department and the Bucks County District
Attorney by the close of the next working day after the day on which the precious
metal is purchased. The transaction records shall include photocopies and/or digital
copies of the forms, descriptions and photographs described in Subsection B above.
E. Records to be filed in electronic inventory tracking database systems. A complete,
accurate and legible copy of every such record of transaction described in
Subsection B above shall be filed on, in and with any and all electronic inventory
tracking database systems as selected and identified by the Middletown Township
Police Department by the close of the next working day after the day on which the
precious metal is purchased. The transaction records shall include photocopies and/
or digital copies of the forms, descriptions and photographs described in Subsection
B above, together with any and all other information required by each and every
such electronic inventory tracking database system, all in the form and format as
required by each such electronic inventory tracking database system.
F. Inspection of precious metals. Each item of precious metal purchased by a dealer in
precious metals shall be retained in unaltered condition for 20 full working days
after report of its purchase and all of the records of the transaction associated
therewith have been filed with the Middletown Township Police Department and
the Bucks County District Attorney. Each item of precious metal purchased by a
dealer in precious metals shall be available for inspection by law enforcement
officials and personnel during this twenty-day period, within the regular business
hours of the dealer in precious metals. A search warrant or order of court shall not
be required for such inspection as described herein unless such inspection is
requested to occur at a time that is not within the regular business hours of the
dealer in precious metals.
G. Business with minors. A dealer in precious metals shall not conduct or engage in a
transaction involving precious metals with any person under the age of 18 years.
A. Participation by Township in electronic inventory tracking database systems. On or
before June 1, 2014, the Middletown Township Police Department shall identify
and select one or more online electronic inventory tracking database systems for the
purpose of aiding and assisting law enforcement officials, including the Township
Police Department, in the investigation of robberies, burglaries and other thefts
occurring within the Township, and for the purpose of aiding and assisting law
enforcement officials, including the Township Police Department, in the recovery
of property stolen and taken during such robberies, burglaries and other thefts. The
Middletown Township Police Department shall register and enroll in, on and with
each such online electronic inventory tracking database system so identified and
selected. In addition to any and/all other rules, regulations and/or requirements of
the Township, each such online electronic inventory tracking database system shall
utilize, maintain and employ technology that protects all records, data and
information entered and/or provided by the Township Police Department and/or
dealers in precious metals from any and all forms of unauthorized access and/or
malicious intrusion. The Township Police Department and each and every dealer in
precious metals shall access each and every such online electronic inventory
§ 358-105 PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS § 358-106
358:3
§ 358-107. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08;
4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 14-02]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate, fail, neglect or refuse to comply
with any provision of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before
a Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of
this chapter continues or each section of this chapter which shall be found to have been
violated shall constitute a separate offense.
tracking database system by means of a confidential, separate and distinct user
identification and password issued by the online electronic inventory tracking
database system directly to the Township Police Department or to each and every
such dealer in precious metals, as the case may be.
B. Participation by dealers in precious metals in electronic inventory tracking database
systems. On or before July 1, 2014, each and every dealer in precious metals shall
register and enroll in, on and with each such online electronic inventory tracking
database system identified and selected by Middletown Township Police
Department as described in Subsection A above and shall further conform with and
abide by any and all such rules, regulations and/or requirements of the Township
and/or each such online electronic inventory tracking database system. Any and all
fees imposed by the Township in relation to enrollment, registration and/or
participation in each and every such online electronic inventory tracking database
system identified and selected by Middletown Township Police Department shall
be paid to the Township by a dealer in precious metals within 30 days of the
issuance of an invoice by the Township. Any and all such fees shall be established,
from time to time, by the Township as part of the Township Fee Schedule
Resolution.47
47. Editor's Note: Township fee schedules are on file in the Township Municipal Building and available to be viewed on the
Township's website at www.middletownbucks.org.
§ 358-106 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 358-107
358:4
Chapter 363
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Technical Code Review Board — See Ch. 15, Art. I.
Construction standards — See Ch. 190.
Firesafety inspections — See Ch. 249.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 312.
Storage facilities and units — See Ch. 425.
§ 358-107 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 358-107
363:1

ARTICLE I
International Property Maintenance Code
[Adopted 9-8-2020 by Ord. No. 20-0748]
§ 363-101. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code.
§ 363-102. Additions, insertions, and changes.
The Code, as the Property Maintenance Code adopted by Middletown Township, is
hereby amended and revised at the sections set forth below:
A. The 2015 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code (the "Code"), as
published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of Middletown Township, regulating and governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings, and structures; by providing
the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and
conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit for
occupation and use; and providing for the condemnation of buildings and structures
unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures
in Middletown Township. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of the Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof, as
fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, and changes, if any,
prescribed in this Chapter 363, Property Maintenance.
B. Three copies of the Code shall be at all times kept available for public inspection in
the office of the Department of Licenses and Inspections of the Township of
Middletown.
A. Section 101.1. Title. This section shall be amended to read as follows: "These
regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of Middletown
Township (the "Code")."
B. Section 102.3. Application of Other Codes. The last sentence in this section shall
be revised so that it reads as follows: "Nothing in this Code shall be construced to
cancel, modify, or set aside any provision of the Middletown Township Zoning
Ordinance."
C. Section 103.1. General. This section shall be amended to read as follows: "The
Middletown Township Department of Licenses and Inspections is hereby
designated to enforce this Code, and the Executive Official in charge thereof shall
be known as the "Code Official."
D. Section 103.2. Appointment. This section shall be deleted and amended to read as
follows: "The Code Official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of
the Township of Middletown. An official or employee connected with the
enforcement of this Code shall not be engaged in or directly or indirectly connected
with the furnishing of labor, materials, or appliances for the construction, alteration,
or maintenance of a building, or the preparation of construction documents thereof,
48. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, International Property Maintenance Code, adopted
8-12-2003 by Ord. No. 03-18, as amended.
§ 363-101 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 363-102
363:3
unless that official or employee is the owner of the building, nor shall such official
or employee engage in any work that conflicts with the official duties or the
interests of the Department of Licenses and Inspections."
E. Section 103.4. Liability. In the first sentence, the entity name "board of appeals"
shall be stricken, deleted, and replaced with the "Technical Code Review Board."
F. Section 103.5. Fees. This section shall be amended to read as follows: "The fees
for activities and services performed by the Department of Licenses and Inspections
in carrying out its responsibilities under the Code shall be established by resolution
of the by the Middletown Township Board of Supervisors, from time to time, as
deemed appropriate by Middletown Township."
G. Section 104.6. Department Records. This section shall be amended to read as
follows: "The Code Official shall keep official records of all business and activities
of the Department of Licenses and Inspections specified in the provisions of this
Code. Such records shall be retained in the official records as long as the building
or structure to which such records relate remains in existence, unless otherwise
provided for by other regulations or laws."
H. Section 106.4. Violation Penalties. This section is deleted in its entirety and
replaced with the following language: "Any person, firm, or corporation who or
which shall violate any provision of this code shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable attorney's
fees. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served in
accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate
offense. If the offending party neither pays, nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil
Procedure."
I. Section 111.1. Application for Appeal. In the first sentence, the entity name
"board of appeals" shall be stricken, deleted, and replaced with the "Technical Code
Review Board."
J. Sections 111.2 through 111.8, as described in more specific detail below, shall be
stricken and deleted in their entirety:
Section 111.2. Membership of board.
Section 111.2.1. Alternate members.
Section 111.2.2. Chairman.
Section 111.2.3. Disqualification of member.
Section 111.2.4. Secretary.
Section 1111.2.5. Compensation of members.
Section 111.3. Notice of meeting.
Section 111.4. Open hearing.
Section 111.4.1. Procedure.
Section 111.5. Postponed hearing.
Section 111.6. Board decision.
§ 363-102 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 363-102
363:4
§ 363-103. State law and other regulations.
Section 111.6.1. Records and copies.
Section 111.6.2. Administration.
Section 111.7. Court review.
Section 111.8. Stays of enforcement.
K. Section 112.4. Failure to Comply. This section is hereby amended by deleting the
phrase "shall be liable to a fine of not less than [AMOUNT] dollars or more than
[AMOUNT] dollars" and inserting the phrase "shall be liable to a fine of $1,000."
L. Section 302.4. Weeds. This section is hereby amended by inserting the phrase "six
inches in height" and adding the following sentence to the end of the section: "This
term shall not include lands under cultivation."
M. Section 302.8. Motor Vehicles. The first sentence of this section is hereby deleted
and replaced with the following sentence: "Except as provided for in other
regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed or uninspected motor vehicle which is out
of date by more than 30 days shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and
no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the
process of being stripped or dismantled."
N. Section 302.9. Defacement of Property. This section is hereby stricken and
deleted in its entirety.
O. Section 304.3. Premises Identification. This section is hereby stricken and deleted
in its entirety.
P. Section 304.14. Insect Screens. This section is hereby amended by deleting the
phrase "During the period from [DATE] to [DATE]" and inserting the phrase
"Throughout the entire year."
Q. Section 308. Rubbish and Garbage. This section, which spans from Section 308
to Section 308.3.2, is hereby stricken and deleted in its entirety.
R. Section 602.3. Heat Supply. Insert the dates "October 1 to June 1."
S. Section 602.4. Occupiable Work Spaces. This section is hereby amended by
deleting the phrase "during the period from [DATE] to [DATE]" and inserting the
phrase "throughout the entire year."
A. In all other matters that are regulated by the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the Commonwealth
promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations, as the case may be, shall
control where the requirements thereof are the same or in excess of the provisions
of this chapter. This chapter shall control in all cases where the state requirements
are not as strict as those contained herein.
B. Wherever the provisions or requirements of this article are in conflict with other
provisions or requirements of the Ordinances of Middletown Township, the most
restrictive, or those imposing the higher standards, shall govern, except as
§ 363-102 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 363-103
363:5
otherwise provided herein.
§ 363-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 363-103
363:6
Chapter 369
PUBLIC PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Graffiti — See Ch. 264. Park rules and regulations — See Ch. 337, Art. I.
§ 363-103 PUBLIC PROPERTY § 363-103
369:1

ARTICLE I
Protection of Public Property
[Adopted 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13 (Ch. 6, Part 5, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 369-101. Word usage.
As used in this article, the term "person" shall include any individual, corporation,
partnership, association, firm or other legal entity. The singular shall include the plural,
the plural shall include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter.
§ 369-102. Tampering with public property on streets, alleys or public ground
prohibited.
No person shall destroy, injure, tamper with or deface any public property of the
Township of Middletown, or any grass, walk, lamp, ornamental work, building, traffic
control device, street sign or streetlight on or in any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or
public grounds in the Township.
§ 369-103. Tampering with stakes, posts and monuments prohibited.
No person shall in any manner interfere or meddle with, or pull, drive, change, alter or
destroy any stake, post, monument or other marking made, placed or set, or hereafter
made, placed or set, or caused to be done by the authorities of the Township to evidence
the location, elevation, line, grade, corner or angle of any public street, alley, sidewalk,
curb, gutter, drain or other public work or thing.
§ 369-104. Tampering with warning lamps, signs or barricades prohibited.
No person shall destroy, remove, deface, obliterate or cover up any lamp, sign or
barricade erected as a warning of danger by the authorities of the Township or by any
person doing work by permission of the authorities of the Township on any of the streets,
alleys, sidewalks or bridges in the Township or on any public grounds of the Township
within or without the Township of Middletown.
§ 369-105. Removal of material from streets, alleys or public grounds prohibited.
No person shall take any earth, stone or other material from any street, alley or public
grounds in the Township, except in an emergency to protect the safety of the general
public.
§ 369-106. Deposit of harmful substances on streets, alleys, sidewalks or public
grounds prohibited.
No person shall pour, throw or deposit any harmful or destructive substance or matter on
any street, alley, sidewalk or public grounds in the Township.
§ 369-107. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to normal activities in connection with construction,
maintenance and repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks and public grounds and the structures
§ 369-101 PUBLIC PROPERTY § 369-107
369:3
and fixtures located thereon or therein or to incidental results of work done thereon or
therein upon permit from or by authority of the Township of Middletown.
§ 369-108. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section of this article
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 369-107 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 369-108
369:4
Chapter 377
RENTAL PROPERTY AND TRANSIENT DWELLINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 448.
§ 369-108 RENTAL PROPERTY AND TRANSIENT DWELLINGS § 369-108
377:1

ARTICLE I
Status of Occupancy Report
[Adopted 4-14-1976 by Ord. No. 76-6 (Ch. 11, Part 1, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 377-101. Definitions.
Unless otherwise herein expressly stated, the following terms shall have, for the purpose
of this article, the meanings herein respectively indicated.
LESSEE — That person or persons who has the use of real estate of a lessor and is
responsible for the giving of any type of consideration therefor, but excluding those who
are lessees for a period of less than 30 days.
LESSOR — Any person who grants a lease for the use of his real estate or portion
thereof, who owns and/or operates a transient dwelling, and/or who otherwise permits
the use of his real estate or portion thereof.[Amended 6-6-2016 by Ord. No. 16-0149]
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or corporation.
§ 377-102. Report of rentals and transient dwellings required. [Amended 6-6-2016
by Ord. No. 16-01]
All lessors, on or before May 1 of each year, shall report to the Township Manager,
in writing, the number of parcels or units of real estate that the lessor presently has
rented and/or has available for rental, a description (by address, number and/or some
other meaningful method) of said parcel or units, the names of the lessees of all such
units at the time of such report, and a designation as to which unit or parcel is occupied
by each such lessee. In addition, for any parcel or unit of real estate that constitutes a
transient dwelling unit, the lessor shall also report the number of persons who reside
in the transient dwelling unit at the time of such report, and the maximum number of
persons that can occupy the transient dwelling unit.
§ 377-103. Status of Occupancy Report.
The Township Manager shall prepare a form report entitled "Status of Occupancy
Report," which report form shall require the necessary information set forth above and
such other pertinent information that the Township may direct to be incorporated in
said report form. The failure to have such report form, however, shall not excuse the
obligation of lessors to provide the information required herein.
§ 377-104. Enforcement and remedies. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13;
6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
A. Enforcement notice.
(1) If it appears to the Township that a violation of this article has occurred, the
Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement
notice as provided in this section.
(2) The enforcement notice shall be sent to the violator and, if applicable, the
49. Editor's Note: This ordinance also changed the title of this chapter from "Rental Property" to "Rental Property and
Transient Dwellings."
§ 377-101 RENTAL PROPERTY AND TRANSIENT DWELLINGS § 377-104
377:3
owner of record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred; to any
person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices
regarding that parcel; and to any other person requested in writing by the
owner of record.
(3) An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(a) The name of the violator and, if applicable, the owner of record and any
other person against whom the Township intends to take action.
(b) The location of the violation and, if applicable, the property in violation.
(c) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have
not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provision of this
article.
(d) The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced and
the date before which the steps must be completed.
(e) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Board of
Supervisors within a period of 10 days.
(f) That the failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Board of Supervisors, constitutes a
violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
B. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted
the violation of the provisions of this article shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay
a judgment of not more than $600 plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney's fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of determination of
a violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day that a violation
continues or each section of this article which shall be found to have been
violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to
any person or entity other than the Township the right to commence any action
for enforcement pursuant to this section.
(3) Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings
brought under this section.
§ 377-104 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 377-104
377:4
ARTICLE II
Apartment Inspections
[Adopted 3-15-2021 by Ord. No. 21-04]
§ 377-201. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have, for the purposes of
this article only, the meanings set forth below:
APARTMENT COMPLEX OFFICIAL—The owner or individual in charge of the dayto-
day operation or management of the apartment complex.
APARTMENT COMPLEX(ES) — A grouping of rental dwellings that are located
within the same building, share common elements, or share common outside access,
with the exception of the following: 1) hotel and motel units, where a change in
occupancy occurs at least every 30 days; and 2) nursing homes, hospitals, and other such
institutional facilities.
BIANNUAL or BIANNUALLY — Once every two years.
RENTAL DWELLING — Any rental or tenant-occupied single-family dwelling, room
or group of rooms located within a building and forming a single, habitable unit with
facilities intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating by one single
family.
§ 377-202. Apartment complex inspection requirements.
All apartment complexes in Middletown Township shall be subject to inspection by the
Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer or employee or an official from the
Office of Fire and Emergency Management as follows:
A. The Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer (or employee) or an official
from the Office of Fire and Emergency Management shall inspect each apartment
complex, including each dwelling unit therein, biannually for compliance with the
Middletown Township Code of Ordinances, including, but not necessarily limited
to, the Property Maintenance Code, the Fire Code, and the Uniform Construction
Code.
B. Such inspections shall pertain only to compliance with the Middletown Township
Code of Ordinances and may not involve any inspection or searches of tenant
belongings unrelated to determining compliance with the Middletown Township
Code of Ordinances.
C. The Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer (or employee) or an official
from the Office of Fire and Emergency Management shall provide advance notice
of the biannual inspection to the responsible apartment complex official.
D. Upon receiving notice of an upcoming biannual apartment complex inspection from
the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer (or employee) or an official
from the Office of Fire and Emergency Management, each responsible apartment
complex official must inform every tenant in the building of the inspection,
anticipated inspection date, and scope of inspection.
§ 377-201 RENTAL PROPERTY AND TRANSIENT DWELLINGS § 377-202
377:5
§ 377-203. Rental dwelling requirements.
All rental dwellings in Middletown Township shall be subject to inspection by the
Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer (or employee) as follows:
E. If any tenant in the apartment complex to be inspected objects to the Building and
Zoning Code Enforcement Officer (or employee) or the official from the Office of
Fire and Emergency Management's entry into that tenant's unit, each responsible
apartment complex official must promptly inform the Building and Zoning Code
Enforcement Officer (or employee) or the official from the Office of Fire and
Emergency Management, whichever provided notice of the inspection.
F. If any tenant or responsible apartment complex official refuses entry for the
biannual inspection, the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer (or
employee) or the official from the Office of Fire and Emergency Management may
pursue legal means to enter the building for such inspections, including, but not
limited to, obtaining an administrative warrant.
G. The Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer (or employee) or the Office of
Fire and Emergency Management shall keep records of the inspections in
accordance with the Uniform Construction Code, the Fire Code, and the Property
Maintenance Code.
H. The Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer (or employee) or the official
from the Office of Fire and Emergency Management may charge a fee to cover
administration and enforcement costs pertaining to the biannual apartment complex
inspections. The fee shall be incorporated into Middletown Township's publicly
available fee schedule.
A. Before the rental of any rental dwelling to a new or initial tenant, it shall be the duty
of the owner, landlord, property manager, or their agents or employees, to make
application for and secure a certificate of approval from the Middletown Township
Department of Building and Zoning. Failure to arrange for an inspection shall
constitute a violation of this article.
B. A certificate of approval shall be issued where the Building and Zoning Code
Enforcement Officer (or employee) determines that the rental dwelling meets the
requirements of the Middletown Township Code of Ordinances, including, but not
limited to, the Property Maintenance Code, the Fire Code, and the Uniform
Construction Code.
C. If the rental dwelling is in violation of the Middletown Township Code of
Ordinances, the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer (or employee)
shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the code violation, and further, shall
determine whether the violation constitutes a danger to the health and safety of the
rental dwelling's occupants or the general public.
D. If the violation of the Middletown Township Code of Ordinances constitutes a
danger to health and safety, the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer (or
employee) shall notify the applicant, in writing, that the rental dwelling shall not be
occupied until the violation is abated and a certificate of approval is issued.
§ 377-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 377-203
377:6
§ 377-204. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation who or which shall violate any provision of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court
costs and reasonable attorney's fees. Each day that a violation continues after due notice
has been served in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof shall be deemed a
separate offense. If the offending party neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil
Procedure.
E. If the violation of the Middletown Township Code of Ordinances does not
constitute a danger to health and safety, the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement
Officer (or employee) shall issue a certificate of approval on the condition that the
violation be corrected by a certain date, to be determined by the Building and
Zoning Code Enforcement Officer (or employee), and that the applicant correct the
violation and arrange for a reinspection of the rental dwelling on or before the said
date. Failure to arrange for a reinspection to correct a violation on or before the date
provided by the Building and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer (or employee)
shall constitute a violation of this article.
F. The certificate of approval shall become invalid upon the rental dwelling becoming
vacant, or upon notice of revocation for violation of the provisions of the
Middletown Township Code of Ordinances from the Building and Zoning Code
Enforcement Officer (or employee). Thereafter, a certificate of approval will be
issued after the inspection and determination that the rental dwelling is fit for
occupancy as provided for under the provisions of the Middletown Township Code
of Ordinances.
G. The fee for the issuance of a certificate of approval shall be set from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of Middletown Township.
H. Failure to comply with any one of the foregoing requirements shall constitute a
violation, subject to the penalties provided for herewith.
I. Issuance of a certificate of approval shall not relieve the owner of a rental dwelling
from the duty to comply with all other applicable requirements of the Middletown
Township Code of Ordinances.
§ 377-203 RENTAL PROPERTY AND TRANSIENT DWELLINGS § 377-204
377:7

Chapter 405
SMOKING
§ 405-101. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
SCHOOL BUILDING — Any facility either owned or leased by the Neshaminy School
District that is currently being used to accommodate students.
SCHOOL BUS—Any vehicle either owned or leased by the Neshaminy School District
that is currently being used to transport students.
SCHOOL GROUNDS — Any grounds owned or leased by the Neshaminy School
District.
SMOKING — Possession of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe or other lighted smoking
equipment.
STUDENTS — Any individual who is enrolled in the educational classes conducted
within the school buildings of the Neshaminy School District.
TOBACCO USE — Smoking and the use of smokeless tobacco in any form.
§ 405-102. Prohibited conduct.
§ 405-103. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each section of this chapter
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 405-104. Conflict.
Whenever the requirements of this chapter are in conflict with other requirements of the
ordinances of the Township of Middletown, the most restrictive or those imposing the
higher standards shall govern.
A. Smoking and tobacco use by students is prohibited in all school buildings and on
all school grounds and school buses. It is unlawful for a student to carry or use a
lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette or smokeless tobacco in these locations.
B. School officials, in cooperation with the Fire Marshal, shall post "No Smoking"
signs in each building, structure, room or place where smoking is prohibited. It shall
be unlawful to remove, deface, mutilate or destroy a "No Smoking" sign.
§ 377-204 SMOKING § 405-104
405:1

Chapter 411
SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND GRADING CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Chs. 430 and 431.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 436.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 440.
Shade trees — See Ch. 462.
Zoning — See Ch. 500.
§ 411-101. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Soil Erosion, Sedimentation
and Grading Control Ordinance," implementing Title 25, Rules and Regulations, Part
I, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection, Subpart
C, Protection of Natural Resources, Article II, Water Resources, Chapter 102, Erosion
Control, of the Pennsylvania Code.
§ 411-102. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are to regulate the modification of the natural terrain, the
alteration of drainage, and to provide for certain erosion and sediment control measures
within the Township of Middletown, and to assure and safeguard health, safety, ecology
and the general welfare in the Township of Middletown.
§ 411-103. Scope.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, any grading, paving, earth disturbance
and alteration of drainage within the Township of Middletown or activity qualified under
§ 411-105 or 411-106 herein shall be in conformity with this chapter. In the event of a
conflict between this chapter and floodplain regulations, the floodplain regulations shall
take precedence.
§ 411-104. Definitions. [Amended 8-16-2000 by Ord. No. 00-09]
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ALLUVIAL SOILS — An azonal great group of soils, developed from transported and
relatively recently deposited material (alluvium), characterized by a weak modification
(or none) of the original material by soil-forming processes.
CUT AND/OR FILL — Process of earthmoving by excavating part of an area and/or
using excavated material for embankments or fill areas.
EROSION —
A. The wearing away of the land surface by running water, wind, ice, chemical or other
§ 405-104 SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND GRADING § 411-104
411:1
GRADE —
FLOODWAY — That portion of the floodplain (NFIP definition), including the
watercourse channel and adjacent land areas, which must be reserved to carry the
one-hundred-year recurrent interval flood without cumulatively increasing the flood
elevation more than one foot.
RUNOFF (HYDRAULICS) — That portion of the precipitation on a drainage area or
watershed that is discharged from the area in stream channels; types include surface
runoff, groundwater runoff or seepage.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being
transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, gravity or ice and has
come to rest on the earth's surface either above or below sea level.
SLOPE — Degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in
percent or degrees.
SOIL DRAINAGE—A condition of the soil, referring to the frequency and duration of
periods when the soil is free of saturation.
WATERCOURSE — A natural drainage route or channel for the flow of water.
§ 411-105. General requirements.
Whenever the landscape is to be permanently disturbed as to either contours, soil or
slope characteristics, or vegetation, or any ground cover is to be permanently removed,
a plan is required showing how resulting erosion and sediment shall be controlled. This
plan shall include the following:
§ 411-106. Activities requiring grading permit.
The following activities require a grading permit:
geological agents.
B. Detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
A. The slope of a road, channel or natural ground.
The finished surface of a canal bed, roadbed, top of embankment or bottom of
excavation; any surface prepared for the support of construction like paving or
laying a conduit.
B.
To finish the surface of a canal bed, roadbed, top of embankment or bottom of
excavation.
C.
A. The amount of site alteration proposed;
B. Development schedule; and
C. Erosion and sediment control practices (both temporary and permanent) and the
operation and maintenance arrangements.
A. Modifying, disturbing, blocking, diverting or otherwise adversely affecting the
natural overland or subsurface flow of stormwater.
§ 411-104 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 411-106
411:2
§ 411-107. Activities requiring no grading permit.
The following activities require no grading permit:
§ 411-108. Application for permit.
§ 411-109. Data required on plan. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-17]
The plan for a grading permit shall include any or all of the following elements, at the
discretion of the Township Engineer, as part of the plan submitted by an applicant for a
grading permit:
B. Construction, erection or installation of any drainage dam, ditch, culvert, drainage
pipe, bridge or any other structure or obstruction affecting the drainage of any
premises.
C. Paving, filling, stripping, excavating, grading or regrading of any land.
D. Disturbing the landscape, vegetation or any ground cover by any proposal involving
a disturbance area in excess of 2,500 square feet upon lands used for nonresidential
purposes and 7,500 square feet upon lands used for residential purposes.
A. Improvements, such as erection of retaining walls, driveway paving, minor
regrading or activities on a property which do not adversely affect the natural
overland or subsurface flow of stormwater, drainage of any premises, or adversely
disturb the landscape, if such improvements are limited to a gross area of up to 25
acres on any one property.
B. Farming, gardening or lawn restoration, but not including sod farming.
A. Any person, firm or corporation proposing to engage in an activity requiring a
grading permit hereunder shall apply by the submission of a plan.
B. The applicant should, before submitting a preliminary plan for review, consult
Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development; Chapter 500, Zoning; and all
other applicable ordinances which regulate the development of land in the
Township of Middletown.
C. A separate plan shall be required for each grading permit.
D. Five copies of the proposed plan, including specifications and development
schedules, shall be submitted to the Building Inspector/Zoning Officer for a grading
permit. One copy shall be forwarded to each of the following: the Middletown
Township Planning Commission and the Township Engineer.
E. The plan for a grading permit shall be accompanied by a fee established in the
Township of Middletown's Schedule of Fees50 and collection procedures for all
applications and other matters pertaining to Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land
Development, and this chapter.
50. Editor's Note: Township fee schedules are on file in the Township Municipal Building and available to be viewed on the
Township's website at www.middletownbucks.org.
§ 411-106 SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND GRADING § 411-109
411:3
§ 411-110. Special requirements. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-17]
In addition to the requirements of § 411-109, and where deemed necessary by the
Township Engineer or the Building Inspector/Zoning Officer, the applicant shall submit
with the plan a detailed drainage study prepared by a registered professional engineer
qualified in hydrology in the commonwealth. This study shall include:
A. A valid boundary line survey of the site on which the work is to be performed.
B. A description of the features, existing and proposed, surrounding the site which are
of importance to the proposed development.
C. A plan of the general topography (including drainage) and soil conditions on the
site (latter available through the County Conservation District).
D. The location and a description of existing and future man-made features of
importance to the proposed development (i.e., cuts and/or fills, buildings, roads and
driveways).
E. Plans and specifications of soil erosion and sediment control measures in
accordance with standards and specifications of the Township of Middletown and
the County Conservation District.
F. A development schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates of
the development sequence and the time of exposure of each area prior to the
completion of effective erosion and sediment control measures.
G. A plan for stormwater management, if required, in accordance with § 440-406 of
Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development, as set forth in the Code of the
Township of Middletown.
A. A plan of the property showing the location of all present and proposed ditches,
streams, pipes and other drainage structures, and proposed cuts and/or fills. In
addition to showing present elevations and dimensions and location and extent of
all proposed grading and/or drainage, the plan shall clearly indicate all woodlands,
buildings, parking areas and driveways. Further, the plan shall indicate the present
and proposed sources, storage and disposition of water being channeled through or
across the premises, together with elevations, gradients and maximum flow rates.
The plan shall describe the work to be performed and disposition of cut and/or fill,
the materials to be used and the manner or method of performance, including
provisions for protecting and maintaining existing drainage facilities whether on
public or private property. The applicant shall also supply the supporting data for
the plan as developed by the engineer.
B. Calculations to determine runoff, which shall be based on the Soil-Cover-Complex
Method, a description of which is available from the United States Department of
Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service and outlined in the currently
effective Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Manual as published by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection.
(1) The design criteria for storm sewer piping on inlet systems within a
subdivision being developed shall be designed for a twenty-five-year
§ 411-109 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 411-110
411:4
frequency storm; culverts across roadways shall be designed for a fifty-year
frequency storm; open watercourses and swales shall be designed for a onehundred-
year frequency storm as prescribed in accordance with the following:
(a) The coefficient of runoff used for all areas upstream of any drainage
structure shall be computed on the basis of existing land use and the
projected land use described and shown on the Middletown Township
Comprehensive Plan and adjacent municipalities' comprehensive plans,
where applicable.
(2) The following provisions apply to the carrying and disposal of stormwater
runoff:
(a) All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry surface water in such a
manner as to prevent erosion or overflow.
(b) The applicant shall agree to the granting and recording of easements
covering the installation and maintenance of drainage facilities.
(c) The rate of runoff shall be no greater during and after the range of design
storms (from the two-year to the one-hundred-year storm) when the
development is completed than that which existed before the
development began. Appropriate measures or calculations shall be
provided to verify such provisions in those areas of the Township which
are not located within the Neshaminy Creek Watershed.
(d) The rate of runoff shall be in accordance with those provisions set forth
in § 440-406H of Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development, as
set forth in the Code of the Township of Middletown, for those areas of
the Township located within the Neshaminy Creek Watershed.
(e) In all areas of the Township, the volume of the runoff resulting from the
one-year, twenty-four-hour design storm (2.7 inches) will be detained for
a minimum twenty-four-hour period in accordance with § 440-406G of
Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development, as set forth in the Code
of the Township of Middletown.
C. A soils investigation report, if load-bearing fill is proposed, which shall consist of
test borings, laboratory testings and engineering analysis to correlate surface and
subsurface conditions with the proposed grading plan. The results of the
investigation shall be presented in a report by a registered professional soils
engineer and shall include data regarding the nature, distribution and supporting
ability of existing soils and rocks on the site, conclusions and recommendations to
ensure stable soil conditions and groundwater control, as applicable. The Township
of Middletown may require such supplemental reports and data as are deemed
necessary by the Township Engineer. Recommendations included in such reports
and approved by the Township Engineer shall be incorporated in the plan or
specifications. In addition:
(1) Fills toeing out on natural slopes steeper than four horizontal to one vertical
shall not be made unless a report is received which is deemed acceptable by
the Township Engineer and approved by the Board of Supervisors. The report
§ 411-110 SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND GRADING § 411-110
411:5
§ 411-111. Approval.
Upon the approval of the plan by the Township Engineer, the Building Inspector/Zoning
Officer shall issue the necessary grading permit.
§ 411-112. Standards for issuance of grading permit. [Amended 8-16-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-09]
shall be made by a registered professional soils engineer certifying that he has
investigated the property, made soils tests and that, in his opinion, such steeper
slopes will safely support the proposed fill.
(2) Natural and/or existing slopes exceeding five horizontal to one vertical shall
be benched or continuously stepped into competent materials prior to placing
all classes of fill.
A. Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter or any condition of the grading
permit, the permittee is responsible for the prevention of damage to other property
or personal injury which may be effected by the activity requiring a grading permit.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall modify, fill, excavate, pave, grade or regrade
land in any manner so close to a property line as to endanger or damage any
adjoining street, alley or any other public or private property without supporting
and protecting such property from settling, cracking, erosion, sediment, flooding or
any other physical damage or personal injury which might result.
C. No person, firm or corporation shall deposit or place any debris or any other
material whatsoever, or cause such to be thrown or placed, in any drainage ditch or
drainage structure in such a manner as to obstruct free flow.
D. No person, firm or corporation shall place any fill in any portion of any floodway
within the Township.
E. All new buildings, building additions, accessory buildings or other structures shall
have a finished floor elevation not less than two feet above the one-hundred-year
recurrence-interval flood elevation as calculated and determined by the applicant
and submitted for review and approval by the Township Engineer.
F. No person, firm or corporation shall fail to adequately maintain, in good operating
order, any drainage facility on his premises. All drainage ditches, culverts, drain
pipes and drainage structures shall be kept open and free-flowing at all times.
G. The owner of any property on which any work has been done pursuant to a grading
permit granted under this chapter shall continuously maintain and repair all graded
surfaces and anti-erosion devices, retaining walls, drainage structures or means and
other protective devices, plantings and ground cover installed or completed. The
Township is responsible for maintenance and repair within the right-of-way of
Township roads.
H. All graded surfaces shall be permanently seeded, sodded and/or planted or
otherwise protected from erosion within 30 days, weather permitting, and shall be
tended and/or maintained until growth is well established. The disturbed area and
§ 411-110 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 411-112
411:6
duration of exposure shall be kept to a minimum using temporary erosion and
sediment control measures immediately as outlined in the currently effective
Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Manual as published by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection.
I. All trees in an area of extreme grade change shall be protected with suitable tree
wells, unless necessity for removal is established. Precautions shall be taken to
prevent the unnecessary removal of trees.
J. When required, adequate provisions shall be made for dust control measures as are
deemed acceptable by the Township Engineer.
K. All plans and specifications submitted for a grading permit shall include provisions
for both interim (temporary) and ultimate (permanent) erosion and sediment
control. The design, installation and maintenance of erosion and sediment control
measures shall be accomplished in accordance with standards and specifications
established by the County Soil Conservation District, as adopted from standards
and specifications of the United States Natural Resources Conservation Service,
and as outlined in the currently effective Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Manual as published by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Protection.
(1) Technical standards for the design and installation of erosion and sediment
control measures are on file with the Township of Middletown, the office of
the County Conservation District and other governmental agency offices.
(2) Standards and specifications adopted for the purposes of this chapter and by
the County Conservation District include, but are not limited to, the following
basic conservation measures:
(a) Temporary cover on critical areas.
(b) Permanent grass and legume cover for critical areas on prepared seedbed.
(c) Permanent grass and legume cover for critical areas on unprepared
seedbed.
(d) Sodding.
(e) Mulching.
(f) Temporary diversion.
(g) Permanent diversion.
(h) Grassed waterway or outlet.
(i) Grade stabilization structure.
(j) Debris basin.
(k) Drain.
(l) Drainage mains or laterals.
§ 411-112 SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND GRADING § 411-112
411:7
§ 411-113. Inspection procedures.
§ 411-114. Costs of inspection.
Permittees shall bear all costs of inspection required or permitted hereunder and shall
deposit with the Township such sum as the Board of Supervisors shall determine to
guarantee payment of the costs of such inspections. The costs of inspections shall be in
accordance with the established schedule of fees and collection procedures for matters
pertaining to this chapter.
§ 411-115. Fee.
The fee for a grading permit shall be fixed by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to
resolution.
§ 411-116. Appeals.
An applicant may file an appeal within 30 days from the date of any determination made
L. A quality control program is critical for fills; therefore, wherever fill material is to
be used, the person, firm or corporation shall be responsible for testing to determine
its dry density as per ASTM D1556. The density of each layer shall be not less than
95% of maximum density as determined by ASTM D1557.
(1) Inspection procedure shall follow the general procedures as stated in
§ 411-113.
(2) Compaction test reports shall be kept on file at the site and be subject to review
at all times.
(3) Degree of compaction required shall be determined by the Township Engineer,
following the guidelines in this section.
A. All inspections shall be the responsibility of the Township Engineer or, in his
absence, a qualified person acceptable to the Township Engineer and the Township
of Middletown.
B. Inspections will be carried out on a random basis, except as stated below. However,
a set of as-built plans shall be on file at the site and authenticated by a registered
professional engineer. When it is deemed acceptable to the Township Engineer, a
designated qualified person may authenticate the as-built plans and will assume full
responsibility for the quality of the work.
C. Any and all as-built plans shall be available on the site at all times and be subject to
inspection and inquiry.
D. Engineering check notes shall accompany all as-built plans which involve structural
or mechanical measures and shall serve as supporting evidence that structures meet
design standards and specifications specified herein.
E. A final inspection shall be conducted by the Township Engineer to certify
compliance with this chapter. Satisfactory compliance with this chapter shall be
necessary before the issuance of an occupancy or use permit.
§ 411-112 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 411-116
411:8
by the Building Inspector/Zoning Officer under this chapter. The Board of Supervisors
shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudication in all appeals from
the determination of the Building Inspector/Zoning Officer in the administration of the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 411-117. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each section of this chapter
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 411-118. Remedy of violation.
In addition to the penalties as set forth in § 411-117, any movement of the landscape,
vegetation or any ground cover performed in violation of this chapter shall be restored
to its previous condition, including replacement of excavated earth, removal of illegally
placed fill, and restoration of grades and planting. In order to enforce this section the
Township Solicitor may seek injunctive relief in accordance with the Rules of Civil
Procedure.
§ 411-116 SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND GRADING § 411-118
411:9

Chapter 418
SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Township Manager — See Ch. 62, Art. I.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 312.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 363.
Zoning — See Ch. 500.
§ 411-118 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 411-118
418:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 418-101. Definitions.
For the purposes of Chapter 418, Articles I through VI, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings set forth below:
ACT 101 — The Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act of 1988, 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
ACT 90 — The Pennsylvania Waste Transportation Safety Act of 2002, 62 P.S. § 6201
et seq.
ACT 97—The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980, 35 P.S. § 6018.101
et seq.
ALUMINUM — All-aluminum scrap or empty beverage and food containers.
ASHES — The residue resulting from the burning of wood, coal, or other combustible
material. This definition excludes ashes from industrial processes.
AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR — A person, individual, partnership, corporation, or
employer or agent thereof authorized by contract with the municipality to collect solid
waste from residential, commercial, and institutional properties, as herein defined, under
the terms and conditions of this chapter. In the event of municipal collection, this
definition shall include the Board of Supervisors and employees thereof.
BIMETALLIC CANS — Empty food or beverage containers consisting of ferrous sides
and bottoms and aluminum tops.
BULK WASTE — Large items of solid waste, including, but not limited to, appliances,
furniture, and tree branches, which require collection in other than conventional
compactor solid waste collection vehicles.
COLLECTOR — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or public agency who is
engaged in the collection and/or transportation of solid waste and/or recyclable materials
in the municipality.
COMMERCIAL PROPERTIES — All properties used for industrial or commercial
purposes. Multiple-dwelling residential buildings containing more than four dwelling
units shall be treated as commercial properties.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITY — Events that are sponsored by public or private agencies
or individuals, that include, but are not limited to, fairs, bazaars, socials, picnics, and
organized sporting events attended by 200 or more individuals per day.
COMPOSTING — A controlled microbial degradation of organic waste to produce a
relatively nuisance-free product of potential value as a soil conditioner.
COMPOSTING PLANT — A facility used for composting.
CONTAINER — A can, mechanical bin, box, or disposable container used for the
storage of solid waste or recyclable materials.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core shaped in
ridged parallel furrows and ridges.
§ 418-101 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 418-101
418:3
COVERED ELECTRONIC DEVICES — Desktop computers, laptop computers,
computer monitors, computer peripherals, televisions, tablets, e-readers, and other
similar devices, as set forth in the Covered Device Recycling Act, 35 P.S. § 6031.101 et
seq.
CURBSIDE RECYCLING COLLECTION—The scheduled collection and transport of
recyclable materials placed at the curb or street line by residential property owners.
DISPOSAL — The deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of solid
waste into or onto the land or water in a manner that the solid waste or a constituent
of the solid waste enters the environment, is emitted into the air, or is discharged to
the waters of the commonwealth. Disposal facilities include, but are not limited to,
municipal waste landfills and construction/demolition waste landfills as defined by the
following: Act 101; Act 07; and PA DEP rules and regulations, as set forth at 25 P.S.
§§ 75 and 272.
DISPOSAL SITE OR FACILITY — A site, location, tract of land, area, or premises
used or intended to be used for solid waste disposal. Disposal sites or facilities include,
but are not limited to, solid waste landfills and construction/demolition waste landfills as
defined by Act 101, Act 97, and/or PA DEP rules and regulations (25 Pa. Code, Chapters
75 and 271).
DUMP — A site for the consolidation of waste from one or more sources, which has
little or no management.
FARM PROPERTY — A parcel or parcels of land devoted primarily to agriculture,
either to raising crops, livestock, poultry or pasture.
GARBAGE (FOOD WASTE) — Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of goods. It does not include wastes from
industrial processing or manufacturing of food products, bodies of dead animals, or
human or animal excrement.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown glass.
Expressly excluded are noncontainer glass, plate glass, blue glass and porcelain and
ceramic products.
HAZARDOUS WASTE—Solid waste that is especially harmful or potentially harmful
to public health. This shall include, but not be limited to, explosives, toxic materials, and
medical waste. For the purposes of this chapter, hazardous waste does not include small
quantities of such waste available on a retail basis to homeowners (e.g., aerosol cans,
pesticides, fertilizers, etc.).
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper and computer paper
used in commercial, institutional and municipal establishments.
INCINERATOR — Any device used for the burning of solid waste where the factors
of combustion (i.e., temperature, retention time, turbulence, and combustion air) can
adequately be controlled.
INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTIES — Those properties that house or serve groups of
largely unrelated people (e.g., hospitals, schools, and/or nursing homes).
LICENSED COLLECTOR—A person, firm, partnership, corporation, or public agency
that has written authorization from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection ("PA DEP") under the Pennsylvania Waste Transportation Safety Act of
§ 418-101 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 418-101
418:4
2002, 62 P.S. § 6201 et seq., to collect, haul, transport, and dispose of municipal waste.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Middletown, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPALITY PROPERTY—Any and all real property owned, leased, or under the
operation or control of the municipality.
NEWSPRINT—Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newspaper" and distributed
at fixed or varying intervals. Expressly excluded, however, are all other paper products
of any nature whatsoever.
OPERATOR —Any person who manages any solid waste storage, transfer, processing,
or disposal operation.
PA DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, institution, or
other entity.
PLASTIC — Empty plastic food and beverage containers. Due to the large variety of
types of plastic, the recycling regulations may stipulate specific types of plastic which
may be recycled.
PRIVATE COLLECTOR — A licensed collector that provides collection services to
commercial or institutional properties on a private contract basis.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the volume or bulk
of solid waste or any technology used to convert part or all of such materials for off-site
reuse. Processing facilities include, but are not limited to, transfer facilities, recycling
facilities, composting facilities, and resource-recovery facilities.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials specified by the municipality for
separate collection in accordance with recycling regulations. Such materials may
include, but shall not be limited to, glass containers, aluminum, steel, bimetallic cans,
high-grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated paper, and plastics.
RECYCLING — The separation, collection, processing, recovery, and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, plastics, and other materials which would otherwise be disposed of
as solid waste.
REFUSE — All solid wastes, except body wastes, and shall include, but shall not be
limited to, garbage, ashes, bulk waste, and rubbish; except that refuse shall specifically
exclude hazardous waste and recyclables as defined by this chapter.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Properties used as dwellings, including buildings
having up to four dwelling units in one building. Multiple-dwelling residential buildings
containing more than four dwelling units, for purposes of this chapter, shall be treated as
commercial properties.
RESIDUE — Solid materials remaining after burning, including, but not limited to,
ashes, metals, glass, ceramics and unburned organic substances.
RUBBISH — Solid waste exclusive of garbage (e.g., nonrecyclable glass, metal, paper
or plastic) and noncompostable plant material, wood or nonputrescible solid waste.
SALVAGE OPERATION — Any business, trade, or industry engaged, in whole or in
part, in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material, including, but not limited to,
automobiles, metals, chemicals, shipping containers or drums.
§ 418-101 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 418-101
418:5
SALVAGING — The controlled removal of reusable materials at a salvage operation.
SANITARY LANDFILL — A PA DEP-approved method of disposing of solid waste
on land without creating nuisances or hazards to the public health or safety. This is done
by confining solid waste to the smallest practical volume and covering it with a layer of
earth at the conclusion of each day's operation, or at such more-frequent intervals as may
be necessary.
SCAVENGING — Uncontrolled or unauthorized removal of solid waste materials or
recyclables.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, rubbish, and refuse and other discarded solid materials,
including, but not limited to, solid waste materials resulting from industrial, commercial
and agricultural operation and from community activities. Liquids, semisolids, and
contained gaseous materials are hereby defined as solid waste. It shall not include
solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage or other significant pollutants in water
resources, such as silt, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial wastewater effluents,
dissolved materials in irrigation return flows, or other common water pollutants. In
addition, it shall not include hazardous waste.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT—The purposeful, systematic control of the storage,
collection, transportation, processing and disposal of solid waste and recyclables.
STEEL — Steel scrap or empty ferrous or tin food or beverage containers.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The duly appointed Township Manager of the Township
of Middletown, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
TRANSFER STATION — A fixed facility used for receiving solid waste from
collection trucks and placing in large-volume, long-haul vehicles.
YARD WASTE — Prunings, grass clippings, weeds, leaves, and general yard and
garden wastes.
§ 418-101 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 418-101
418:6
ARTICLE II
Solid Waste Management
§ 418-201. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Municipal Solid Waste Management
Ordinance of the Township of Middletown."
§ 418-202. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to coordinate and regulate the
storage, collection, transportation, processing, and disposal of all solid waste herein
defined in order to protect the public safety, health, and welfare of the people of the
Township of Middletown (hereinafter referred to as the "municipality").
§ 418-203. Responsibility.
The Township Manager or designee shall be responsible for all aspects of solid waste
management within the municipality.
§ 418-204. Functions and powers of Township Manager.
The Township Manager or designee shall be responsible for the preparation of all
necessary plans for solid waste management and shall coordinate these plans with
other local, county, state, and federal agencies. These plans shall control the collection,
storage, transportation, processing, and disposal of all solid waste. In accordance with
all the pertinent statutes, rules, and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
the Township Manager shall be responsible for the following:
§ 418-205. Duty of owners and occupiers of property not to accumulate solid
waste.
A. Providing services for the collection, storage, transportation, and disposal of solid
waste and recyclable materials for the municipality and/or approving and regulating
services for the establishment, maintenance, and operation for the private
collection, storage, transportation, and disposal of solid waste and recyclable
materials;
B. Aiding and assisting the commonwealth in the application and enforcement of rules
and regulations pertaining to solid waste management;
C. Adopting, issuing, and enforcing such local rules and regulations pursuant to
§ 418-215 of this article, as is necessary to implement and carry out the intent of
this article;
D. Assisting in the review of permits required by the commonwealth for siting and
operation of transfer, processing, and disposal facilities; and
E. Enforcing this article by issuing warning notices and initiating proceedings against
violators of this article and its appurtenant rules and regulations.
A. No person shall permit any solid waste to accumulate for a period of longer than
§ 418-201 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 418-205
418:7
§ 418-206. Unlawful solid waste.
§ 418-207. Standards and regulations for storage prior to collection.
seven days upon property owned or occupied by said person in the municipality.
B. Owners and occupiers of residential property are hereby required to make
accumulated solid waste available for collection pursuant to the terms of this article.
C. All solid waste accumulated on any residential property in the municipality shall be
collected, conveyed, and disposed of by the municipality or by a licensed or
authorized collector in accordance with the provisions of this article; except that
solid waste and recyclable materials may be collected, conveyed, and disposed of
by property owners from their own property for the intended purpose of depositing
such solid waste and recyclable materials in PA DEP-permitted solid waste
processing facilities or recycling centers, provided they comply with the provisions
of this article.
D. All solid waste or recyclable materials accumulated on commercial, institutional, or
residential property subdivisions that are members of a homeowners' association
("HOA") that contracts for private, nonmunicipal collection shall be collected,
conveyed, and disposed of by private collectors in accordance with this article. In
all such contracts with a private collector, the fee or payment shall be a matter of
private agreement between the owners or occupiers of the commercial, institutional,
or residential properties and the private collector. Owners of nonresidential
properties, or participants in HOAs that independently contract for solid waste and
recyclable materials collection, may collect, convey, and dispose of privately
generated solid waste by their own containers and/or trucks, provided they comply
with the other provisions of this article applicable thereto.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and dispose of any solid waste within
the municipality, except as provided in this article.
A. It shall be unlawful to keep, or allow in or about any dwelling or upon any land or
other premises within the municipality, solid waste of any kind which is obnoxious
or offensive by reason of dust or odor or which attracts insects and vermin except
in covered containers. The container cover shall be watertight and fly-proof, and it
shall be unlawful to retain accumulation of any said solid waste so as to constitute
as menace to the health and safety, it being a presumption that such a menace exists
when more than seven days have elapsed after such solid waste is originally
retained, accumulated, or permitted to accumulate, and nothing herein contained
shall be construed to permit the retention of any solid waste which is or becomes
obnoxious or offensive by reason of dust or odor or which attracts insects or vermin.
B. No volatile liquids, explosives, radioactive material, or containers which would
explode upon contact with heat or fire shall be placed for collection, except small
(retail-sold) spray cans.
C. No hazardous waste shall be stored or placed for collection on residential
properties, except for small quantities of such waste normally found in the
household and available on a retail basis to homeowners.
§ 418-205 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 418-207
418:8
§ 418-208. Standards and regulations for collection.
A. Only approved containers for receiving and holding solid waste shall be used for
the collection of solid waste by the authorized collector from residential properties
within the municipality. Containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times.
B. Solid waste located outside residential, commercial, and institutional properties
shall be stored, at all times, in a container which shall have a tight-fitting cover that
is watertight and fly-proof. Containers shall be kept tightly covered at all times.
C. Garbage (food waste) shall be drained of liquids before it is placed in a container.
D. Containers shall be of not less than 20 gallons nor more than 35 gallons in capacity
for a residential property.
E. Containers shall be stored on the residential property and shall not be placed at the
curb for collection before 6:00 p.m. on the evening preceding a scheduled collection
day. Empty containers shall be removed from the curb by 10:00 a.m. the day
following collection.
F. Yard waste may be placed next to the container for composting, disposal, or
processing at a composting plant pursuant to Article III, Recycling Management, if
it is tightly secured, not more than four feet in length, and not more than 50 pounds
in weight. Branches and tree limbs cannot be more than six inches in diameter.
G. The municipality specifically reserves the right to modify and to specifically
provide for some other receptacle for the handling of solid waste, which the
Township Manager or designee may, at some future time, deem to be acceptable,
appropriate, and beneficial for handling of said solid waste.
A. The municipality shall have the option of collecting solid waste or it may contract
with authorized collector(s) to provide the service or it may contract for collection
service for residential properties only and require private collection service for
commercial and institutional properties.
B. All residential properties, with the exception of subdivisions where the applicable
HOA contracts for solid waste collection, shall use the municipality's contracted,
authorized collector(s).
C. The collection, conveyance or disposal of solid waste by the municipality or by
authorized collectors under and in accordance with a contract with the municipality
shall be considered a municipal service for which the owner of the serviced
premises shall be liable to pay therefor in accordance with and subject to fees
determined and established from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors. All bills for such fees shall be rendered by periodic statements of
accounts issued in advance of the service, not less than on a quarter-annual basis,
and shall thereupon be immediately due and payable. All bills shall be payable at
the Township Municipal Building to the order of "Middletown Township." All
accounts shall be considered delinquent if not paid within 30 days after the date of
the bill, and accounts which are not paid within 30 days after the date of the bill
shall be subject to a penalty of 10% of the amount of the bill. If a delinquent account
is not paid within 60 days from the date of the bill, the Township Manager shall
§ 418-207 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 418-208
418:9
refer the account to the Township Solicitor with instructions to process for the
collection of such unpaid charges, together with all penalties thereon, by an action
in assumpsit, or, at the election of the Township Manager, in any other manner
provided by law for the collection of a municipal claim. The Township Manager
may, by and with approval of the Board of Supervisors, utilize the office and
services of the Township Tax Collector with appropriate compensation to him for
the rendering and collection of the accounts.
D. The authorized collector shall provide service to all who desire service and have
paid the required fees.
E. Collection requirements.
(1) All solid waste located at residential properties shall be collected at least once
each week. All solid waste located at commercial and institutional properties
shall be collected as often as required by generated volumes and
environmental problems, but not less than once each week.
(2) All recyclable materials shall be collected in accordance with the "Township
of Middletown Recycling Ordinance" (Article III, Recycling Management, of
this chapter).
F. The contract in force with the licensed or authorized collector shall establish and
record a regular collection schedule. If collection is schedule once each week and
the collection day falls on a holiday, then the licensed or authorized collector shall
follow the schedule set by the current contract in force with the licensed or
authorized collector.
G. All collection and transportation vehicles shall be constructed of metal or other
impervious materials, able to be enclosed or fitted with a cover which will be used
to prevent spillage of its contents. All solid waste materials dropped on streets or
roads shall be immediately picked up by the private, licensed or authorized
collector.
H. All private, licensed and authorized collector vehicles shall be cleaned at sufficient
frequency to prevent odors, vectors, and other nuisances.
I. Place of collection.
(1) Containers shall be placed at curbside on the public street abutting the
residential property for collection by the authorized collector on the dates and
times set forth in § 418-208J.
(2) Containers shall be placed so they face the public street (i.e., with the handle
away from and parallel to the center of the street), with the lid closed, and so
that there is a minimum of three feet between the container(s) and any
obstructions (ex., cars, mailboxes, fences, telephone poles, etc.).
(3) Municipal solid waste must be placed within the container and not on top of
the container. Any solid waste that causes the lid of the container to be in an
open or upright position shall be considered excessive solid waste and shall
not be collected.
§ 418-208 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 418-208
418:10
§ 418-209. Regulations of authorized collectors.
(4) Notwithstanding provisions of this article, industrial, commercial, and
residential property subdivisions that are members of a HOA that contracts for
private, nonmunicipal collection may, by mutual agreement with private
collectors, be permitted to use containers and/or carts and place such
containers and/or carts at a location on their property other than specified in
§ 418-208I.
(5) Municipal collection shall be made from all residential properties, with the
exception of those subdivisions whose HOA contracts with private collectors,
throughout the municipality. This shall include all streets, dedicated or
otherwise, and shall include those streets that are temporarily closed for repairs
or construction. In the latter case, special collection points shall be authorized
and designated by the Township Manager or designee if the condition of the
street would prevent access thereto by the collector's truck.
J. Frequency of collections.
(1) Collection, schedule and routes. The authorized collector shall collect solid
waste, as defined herein, throughout the municipality on routes and schedules
developed and mutually agreed upon by the Township Manager or designee
and the authorized collector, and which may be modified from time to time as
necessary and as agreed upon by the Township Manager or designee.
(2) Holidays. Solid waste collection shall not be made on the following holidays:
January 1, New Year's Day; last Monday of May, Memorial Day; July 4,
Independence Day; first Monday of September, Labor Day; fourth Thursday
of November, Thanksgiving Day; December 25, Christmas Day. Collections
scheduled for these days shall be made as set by the current contract in force
with the authorized collector.
(3) Hours. Collections shall be made at those hours mutually agreed upon between
the authorized collector and the Township Manager or designee. Hours agreed
upon shall be so indicated within the current collection contract.
A. All residential property solid waste within the municipality shall be collected by an
authorized collector as hereinafter provided.
B. The collection of solid waste shall be done only by the person to whom or to which
a contract therefor shall be awarded. Such contract shall be awarded, from time to
time, to the lowest responsible bidder, following the procedure set forth hereinafter.
C. The Board of Supervisors, from contracting period to contracting period, shall set
bid specifications for the collection of solid waste for residential properties, which
shall apply to each prospective bidder for contract collection within the
municipality.
D. The Board of Supervisors shall request bids for solid waste collection services for a
specified period, as allowed by state law. All bid notices, awards, and conditions
shall be in compliance with all applicable state laws.
§ 418-208 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 418-209
418:11
§ 418-210. Collection vehicles, equipment, and personnel.
E. Before any contract shall be entered into for the collection of solid waste from
residential properties, the person to whom such contract is awarded shall furnish a
bond with one or more sufficient sureties to be approved by the Township Manager
or designee. The authorized collector shall, during the continuance of the contract,
truly abide by, comply with, and perform all the terms and provisions of the contract
and of this article and such other rules and regulations as may be adopted from time
to time.
F. The authorized collector shall assume full responsibility for the removal and
ultimate disposition, subject to the provisions of § 418-212, of all residential
property solid waste from the municipality when such solid waste is placed in
proper containers and in the proper locations as specified in §§ 418-207 and
418-208 herein.
G. Compensation of the authorized collector for the removal of solid waste from
residential properties shall be paid according to the terms of the bid specifications
and contract. Payment of said compensation is, however, contingent upon the
authorized collector fulfilling all provisions of this article and the aforementioned
contract.
A. All vehicles used for collection of solid waste shall be equipped with compacting
devices or equivalent types of closed bodies and shall have enclosed cargo space,
unless such collection is done by private individuals from solid waste generated on
private property, at which time appropriate containers shall be utilized, and all other
provisions of this article affecting such collection shall be adhered to.
B. It shall be unlawful to collect, haul, transport, or convey solid waste in open,
unenclosed vehicles, unless such solid waste is hauled from private property by the
owner; except that open-type vehicles may be used for the collection of large items
which cannot, because of size, be collected by ordinary means, in accordance with
the provisions of § 418-210A.
C. Trucks shall, at all times, be in good and proper mechanical condition and in
compliance with the minimum safety and sanitary regulations of the laws of the
commonwealth, the County of Bucks, and the municipality.
D. The private, licensed or authorized collector shall furnish proof that he is the owner
of the vehicle(s) to be used, or he must produce, in writing, a lease or rental
agreement between the titled owner of the vehicle(s) and the collector.
E. Vehicles and equipment shall not be overloaded so that garbage or solid waste may
spill or drop on the highways or streets, nor shall the equipment be so designed or
maintained so as to permit the leakage of fluids. All trucks shall be regularly
cleaned and kept in proper condition and shall bear the name and address of the
contractor plainly visible on both cab doors.
F. All vehicles may be inspected at any time at the discretion of the municipality by a
designated agent for compliance with the provisions of this article, including prior
to the issuance of any license.
§ 418-209 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 418-210
418:12
§ 418-211. Standards and regulations for storage after collection.
§ 418-212. Standards and regulations for disposal.
G. Each truck shall be staffed by at least one driver and one helper, unless otherwise
approved by the Township Manager (e.g., special collection vehicles or under
emergency conditions) or by contract with the municipality.
H. Each truck shall have at least one broom and one shovel to clean up solid waste that
may be spilled or otherwise scattered during the process of collection.
I. The collector shall file with the Township Manager or designee a list of all vehicles
and equipment with identification information thereon. Changes in equipment shall
be promptly reported to the Township Manager so that, at all times, their records
will be correct and accurate.
J. The collector, at his expense, shall store and park the equipment at a convenient and
lawful place. No trucks or equipment may be parked or stored on any street within
the municipality, except during actual collection periods.
A. All storage of solid waste after collection and before disposal shall only be in
transfer stations which conform to the regulations of the commonwealth, the
County of Bucks, and the municipality. The only exception shall be full or partially
full collection vehicles which have made a final pickup for the day. In no case shall
such collection vehicles be permitted to hold solid waste longer than 24 hours.
B. All plans and specifications for transfer stations shall be submitted for approval and
permit issuance to the municipality, the County of Bucks, and to the commonwealth
before operation commences.
C. All storage of solid waste in transfer stations shall be limited to no more than 48
hours.
D. Operators of transfer stations must submit to the municipality a contingency plan
for the disposition of solid waste which is not able to be removed from the site
within 48 hours because of an emergency situation.
A. It shall be unlawful for any collector to dump, process, destroy, bury or otherwise
dispose of solid waste within the jurisdictional limits of the municipality, except at
facilities approved and permitted by the Township, the County of Bucks, and the
PA DEP.
B. All private, licensed, or authorized collectors shall dispose of the solid waste from
the municipality at a sanitary landfill, incinerator, waste-to-energy plant, or other
facility approved and permitted by the PA DEP.
C. The municipality reserves the right to designate a specific disposal site in its
contracts and/or licenses with licensed or authorized collectors.
D. All disposal regulations at the designated disposal site shall be adhered to by the
private, licensed, or authorized collector.
E. All vehicles used for collection shall use, insofar as practical, state highways when
§ 418-210 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 418-212
418:13
§ 418-213. Standards and regulations for processing methods.
§ 418-214. Prohibited activities.
§ 418-215. Regulations.
The collection of solid waste in the municipality and the disposal thereof shall be
subject to such further reasonable rules and regulations as may from time to time be
promulgated by the Township Manager or designee; provided, however, that no such
proceeding to and from the designated disposal site, except when using roads or
streets in those townships or boroughs where licensed or contracted to collect.
A. All solid waste processing shall be accomplished by approved methods in properly
permitted facilities, including, but not limited to, incinerators, compost plants, and
salvage operations, conforming to all the applicable laws, ordinances, and zoning
requirements.
B. All plans and specifications shall be approved by the commonwealth prior to the
construction and operation of such processing facilities.
C. All incinerators shall be operated so that pollution of the air will not exceed the air
quality standards established by the PA DEP.
D. Residues and discards from the solid waste processing facilities shall be disposed
of at a PA DEP-permitted facility.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any materials delivered and
deposited for disposal, except as may be provided for in the municipality's solid
waste rules and regulations promulgated under this article.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to salvage or reclaim any solid waste, except at
a properly permitted facility in which salvage is an integral plan of operation.
C. It shall be unlawful to make solid waste available for animal consumption, unless it
has been heat-treated to kill any disease agent therein.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, maintain, or operate an open dump.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any solid waste, except in a manner and
under conditions prescribed by the municipality's Fire Marshal, and such burning
shall be in accordance with the pertinent rules and regulations of the
commonwealth.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit, or cause or permit to
be thrown, placed or deposited, any solid waste in or upon any street, alley,
sidewalk, body of water, public or private property, except as provided in this
article.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of an electronic covered device, or
any of its components, with their municipal solid waste. These devices and their
components must be properly recycled, pursuant to Article III, Recycling
Management.
§ 418-212 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 418-215
418:14
rules and regulations shall be contrary to the provisions of this article or applicable law.
§ 418-216. Inspection procedures.
§ 418-217. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, upon conviction thereof in
an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each
day that a violation of this article continues, or each section of this article which shall be
found to have been violated, shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 418-218. Greater restriction.
Whenever the requirements of this article are in conflict with other requirements of the
ordinances of the Township of Middletown, the most restrictive or those imposing the
highest standards shall govern.
A. All containers, vehicles, equipment, transfer stations, disposal sites, books and
records of authorized, unauthorized or prospective collectors, storers, processors
and disposers shall be subject to inspection by the Township Manager or designee
at any reasonable hour without prior notice.
B. Vehicles and equipment of collectors may be inspected by the Township Manager
or authorized agent before being put into operation and during operation.
C. All solid waste storage, transfer, processing, or disposal facilities within the
municipality shall also be inspected immediately prior to commencement of
operation and at least once each year thereafter in concert with representatives of
the county and/or the commonwealth.
D. If violations of this article are discovered in the course of these inspections, the
Township Manager or designee is empowered to enforce this article.
§ 418-215 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 418-218
418:15

ARTICLE III
Recycling Management
§ 418-301. Title.
The title of this article shall be the "Middletown Township Recycling Ordinance," and
the same may be cited in that manner.
§ 418-302. Residential property recycling.
§ 418-303. Commercial, institutional, and municipal property and community
activity recycling.
A. Separation of materials. All persons residing in a residential property shall separate
recyclable materials from solid waste. "Recyclable materials" shall mean those
materials specified by the municipality for separate collection in accordance with
recycling regulations. Such materials may include, but shall not be limited to, glass
containers, aluminum, steel, bimetallic cans, high-grade office paper, newsprint,
corrugated paper, and plastics.
B. Placement of containers at curbside for residences. All containers used for recycling
must be clearly identified as a recycling container. Recyclable materials shall be
placed at the curb or street line, separate from solid waste by at least three feet, for
collection at such times, dates, and places as may be hereinafter established by
regulation. Recyclable materials must be placed in waterproof containers.
Recyclable materials shall not exceed 50 pounds in weight nor be placed in public
streets.
C. Times for placing at or removing from curbside. Recycling containers shall be
stored on the residential property owner's property and shall not be placed at the
curb for collection before 6:00 p.m. on the evening preceding a scheduled collection
day. Empty containers shall be removed from the curb by 10:00 a.m. the day
following collection.
A. All commercial, institutional, and municipal properties and community activities
shall separate recyclable materials from solid waste.
B. All commercial, institutional, and municipal properties and community activities
shall recycle glass containers, aluminum, steel, bimetallic cans, high-grade office
paper, newsprint, corrugated paper, and plastics.
C. All persons owning and/or operating commercial, institutional, or municipal
properties and all organizers of community activities shall be responsible for
providing a system to separate recyclable materials from the solid waste generated
at their properties or community activities.
D. The method of collection of the recyclable materials shall be the responsibility of
the person who generates the materials.
E. Frequency of collection. The recyclable materials for all commercial, institutional,
or municipal properties shall be collected as often as required by generated volumes
and environmental conditions, but not less than once a month.
§ 418-301 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 418-303
418:17
§ 418-304. Yard waste.
§ 418-305. Consumer and small business electronics recycling.
§ 418-306. Businesses with more than 50 employees electronics recycling.
Businesses must recycle their covered electronic devices pursuant to the Covered Device
Recycling Act, 35 P.S. § 6031.101 et seq. For businesses, the recycling facility to which
covered electronic devices are transferred does not need to be certified. If the facility is
located in the commonwealth, it must have a general permit WMGR081 from the PA
DEP.
§ 418-307. Electronics recycling facilities.
F. Reporting. All commercial, institutional, or municipal properties are required to
submit a recycling report within 30 days upon the initiation of the recycling
program, and at such time as the municipality may deem appropriate, to the
Township Manager on forms provided by the Township.
A. All persons shall separate yard waste from solid waste for composting, disposal, or
processing at a composting plant.
B. Yard waste is to be placed in either thirty-gallon, biodegradable, paper bags or in a
regular container with handles and a tight-fitting lid of not less than 20 gallons nor
more than 35 gallons in capacity and must not weigh more than 50 pounds when
filled.
C. Cardboard boxes, plastic bags, or biodegradable plastic bags cannot be used, as
these will not be accepted at the composting plant.
D. Tree branches and limbs no thicker than six inches in diameter are to be bundled
into four-foot lengths and placed next to the yard waste at the curb.
A. No person may dispose of an electronic covered device, or any of its components,
with their solid waste. Pursuant to the Covered Device Recycling Act, 35 P.S.
§ 6031.101 et seq., these devices and their components must be properly recycled
and may not be taken to, nor accepted by, landfills or other solid waste disposal
facilities.
B. All persons must take their covered electronic devices to a County-approved or
state-permitted electronics collection location for proper recycling.
A. Whether located in or outside of the commonwealth, facilities that process or
recycle covered electronic devices that are collected from consumers through any
electronics collection program in the commonwealth, whether municipal,
manufacturer, retailer, etc., must have achieved and maintained one of the
following certifications:
(1) R2 (responsible recycling practices standard) certification.
(2) Stewards certification.
(3) An internationally accredited third-party environmental management standard
§ 418-303 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 418-307
418:18
§ 418-308. Regulations of private collectors.
No person shall collect, remove, haul, or convey any recyclable materials through or
upon any of the streets or alleys of the municipality or dispose of the same in any manner
or place. Private collectors must abide by the regulations set forth by the PA DEP.
§ 418-309. Reporting requirements of private collector.
All persons who collect, remove, haul or convey any recyclable materials within the
municipality shall submit a report to the Township Manager on or before February 15
of each year. This report shall include the type and quantity of recyclable materials
collected during the preceding calendar year on forms provided by the municipality. All
private collectors are required to submit all receipts and records of the type and quantity
of recyclable materials collected within the municipality along with the report.
§ 418-310. Collection by unauthorized persons.
It shall be a violation of this article for any persons unauthorized by the municipality to
collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such recyclable materials at
any property within the municipality; except that recyclable materials may be collected,
conveyed, and disposed of by property owners from their own property for the intended
purpose of depositing such recyclable materials at recycling centers, provided they
comply with the provisions of this article. Each such unauthorized collection in violation
hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 418-311. Franchise or license.
The Middletown Township Board of Supervisors may enter into agreements with public
or private agencies or firms for the collection and sale of all or part of the recyclable
materials from residential properties.
§ 418-312. Alternative collection of recyclable materials.
Any person may donate or sell recyclable materials to individuals or organizations.
These materials must be delivered to the site of such individual or organization.
§ 418-313. Enforcement and administration.
The Township Manager, the Township Manager's designee, and sworn Middletown
Township police officers are hereby authorized and directed to enforce this article.
The Middletown Township Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution, establish and
promulgate regulations for the collection of recyclable materials. These regulations may
be changed from time to time by the Middletown Township Board of Supervisors by
for the safe and responsible handling of covered electronic devices.
B. The commonwealth's residual waste regulations require electronics processing/
recycling facilities located in the commonwealth to obtain a PA DEP general permit
WMGR081 (regarding the processing and beneficial use of electronic equipment
and components by sorting, disassembling, or mechanical processing) prior to
processing any electronic devices or electronic waste.
§ 418-307 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 418-313
418:19
resolution.
§ 418-314. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or any regulations thereof,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the
manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules
of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus
costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section of this
article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 418-313 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 418-314
418:20
ARTICLE IV
Waste Flow Control and Licensing
§ 418-401. Short title.
This article shall be known and referred to as the "Waste Flow Control and Licensing
Ordinance of the Township of Middletown."
§ 418-402. Designation of processing and/or disposal facilities.
§ 418-403. Prohibited activities.
§ 418-404. Standards for collection and transportation.
A. The municipality shall designate by separate resolution one or more specific
processing and/or disposal facilities where all licensed collectors must transport and
dispose all municipal solid waste collected within the municipality. Processing and/
or disposal facilities designated by the municipality must be on the list of Countydesignated
facilities in the Bucks County Municipal Waste Management Plan.
B. The municipality shall have the right by separate resolution to require any licensed
collector to obtain a contract with any or all processing and/or disposal facilities
accepting municipal solid waste generated within the municipality. Said contracts
must provide for a minimum of one year of guaranteed capacity with a contract
renewal option of at least one year. Said contract(s) must be accompanied by a
notarized statement of projected annual weight and/or volume of solid waste and/or
recyclable materials to be disposed at the facility.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and/or transport municipal solid waste
or recyclable materials from any source within the municipality in a manner not in
accordance with the provisions of this article, any applicable municipal ordinance,
the Bucks County Municipal Waste Management Plan, Act 101, the minimum
standards and requirements established in Chapter 285 of the PA DEP's municipal
waste management regulations (Chapter 285 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code)
and/or any other federal, state, or local regulations.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport any municipal waste or recyclable
materials collected from within the municipality to any processing and/or disposal
facility other than those facilities designated in the Bucks County Municipal Waste
Management Plan.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any material from any municipal
solid waste or recyclable materials that are stored or placed for subsequent
collection within the municipality without prior approval from the municipality.
A. All private, licensed, and authorized collectors operating within the municipality
must comply with the following minimum standards and regulations:
(1) All trucks and other vehicles used for collection and transportation of
municipal solid waste and/or recyclable materials must comply with the
requirements of Act 97 and Act 101, including the Title 25 Pennsylvania Code
Chapter 285, Subchapter B, regulations for the collection and transportation of
§ 418-401 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 418-404
418:21
§ 418-405. Requirements.
All private, licensed, and authorized collectors shall meet the requirements of Act 97,
Act 101, the Bucks County Municipal Waste Management Plan, all PA DEP rules and
regulations (Chapter 285 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code), and any applicable
Bucks County Department of Health regulations regarding storage, collection, and
transportation of municipal solid waste and recyclable materials, including provisions
for proper labeling of collection and transfer vehicles.
§ 418-406. Reporting requirements.
municipal waste.
(2) All collection vehicles conveying municipal solid waste and/or recyclable
materials shall be operated and maintained in a manner that will prevent
creation of a nuisance or a hazard to public health, safety, and welfare.
(3) All collection vehicles conveying putrescible municipal solid waste shall be
watertight and suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside littering,
attraction of vectors, and the creation of odors and other nuisances.
(4) All collection vehicles conveying nonputrescible municipal solid waste and/or
recyclable materials shall be capable of being enclosed or covered to prevent
litter and other nuisances.
(5) All collection vehicles conveying municipal solid waste and/or recyclable
materials shall bear signs identifying the name and business address of the
person or municipality which owns the vehicle and the specific type of
materials transported by the vehicle. All such signs shall have lettering which
is at least six inches in height as required by Act 90.
B. All collection vehicles and equipment used by licensed collectors shall be subject
to inspection by the municipality or its authorized agents at any reasonable hour
without prior notification.
A. All private, licensed, and authorized collectors shall maintain current up-to-date
records of the collected municipal solid waste and/or recyclable material within the
municipality. Such records and collected volume reports shall be subject to review
by and made available to the municipality or its authorized agents upon written
request.
B. All private, licensed, and authorized collectors operating within the municipality
shall participate in the Bucks County Municipal Waste Documentation Program.
Said program shall be developed and put into operation by the county for the
purpose of documenting the origin of municipal solid waste and recyclable material
and the ultimate disposal point of said waste and recyclables. As part of the
program, each private, licensed, and authorized collector shall prepare and submit a
semiannual report to the municipality. The report for the first half of the year
(January through June) shall be submitted on or before July 31, and the report for
the second half of the year (July through December) shall be submitted by January
31 of the following year. At a minimum, the following information shall be
included in each report:
§ 418-404 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 418-406
418:22
§ 418-407. Violations and penalties.
§ 418-408. Injunctive powers.
The municipality may petition the Bucks County Court of Common Pleas for an
injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, in order to enforce any provision of this
article.
(1) Total weight of municipal solid waste and recyclable materials collected from
all sources within the municipality during each month of reporting period.
(2) Name of each processing and/or disposal facility used during the reporting
period and total weight of municipal solid waste and recyclable materials
delivered to each facility during each month of the reporting period.
(3) Any other information determined to be necessary during the development and
implementation of the Bucks County Municipal Waste Documentation
Program.
C. All semiannual reports submitted to the Township from licensed collectors shall be
submitted by the Township to the county by August 31 (covering January through
June) and by February 28 of the following year (covering July through December).
A. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the
manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues or each section of this article which shall be found to have been violated
shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Collection and/or transportation of any municipal solid waste or recyclable material
in a careless or negligent manner or any other manner that is not in compliance with
the requirements of this article, Bucks County Department of Health regulations,
and/or any applicable federal, state, or local regulations.
C. Transportation and disposal of any municipal solid waste collected within the
municipality to any site that is not a designated facility in the Bucks County
Municipal Waste Management Program or that is not properly permitted by the PA
DEP.
D. Violation of any part of this article, any other applicable county or municipal
ordinance, the Bucks County Municipal Waste Management Plan, or any other
applicable Pennsylvania law or regulations.
§ 418-406 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 418-408
418:23

ARTICLE V
Hours and Dates of Collection
§ 418-501. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Middletown Township Municipal Waste and
Recyclable Materials Hours and Dates of Collection Ordinance."
§ 418-502. Authorization to enact rules and regulations.
§ 418-503. Weekday hours and dates of collection.
A. The municipality is authorized to enact comprehensive rules and regulations
restricting the hours and days of municipal solid waste and/or recyclable materials
collection as required by federal, commonwealth, and Bucks County law or
regulation and to serve the overall interests of the municipality, its residents, and its
commercial enterprises, including the following:
(1) Mandating the universal adherence of all collectors in the municipality to the
hours and dates specified.
(2) Specifying the responsibilities and obligations of residential, institutional, and
commercial property operators for the on-premises storage, and source
separation of municipal solid waste and/or recyclable materials and their
handling in support of collection services.
(3) Obtaining commercially available and equitably priced services and the
awarding and administration of contracts for the collection, handling, and
transportation of municipal solid waste and/or recyclable materials.
(4) Specifying the residential, institutional, and commercial property collection
services to be provided and the responsibilities and obligations of collectors
and property operators with respect to those services.
(5) Authorizing municipal enforcement of this article, amending the Middletown
Township Code, this article, and the rules and regulations adopted in
furtherance thereof and to specify penalties and remedies for noncompliance.
B. In order to be effective, any rules and regulations adopted in furtherance of this
article or any amendments thereto must be approved at a public meeting, which said
public meeting shall be advertised in accordance with the requirements imposed
upon the municipality by the Second Class Township Code related to the adoption
of Township ordinances.
A. No authorized collector which collects or removes municipal solid waste or
recyclable materials shall be permitted to collect and/or remove municipal solid
waste or recyclable material after 8:00 p.m. or prior to 6:00 a.m. on weekdays or
prior to 6:00 a.m. on weekends unless otherwise fixed by contract between the
authorized collector and the municipality.
B. No commercial, institutional property, or property subdivisions that are members
of an HOA within the municipality, which contracts with a private or licensed
§ 418-501 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 418-503
418:25
§ 418-504. Exclusions.
§ 418-505. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
collector to remove municipal solid waste or recyclable materials shall authorize
a private or licensed collector to collect and/or remove municipal solid waste or
recyclable material from commercial, institutional, or residential properties after
8:00 p.m. or prior to 6:00 a.m. on weekdays or prior to 6:00 a.m. on weekends.
A. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit any person not regularly engaged in the
business of collecting municipal solid waste or recyclable materials from hauling
one's own municipal solid waste or recyclable materials on an irregular and
unscheduled basis to an authorized disposal facility.
B. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a farm property from carrying out the
normal activities of its farming operation, including composting and spreading of
manure or other farm-produced agricultural wastes.
C. The Township Manager or his/her designee shall have the ability to grant waivers
to the time limitations outlined in § 418-503 of this article in cases of extreme heat
or pending inclement weather or under other circumstances that may arise.
A. The municipality is authorized and directed to enforce this article.
B. Any action by any authorized, private, or licensed collector that violates or does not
comply with any provision of this article or any rule or regulation thereof and such
action constitutes an offense that shall subject the authorized, private, or licensed
collector to a fine not to exceed $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, including
reasonable attorneys' fees. Every time a collector violates § 418-503 of this article
it shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant
to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure.
C. Any owner or occupant of any commercial, institutional property, or property
subdivisions that are members of an HOA within the municipality, who permits the
removal, of municipal solid waste or recyclable materials from such property in the
municipality, or who knowingly permits the violation of any term, condition, or
provision of this article by any collector shall commit a violation of this article and
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000, plus costs
of prosecution, including reasonable attorneys' fees. Each day that a violation
continues under this article shall constitute a separate offense, punishable as
provided hereunder.
D. The municipality may also require the owner or occupant of a property to remove
any accumulation of municipal solid waste or recyclable materials and, should said
person fail, following written notice, to remove such municipal solid waste or
recyclable materials within the time frame specified in the regulations, the
municipality may cause such waste or materials to be collected and disposed of,
with all costs for such actions being the responsibility of the responsible property
operator, as provided by law.
§ 418-503 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 418-506
418:26
§ 418-506. Applicable regulations; amendments.
A. This article shall be subject to all applicable federal, state, county and local laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations, including the rules and regulations as set forth by
the PA DEP.
B. This article or any part thereof may be amended from time to time in accordance
with the procedures established by law.
§ 418-506 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 418-506
418:27

ARTICLE VI
Collection and Transportation
§ 418-601. Short title.
This article shall be known and referred to as the "Municipal Waste Collection and
Transportation Ordinance of the Township of Middletown."
§ 418-602. Prohibited activities.
§ 418-603. Standards for collection and transportation.
All collectors operating within the municipality must comply with the following
minimum standards and regulations:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and/or transport municipal solid waste
from any residential, public, commercial, industrial or institutional establishment
within the municipality without first securing written authorization from the PA
DEP in accordance with the provisions of Act 90.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to store, collect, and/or transport municipal solid
waste or recyclable materials from any sources within the municipality in a manner
not in accordance with the provisions of this article, any applicable municipal
ordinance, the revised Bucks County Plan, Act 90, Act 101, the minimum standards
and requirements established in Chapter 285 of the PA DEP municipal waste
management regulations, any applicable Bucks County Department of Health
regulations, and/or any other federal, state or local regulations.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any material from any municipal
solid waste or recyclable materials that are stored or placed for subsequent
collection within the municipality without prior approval from the municipality.
A. All trucks or other vehicles used for collection and transportation of municipal solid
waste and/or recyclable materials must comply with the applicable requirements of
Act 90, Act 97, Act 101 and PA DEP regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and
Act 101, including Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code Chapter 285, Subchapter B,
regulations for the collection and transportation of municipal solid waste.
B. All collection vehicles conveying putrescible municipal solid waste shall be
watertight and suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside littering, attraction of
vectors, and the creation of odors and other nuisances.
C. All collection vehicles conveying nonputrescible municipal solid waste and/or
recyclable materials shall be capable of being enclosed or covered to prevent litter
and other nuisances.
D. All collection vehicles conveying municipal solid waste and/or recyclable materials
shall bear signs identifying the name and business address of the person or
municipality which owns the vehicle and the specific type of material transported
by the vehicle. All such signs shall have lettering which is at least six inches in
height as required by Act 101.
§ 418-601 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 418-603
418:29
§ 418-604. Licensing and registration requirements.
E. All collection vehicles and equipment used by collectors shall be subject to
inspection by the Township of Middletown or its authorized agents at any
reasonable hour without prior notification.
A. No person shall collect or remove any municipal solid waste from within the
municipality without first obtaining written authorization from the PA DEP in
accordance with the provisions of Act 90 and providing a copy of such written
authorization to the municipality. This section shall not apply to private individuals
(e.g., homeowners) who wish to transport their own household solid waste to PA
DEP-approved facilities or recyclable materials to appropriate recycling centers,
nor to farmers, landscapers, or nurserymen who collect, remove, haul or otherwise
transport agricultural or other organic waste associated with their respective
business activities.
B. For a private, licensed, or authorized collector to collect and transport municipal
solid waste within the municipality, a collector shall submit a registration form to
the municipality, which shall include a copy of their state-issued written
authorization and a copy of their municipal and residual waste transporter
authorization application (DEP form 2500-PM-BWM0015), along with any of the
following information that may be deemed appropriate by the municipality:
(1) A list of collection vehicles covered under the written authorization, including,
at a minimum, the following information for each vehicle: identification
information for each vehicle (such as vehicle license number, vehicle
registration number, or company identification number); date and location of
most recent vehicle inspection; and hauling capacity of the vehicle.
(2) The type of municipal waste to be collected and transported.
(3) Certificate(s) of insurance evidencing that the collector has valid liability,
automobile and workers' compensation insurance in the minimum amounts
established and required by separate resolution of the governing body of the
municipality.
(4) If the collector is hauling or collecting recyclable materials in the municipality,
identify the materials being hauled or collected and provide the following
information for each vehicle: identification information for each vehicle (such
as vehicle license number, vehicle registration number, or company
identification number): date and location of most recent vehicle inspection;
and the hauling capacity of the vehicle.
C. Any person who fails to satisfy the minimum standards and requirements of this
article or is in violation of the provisions of this article may not lawfully collect
municipal solid waste or recyclable material in the municipality.
D. All private, licensed, or authorized collectors of municipal solid waste or recyclable
materials shall meet the requirements of Act 90, Act 97, Act 101, the Bucks County
Municipal Waste Management Plan, and all PA DEP rules and regulations (Chapter
285 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code).
§ 418-603 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 418-605
418:30
§ 418-605. Reporting requirements.
§ 418-606. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, upon conviction thereof, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each, day that
a violation of this article continues or each section of this article which shall be found
to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. For purposes of this section,
the doing of any act or thing prohibited by any provision of this article or the failure to
do any act or thing as to this article is punishable as herein stated. Authorized, private,
and licensed collectors who shall violate any provision of this article may be reported
to the PA DEP by the municipality and may be subject to the revocation of the state
authorization to transport municipal waste, as described in Act 90.
§ 418-607. Injunctive powers.
The Township of Middletown may petition the Bucks County Court of Common Pleas
for an injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, in order to enforce any of the
provisions of this article.
A. All private, licensed, or authorized collectors of municipal solid waste or recyclable
materials operating within the municipality shall participate in the Bucks County
Municipal Recycling Documentation Program. The program will provide a system
for documenting the origin of municipal solid waste and recyclable material within
the municipality and the ultimate disposal point of said waste and recyclables. Each
private, licensed, or authorized collector of municipal solid waste or recyclable
materials operating in the municipality shall prepare and submit an annual report to
the municipality on the official collector's solid waste and/or recyclable materials
documentation reporting form. The report shall be submitted by the PA DEPlicensed
collector to the municipality by January 31 of each year and include all of
the required information pertaining to the preceding calendar year.
B. All annual reports submitted to the municipality from private, licensed, or
authorized collectors of municipal solid waste or recyclable materials shall be
combined into a single report and submitted by the municipality on the official
municipal documentation reporting form to the county by February 28 of the year
following the reporting period.
§ 418-605 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 418-607
418:31

Chapter 425
STORAGE FACILITIES AND UNITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms and weapons — See Ch. 242.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 363.
Zoning — See Ch. 500.
§ 418-607 STORAGE FACILITIES AND UNITS § 418-607
425:1

ARTICLE I
Public Storage Facilities and Lockers
[Adopted 4-2-2002 by Ord. No. 02-04 (Ch. 13, Part 14, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 425-101. Purpose and intent.
The threat to public safety posed by the abuse of public accommodations and facilities is
substantial, and the seriousness of the harm which may be visited upon the community
and the nation by the abuse of such accommodations and facilities in connection with the
storage and distribution of explosives and illicit drugs is a unique menace to the public
peace, safety, health and welfare. The Township of Middletown is uniquely situated
between and among the major metropolitan areas of the Northeastern United States
and has easy access to the major routes and hubs of vehicular, train and air travel.
Public storage facilities and public storage lockers in this Township provide the unique
opportunity to their customers and users to temporarily store in readily accessible but
hidden facilities quantities of materials which may easily be transported throughout the
Northeast corridor; unfortunately, those facilities are particularly suitable in serving the
needs of those persons engaged in the traffic and use of explosives, narcotics and other
contraband. The intent of this article is to provide a means of ensuring the public storage
facilities and public storage lockers within this Township are not being used for such
far-reaching illicit purposes, but by the least intrusive means available, for the protection
of not only the residents of this Township but of the nation as well.
§ 425-102. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PUBLIC STORAGE FACILITY — A structure or facility containing or comprising
more than one separate room or unit for the storage of the personal property of a person
or persons other than the owner of the facility, and which is operated for a fee for the
purpose of providing such person(s) the ability to store his/her/their property in such
room(s) or unit(s) and the right to lock or otherwise secure the room or unit against
public access.
PUBLIC STORAGE LOCKER — A unit for the storage of the personal property of a
person other than the owner of the structure or facility at or in which the unit is located,
and which is located in the publicly accessible areas of the facility or structure for the
purpose of providing such person for a fee the ability to store his or her property in such
unit and to lock or otherwise secure the unit against public access.
§ 425-103. Applicability.
This article shall apply to any public storage facility and public storage locker which
presently or at any time after the effective date of this article is situate and/or operates
in the Township. Any person, firm or corporation that owns or operates a public storage
facility or a structure or facility that contains public storage lockers in the Township
shall provide written notice of the contents of this article to each customer with whom
it hereafter enters into an agreement or an extension agreement for the use of a storage
unit, room or locker at its structure or facility. Failure of the owner or operator of the
facility to provide written notification as required herein shall not excuse the compliance
of an owner or operator with the other provisions of this article or limit or negate the
§ 425-101 STORAGE FACILITIES AND UNITS § 425-103
425:3
authority granted herein to the Township's representatives to conduct an inspection.
§ 425-104. Assistance of trained dogs in detecting explosives, narcotics and other
contraband.
At such times that a public storage facility is open to its customers, or that a structure
or facility that contains public storage lockers is open to the public, a representative
of Middletown Township may, and is hereby authorized to, conduct an inspection of
any public storage facility or public storage locker, except for the interior of the storage
rooms, units or lockers that are secured against public access, with the assistance of a dog
trained to detect by smell the presence of explosives, narcotics and/or other contraband
and being handled by an officer or other individual who is trained in the handling of
such dogs. If in the opinion of the officer or other individual handling the dog the dog
detects the presence of explosives, narcotics or other contraband in a storage unit, room
or locker, such determination shall be reasonable suspicion for believing explosives,
narcotics and/or other contraband is in fact located in such unit, room or locker. Such
reasonable suspicion shall be grounds for the Police Department to secure the public
storage facility and/or public storage locker from and against further public access until
such time as a search warrant is issued and for such period of time that is necessary
to execute upon such warrant. However, in the event of exigent circumstance and/or
immediate concern for the health, safety or welfare of the occupants of the facility or the
community, an officer shall conduct an immediate search of the unit, room or locker that
has been identified.
§ 425-105. Authorized representatives of Township.
The representative(s) of the Township who may conduct the inspection authorized in
the preceding section shall include the Township Building Inspector, Code Enforcement
Officer, Zoning Officer, Fire Marshal, police officers and any other agent or employee
of the Township so authorized to act by the Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 425-106. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating or interfering with any of the provisions
of this article or failing to comply with a request made pursuant to any section
hereof shall, upon conviction thereof before a Magisterial District Judge, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution and, in
default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days. Each day that a person, firm or corporation refuses or continues to
refuse to comply with a request to conduct an inspection as authorized in this article
shall be considered a separate offense.
B. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the Township
Solicitor from initiating appropriate actions or proceedings at law or equity to effect
the purposes of or compel compliance with this article.
§ 425-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 425-106
425:4
ARTICLE II
Portable Home Storage Units and Construction Trailers
[Adopted 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. 07-11]
§ 425-201. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CONSTRUCTION TRAILERS—Movable wheeled trailers that are used in connection
with the performance of construction work, and which may be designed or intended
to convey tools, equipment, construction materials, building materials or other
construction-related items to and from a construction site by a building contractor or
property owner, and which same trailers are located on any site at which construction
work is actively being performed, has commenced and temporarily ceased, or a building
permit for construction work has been issued where construction activity is not actively
progressing.
PORTABLE HOME STORAGE UNITS — Portable sheds (hereinafter referred to
as "PHSUs") that are loaded with materials and placed on a residential parcel for
purposes of temporary storage of materials, including but not limited to household
goods, building materials (prior to being used for building purposes), and for any other
storage on a limited basis on a parcel which is either zoned residential or used primarily
for residential purposes. Such units shall not be considered an accessory structure as
provided under Chapter 500, Zoning, of the Code of Middletown Township.
§ 425-202. Permit required; application; insurance; fee.
§ 425-203. Duration.
A. Prior to the placement of any PHSU or construction trailer on any residential parcel
in Middletown Township, the owner of such parcel or, in the case of a construction
trailer, the registered owner of the trailer must apply for and obtain a permit for the
placement of such PHSU or construction trailer from the Middletown Township
Department of Licenses and Inspections.
B. All applications for a permit under this article must be accompanied by an insurance
certificate providing liability insurance in an amount not less than $100,000 in
general liability coverage from the company supplying the PHSU or from the owner
of any construction trailer.
C. The Township shall collect an application fee for any permit issued hereunder, in
an amount to be fixed by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, for a thirty-day
permit, subject to adjustment from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors as provided hereunder.
D. Permits issued under this article and any renewal of permits issued hereunder must
be signed by a code official of the Township and prominently displayed on the
PHSU or construction trailer for which the permit is issued in a sealed and
watertight manner, so as to protect the permit from denigration by the weather, rain
or other elements.
A. Initial permits may be granted for a period of 30 days by the Code Enforcement
§ 425-201 STORAGE FACILITIES AND UNITS § 425-203
425:5
§ 425-204. Limitation on number of permits for PHSUs.
No residential parcel under this article may be issued more than two permits for the
placement of a PHSU during any twelve-month period. Such limitations shall include
applications for extension. The total number of days upon which any PHSU may be
located on any residential property within the Township shall not exceed 60 days unless
otherwise provided under this article.
§ 425-205. Limitation on number of permits for construction trailers.
No residential parcel under this article may be issued more than one permit for the
placement of a construction trailer during any twelve-month period. Such limitation
shall not include any period of extension provided under § 425-203C. In the event of
extenuating circumstances, such that the expiration of a permit under this part would
constitute an undue hardship to the permit holder, the Township may issue not more than
one additional permit during any twelve-month period, which same permit may not be
extended or renewed and shall expire as provided under § 425-203C.
§ 425-206. Permits for extended hardship.
Upon a finding by the Code Enforcement Officer that a parcel of property has
experienced a flood, fire, natural disaster or other act of God, so as to render the primary
residential dwelling thereon uninhabitable and so as to require, in the judgment of
the code official, the placement of a PHSU on the property for a period longer than
that provided under § 425-203 or 425-204, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue
an extended hardship permit under this section for the placement of a PHSU for such
period of time as fixed by the Code Enforcement Officer and not otherwise subject to
the limitations provided under this article. All such extended hardship permits must be
duly registered with the Township Department of Licenses and Inspections and shall be
issued without application fee.
§ 425-207. Location.
All PHSUs and construction trailers must be kept in the driveway of the parcel at the
furthest accessible point from the street. All locations must be paved off-street surfaces,
and the applicant must obtain preapproval of the Township for placement of a PHSU or
construction trailer. In the event a parcel is devoid of a driveway or other paved surface,
Officer, upon proper submission of the required application and supporting
documentation as provided under § 425-202.
B. After the expiration of the thirty-day period for the initial permit, an applicant may
submit a renewal application for an additional 30 days, which same application
shall not be unreasonably refused by the Township. All such applications for
extension of permit must be accompanied by an extension fee in an amount to be
fixed by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, which same fee may be adjusted
from time to time by further resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
C. No more than one extension may be granted for any permit issued under this part
for any PHSU. Permits for the placement of a construction trailer may be granted
not more than four extensions.
§ 425-203 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 425-207
425:6
the placement of the PHSU or construction trailer shall be at the direction of the Code
Enforcement Official.
§ 425-208. Number of units.
§ 425-209. Violations and penalties.
A. Only one PHSU may be placed on any one residential parcel at one time. The Code
Enforcement Officer is authorized to permit the placement of more than one PHSU
under the terms of § 425-206 in the event that the circumstances giving rise to the
hardship permit warrant the placement of additional PHSUs in order to
accommodate the storage of interior furnishings, goods and materials from a
residence substantially damaged by flood, fire, act of God or other natural disaster.
B. Not more than one construction trailer may be placed on any residential parcel at
one time.
A. Any person who shall place a PHSU or construction trailer in violation of this
article shall, upon conviction before a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to
pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, together with the cost of prosecution and, upon
default from the payment thereof, may be sentenced to undergo imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 30 days. Each day in which a violation shall continue after
due notice to the property owner shall be deemed a separate offense, punishable by
the terms and conditions provided under this section.
B. Any code enforcement officer or law enforcement officer of Middletown Township
is duly empowered to enforce the terms, conditions and provisions of this article
and to commence such summary criminal proceedings as may be warranted upon
the finding of any violation of the terms, conditions and provisions of this article.
§ 425-207 STORAGE FACILITIES AND UNITS § 425-209
425:7

Chapter 430
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH DISTURBANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction standards — See Ch. 190.
Soil erosion, sedimentation and grading control — See Ch.
411.
Stormwater management for Neshaminy Creek
Watershed — See Ch. 431.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 440.
Zoning — See Ch. 500.
§ 425-209 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 425-209
430:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 430-101. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Middletown Township Stormwater
Management and Earth Disturbance Ordinance."
§ 430-102. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the Township finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting from
development and redevelopment throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity
of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities
to convey and manage stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood
reduction efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater
recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting from land
development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can also harm surface
water resources by changing the natural hydrologic patterns, accelerating stream
flows (which increase scour and erosion of streambeds and stream banks, thereby
elevating sedimentation), destroying aquatic habitat and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals and
pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss of recharge.
C. A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM), including
minimization of impacts of development, redevelopment and activities causing
accelerated erosion and loss of natural infiltration is fundamental to the public
health, safety, welfare and the protection of the people of the Township and all the
people of the commonwealth, their resources and the environment.
D. Stormwater can be an important water resource by providing groundwater recharge
for water supplies and baseflow of streams, which also protects and maintains
surface water quality.
E. Impacts from stormwater runoff can be minimized by using project designs that
maintain the natural hydrologic regime and sustain high water quality, groundwater
recharge, stream baseflow and aquatic ecosystems. The most cost-effective and
environmentally advantageous way to manage stormwater runoff is through
nonstructural project design that minimizes impervious surfaces and sprawl, avoids
sensitive areas (i.e., stream buffers, floodplains, steep slopes), and considers
topography and soils to maintain the natural hydrologic regime.
F. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an essential
component in successfully addressing stormwater.
G. Federal and state regulations require certain townships to implement a program of
stormwater controls. These townships are required to obtain a permit for
stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer systems under the National
§ 430-101 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-102
430:3
§ 430-103. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare within the
Neshaminy and Delaware River South Watersheds by maintaining the natural hydrologic
regime and minimization of the impacts described in § 430-102 of this chapter through
provisions designed to:
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
H. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems can
contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth by the Township.
A. Promote alternative project designs and layouts that minimize the impacts on
surface water and groundwater.
B. Promote nonstructural best management practices (BMPs).
C. Minimize increases in stormwater volume.
D. Minimize impervious surfaces.
E. Manage accelerated stormwater runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems and
stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating activities that cause these
problems.
F. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater planning and
management.
G. Utilize and preserve existing natural drainage systems as much as possible.
H. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, requiring a minimum of
structures and relying on natural processes.
I. Focus on infiltration of stormwater to maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent
degradation of surface water and groundwater quality, and to otherwise protect
water resources.
J. Maintain existing baseflows and quality of streams and watercourses.
K. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including regulations at 25
Pa. Code § 93.4.a requiring protection and maintenance of existing uses and
maintenance of the level of water quality to support those uses in all streams, and
the protection and maintenance of water quality in special protection streams.
L. Address the quality and quantity of stormwater discharges from the development
site.
M. Provide a mechanism to identify stormwater controls necessary to meet NPDES
permit requirements.
N. Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program that addresses
nonstormwater discharges into the Township's separate storm sewer system.
O. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
§ 430-102 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-103
430:4
§ 430-104. Statutory authority.
The Township is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff, surface
water and groundwater quality and quantity by the authority of the following:
§ 430-105. Compatibility with other ordinance or legal requirements.
P. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
Q. Provide performance standards and design criteria for watershed-wide stormwater
management and planning.
R. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all permanent structural and
nonstructural stormwater management facilities and BMPs that are implemented in
the Township.
S. Provide requirements and necessary agreements for long-term maintenance
responsibilities for all permanent structural and nonstructural stormwater
management facilities and BMPs to ensure that they continue to function as
designed and maintained and pose no threat to public health, safety and welfare.
A. Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the
"Storm Water Management Act" (hereinafter referred to as "the Act");
B. Water Resources Management Act of 2002, as amended;
C. Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. §§ 66501 et seq. and 66601 et seq.;
D. Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended;51
E. Clean Water Act, P.L. 92-500, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.;
Pennsylvania's Clean Streams Law, as amended, 35 P.S. § 691.1 at seq.; federal
regulations implementing the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
program under Sections 318, 402 and 405 of the Clean Streams Act, as codified at
40 CFR 122.26 and 123.35, and state regulations incorporating those federal
regulations, as codified at 25 Pa. Code § 92.2;52 and
F. As a condition of the general permit for stormwater discharges from small
municipal separate storm sewer systems, to implement and enforce stormwater
management programs in accordance with established stormwater management
protocols, as the same may be amended from time to time.
A. Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of the
responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance.
B. To the extent that this chapter imposes more rigorous or stringent requirements for
stormwater management, the specific requirements otherwise contained in this
chapter shall be followed.
51. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
52. Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of the Pa. Code was reserved 10-8-2010. See now 25 Pa. Code Ch. 92a, National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permitting, Monitoring and Compliance.
§ 430-103 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-105
430:5
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of the Township's
requirements regarding stormwater matters that do not conflict with the provisions
of this chapter, such as local stormwater management design criteria (e.g., inlet
spacing, inlet type, collection system design and details, outlet structure design,
etc.). Conflicting provisions in other Township ordinances or regulations shall be
construed to retain the requirements of this chapter addressing state water quality
requirements.
§ 430-105 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-105
430:6
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 430-201. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted
as follows:
§ 430-202. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through the
combined action of man's activity and the natural processes of a rate greater than would
occur because of the natural process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — The work of producing crops and raising livestock
including tillage, plowing, disking, harrowing, pasturing and installation of conservation
measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an
agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of the moving
of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also the changing of surface
conditions by causing the surface to be more or less impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A person who has filed an application for approval to engage in any
regulated activity defined in § 430-301 of this chapter.53
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS — Engineering or site drawings maintained by the contractor
as he constructs the project and upon which he documents the actual locations of the
building components and changes to the original contract documents. These documents,
or a copy of same, are turned over to the Township Engineer at the completion of the
project, and shall be submitted in an electronic format of such type as is designated by
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number
includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine
gender include feminine gender, and words of feminine gender include masculine
gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specific example
but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and
character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, corporation, unit of government, or any other similar
entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and "should" are
permissive.
E. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed, maintained,
or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained."
53. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 430-201 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-202
430:7
the Township.
BANKFULL — The channel at the top-of-bank, or point from where water begins to
overflow onto a floodplain.
BASEFLOW — Portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater; the sustained
discharge that does not result from direct runoff or from water diversions, reservoir
releases, piped discharges, or other human activities.
BIORETENTION — A stormwater retention area that utilizes woody and herbaceous
plants and soils to remove pollutants before infiltration occurs.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Methods, measures or practices used
to prevent or reduce surface runoff and/or water pollution, including but not limited
to structural and nonstructural stormwater management practices and operation and
maintenance procedures. See also "nonstructural best management practice (BMP)."
BMP OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE PLAN — A plan prepared by the
developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be managed at the
particular site of interest according to this chapter.
BUFFER — The area of land immediately adjacent to any natural watercourse,
measured perpendicular to and horizontally from the top-of-bank on both sides of a
stream (see "top-of-bank").
CHANNEL — An open drainage feature through which stormwater flows. Channels
include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made drainageways, swales,
streams, ditches, canals and pipes flowing partly full.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening or headward cutting of channels
and waterways caused by stormwater runoff or bankfull flows.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Bucks County Conservation District.
CULVERT — A structure with its appurtenant works which carries water under or
through an embankment or fill.
DAM — A man-made barrier, together with its appurtenant works, constructed for
the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid or semifluid. A dam may
include a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad or other purposes which
impounds or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL (QUALIFIED) — A Pennsylvania registered professional
engineer, registered landscape architect or registered professional land surveyor trained
to develop stormwater management plans.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a
storm event measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., a five-year storm) and duration
(e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DESIGNEE — The agent or representative of Middletown Township responsible for
the administration, review and/or enforcement of any provisions of this chapter by
appointment, resolution, contract or memorandum of understanding.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard stormwater
§ 430-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-202
430:8
runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate.
Detention basins are designed to drain completely soon after a rainfall event and become
dry until the next rainfall event.
DETENTION DISTRICT — Those subareas of a watershed in which some type of
detention is required to meet the plan requirements and the goals of Act 167.54
DEVELOPER — A person that seeks to undertake any regulated earth disturbance
activities at a project site in the Township.
DEVELOPMENT — Any human-induced change to improved or unimproved real
estate, whether public or private, including but not limited to land development,
construction, installation or expansion of a building or other structure, land division,
street construction, drilling and site alteration, such as embankments, dredging,
grubbing, grading, paving, parking or storage facilities, excavation, filling, stockpiling
or clearing. As used in this chapter, development encompasses both new development
and redevelopment.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract or parcel of land where any regulated
activity set forth in § 430-301 is planned, conducted or maintained.55
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE DISCHARGE — Drainage discharge that is not confined to a
single point location or channel, including sheet flow or shallow concentrated flow.
DISCHARGE — To release water from a project, site, aquifer, drainage basin or other
point of interest (verb); the rate and volume of flow of water such as in a stream,
generally expressed in cubic feet per second (noun). See also "peak discharge."
DISCHARGE POINT — The point of discharge for a stormwater facility.
DISTURBED AREAS — Unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance activity is
occurring or has occurred.
DITCH — A man-made waterway constructed for irrigation or stormwater conveyance
purposes.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE—That portion of the property line of the lot, tract or
parcels of land being developed, located such that overland or pipe flow from the project
site would be directed towards it by gravity.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility
designed to transport stormwater runoff that includes channels, swales, pipes, conduits,
culverts and storm sewers.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing the
use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Township after the drainage plan has
been approved.
DRAINAGE PLAN — The documentation of the stormwater management system, if
any, to be used for a given development site, the contents of which are established in
§ 430-302.
54. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
55. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 430-202 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-202
430:9
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY —A construction or other human activity which
disturbs the surface of land, including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading,
excavations, embankments, land development, agricultural plowing or tilling, timber
harvesting activities, road maintenance activities, mineral extraction, and the moving,
depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EARTH DISTURBANCE PERMIT—A permit issued by the Township Department of
Licenses and Inspections for any earth disturbance activity.
EMERGENCY SPILLWAY — A conveyance area that is used to pass peak discharge
greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the stormwater facility.
ENCROACHMENT — A structure or activity that changes, expands or diminishes the
course, current or cross section of a watercourse, floodway or body of water.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including water/stream
channels, is worn away by water, wind or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN—A plan that is designed to minimize
accelerated erosion and sedimentation. Said plan must be submitted to and approved by
the appropriate conservation district before construction can begin.
ERSAM — Existing resource and site analysis map.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar
material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated and shall
include the conditions resulting therefrom.
EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality which satisfy
Pennsylvania Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality
Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to antidegradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS—The initial condition of a project site prior to its proposed
alteration. If the initial condition of the site is undeveloped land, the land use shall be
considered as "meadow" unless the natural land cover is proven to generate lower curve
numbers or Rational "C" value, such as forested lands.
FINANCIAL SECURITY — An irrevocable letter of credit with a federal or
commonwealth lending institution, a corporate surety bond from a bonding company
authorized to do business within the commonwealth or such other guaranty approved by
the Solicitor in an amount approved by the Township Engineer.
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land areas from
the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of this commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any natural
source or as delineated by applicable Department of Housing and Urban Development,
Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard Boundary Map as being a special flood
hazard area.
FLOODPLAIN SOILS — Soils in areas subject to periodic flooding and listed in
the Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties, Pennsylvania, United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, July 1975, as being "in the
floodplain" or "subject to flooding." Floodplain soils include but are not limited to:
A. Alluvial land.
§ 430-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-202
430:10
FLOODWAY — The channel of a watercourse and those portions of the adjoining
floodplains, which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the one-hundredyear
frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of the floodway is as
indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no
FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year frequency
floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from
the stream to 50 feet from the top-of-bank.
FLUVIAL GEOMORPHOLOGY — The study of landforms associated with river
channels and the processes that form them.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and associated
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include timber inventory
and preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets,
logging road design and construction, timber harvesting and reforestation.
FREEBOARD—A vertical distance between the elevation of the design high-water and
the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, swale or diversion berm. The space is required as a
safety margin in a pond or basin.
GRADE — A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground, specified in percent
and shown on plans as specified herein (noun); to finish the surface of a roadbed, the top
of an embankment, or the bottom of excavation (verb).
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or man-made waterway, usually broad and
shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to convey surface water.
GROUND COVER — Low-growing plant materials planted and growing in such a
manner so as to conceal the earth surface.
GROUNDWATER —Water beneath the earth's surface that supplies wells and springs,
and is often between saturated soil and rock.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE—The replenishment of existing natural underground
water supplies from rain or overland flow.
HEC-HMS — The United States Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering
Center (HEC) - Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS). This model was used to model
the Neshaminy and Little Neshaminy Creeks watershed during the Act 167 Plan
development and was the basis for the standards and criteria of this chapter.
HIGH QUALITY WATERS — Surface waters having quality which exceeds levels
necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish and wildlife and recreation in and on
the water by satisfying Pennsylvania Code, Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter
93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(a).
B. Alton gravelly loam, flooded.
C. Bowmansville silt loam.
D. Hatboro silt loam.
E. Marsh.
F. Pope loam.
G. Rowland silt loam.
§ 430-202 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-202
430:11
HOT SPOTS—Areas where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff,
with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater.
HYDROGRAPH — A graph representing the discharge of water versus time for a
selected point in the drainage system.
HYDROLOGIC REGIME — The hydrologic cycle or balance that sustains quality
and quantity of stormwater, baseflow, storage and groundwater supplies under natural
conditions.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — A classification of soils by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service, formerly the Soil Conservation Service, into four runoff potential
groups. The groups range from A soils, which are very permeable and produce little
runoff, to D soils, which are not very permeable and produce much more runoff.
HYETOGRAPH — A graphical representation of average rainfall, rainfall excess rates,
or volumes over specified areas during successive units of time during a storm.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the
ground. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, streets, sidewalks, pavement
roofs or driveway areas. Any surface areas designed to be gravel or crushed stone shall
be regarded as impervious surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain stormwater
runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILL—Development that occurs on smaller parcels that remain undeveloped but are
within or in very close proximity to urban or densely developed areas. Infill development
usually relies on existing infrastructure and does not require an extension of water, sewer
or other public utilities.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is absorbed
by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated downward to recharge
groundwater.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff into the
underground water (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, or seepage trenches).
INFILTRATION TEST — An in-situ test performed in accordance with the current
standards as stated in the Pennsylvania Code, Title 25, Environmental Protection,
Chapter 73 (Standards for On-lot Sewage Treatment Facilities) by a qualified soil
scientist or geotechnical engineer to determine the permeability or percolation capacity
of an area for use in designing any infiltration BMPs. The number and locations of
infiltration tests shall be in accordance with Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual (Draft January 2005, Section 6.9, Protocol 1).
INLET — The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A stream that flows only part of the time. Flow
generally occurs for several weeks or months in response to seasonal precipitation or
groundwater discharge.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land
for any purpose involving:
A.
§ 430-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-202
430:12
LIMITING ZONE — A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or underlying strata
that includes one of the following:
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as
permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) PRACTICES — Practices that will minimize
proposed conditions runoff rates and volumes, which will minimize needs for artificial
conveyance and storage facilities.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff conveyance
used as a reach in the Neshaminy and Little Neshaminy Creeks hydrologic model.
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether
proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot
or lots, regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively,
between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means
of or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups, or other features.
(2)
B. A subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.56
C.
The following shall not be considered a land development:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or singlefamily
semidetached dwelling into not more than three residential units, unless
such units are intended to be a condominium;
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm building, on a lot or lots,
subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines of an
enterprise which would be considered an amusement park. For the purposes
of this exemption, an amusement park is defined as a tract or area used
principally as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides. This
exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park
until initial plans for the expanded area have been approved by the
municipality.
(3)
D.
A seasonal high-water table, whether perched or regional, determined by direct
observation of the water table or indicated by soil mottling.
A.
A rock with open joints, fracture or solution channels, or masses of loose rock
fragments, including gravel, with insufficient fine soil to fill the voids between the
fragments.
B.
A rock formation, other stratum or soil condition that is so slowly permeable that it
effectively limits downward passage of effluent.
C.
56. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 430-202 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-202
430:13
MANAGER — The Manager of Middletown Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania,
or other person so designated by the Board of Supervisors.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for calculation of
velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per second) in open
channels, based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope. Open channels
may include closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MAXIMUM EXPECTED DISCHARGE — The maximum expected quantity of water
arriving at a particular location.
NATURAL HYDROLOGIC REGIME — See "hydrologic regime."
NATURAL RECHARGE AREA — Undisturbed surface area or depression where
stormwater collects, and a portion of which infiltrates and replenishes the groundwater.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION—Pollution that enters a water body from diffuse
origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible, confined or discrete
conveyances.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES — Water flowing in stormwater collection
facilities, such as pipes or swales, which is not the result of a rainfall event or snowmelt.
NONSTRUCTURAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Methods of
controlling stormwater runoff quantity and quality, such as innovative site planning,
impervious area and grading reduction, protection of natural depression areas, temporary
ponding on site and other techniques.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal government's
system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act, which is delegated to DEP in
Pennsylvania.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation
Service).
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an open
surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made
drainageways, swales, streams, ditches and canals.
OUTFALL — "Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where the
Township's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of the commonwealth.
OUTLET—Points of water disposal to a stream, river, lake, tidewater or artificial drain.
PA DEP —The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PARENT TRACT — The parcel of land from which a land development or subdivision
originates, determined from the date of Township adoption of this chapter.
PARKING LOT STORAGE — Involves the use of parking areas as temporary
impoundments with controlled release rates during rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm
event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL—The computer-based hydrologic model developed
at the Pennsylvania State University.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (CALIBRATED)—The computer-based hydrologic
§ 430-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-202
430:14
modeling technique adapted to the Delaware River South watershed for the Act 167 plan.
The model has been calibrated to reflect actual recorded flow values by adjoining key
model input parameters.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association, corporation,
partnership, limited liability company or a governmental unit, public utility or any other
legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PERVIOUS SURFACE—A surface that allows the infiltration of water into the ground.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit or similar structure (including appurtenances) that
conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION —The Planning Commission of Middletown Township.
PMF (PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD) — The flood that may be expected from
the most severe combination of critical meteorological and hydrologic conditions that
are reasonably possible in any area. The PMF is derived from the probable maximum
precipitation (PMP) as determined based on data obtained from the National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but
not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel or conduit from which stormwater is or
may be discharged, as defined in state regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.57
POST CONSTRUCTION — Period after construction during which disturbed areas
are stabilized, stormwater controls are in place and functioning and all proposed
improvements in the approved land development plan are completed.
POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN (PCSWM) — A
copy of an approved BMP operations and maintenance plan, which contains the original
required endorsements of the Township and which is intended to be recorded with the
Bucks County Recorder of Deeds.
PREDEVELOPMENT—Undeveloped/natural condition. (When applying recharge and
stormwater requirements meeting definition of "regulated activity," existing impervious
coverage shall be considered as meadow conditions.)
PRETREATMENT —Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to provide storage or
filtering to trap coarse materials and other pollutants before they enter the system, but
not necessarily designed to meet the water quality volume requirements of § 430-404.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in the
Township are planned, conducted or maintained.
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak flow.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration of rainfall,
other surface waters, or land application of water or treated wastewater.
RECONSTRUCTION — The process by which existing developed area is adaptively
reused, rehabilitated, restored, renovated and/or expanded. The development relies on
existing infrastructure and does not require an extension of water, sewer or other public
utilities.
57. Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of the Pa. Code was reserved 10-8-2010. Defined terms can now be found at 25 Pa. Code §
92a.2.
§ 430-202 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-202
430:15
RECORD O&M PLAN — A copy of an approved BMP operations and maintenance
plan which contains the original required endorsements of the Township and which is
intended to be recorded with the Bucks County Recorder of Deeds.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any development that requires demolition or removal of
existing structures or impervious surfaces at a site and/or the replacement with new
impervious surfaces. Maintenance activities such as top-layer grinding and repaving
are not considered to be redevelopment. Interior remodeling projects and tenant
improvements are also not considered to be redevelopment. Utility trenches in streets
are not considered redevelopment unless more than 50% of the street width including
shoulders is removed and repaved.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions that have an impact on
stormwater runoff quality or quantity and that are specified in § 430-105 of this chapter.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of existing conditions peak rate of runoff from a
site or subarea to which the proposed conditions peak rate of runoff must be reduced to
protect downstream areas.
REPAVING — Replacement of the impervious surface that does not involve
reconstruction of an existing paved (impervious) surface.
REPLACEMENT PAVING — Reconstruction of and full replacement of an existing
paved (impervious) surface.
RETENTION BASIN — A structure in which stormwater is stored and not released
during the storm event. Retention basins are designed for infiltration purposes and do
not have an outlet. The retention basin must infiltrate stored water in four days or less.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm event of
a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the twenty-five-year return
period rainfall would be expected to recur on the average of once every 25 years.
RISER—A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used to control the
discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the existing road cross
section, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road surfaces, cutting road
banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches and other similar activities.
ROOF DRAINS—A drainage conduit or pipe that collects water runoff from a roof and
leads it away from the structure.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — The temporary ponding and gradual release of stormwater
falling directly onto flat roof surfaces using controlled-flow roof drains into building
designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
RUNOFF COEFFICIENT — That portion of a total volume of water which can be
expected to flow off a particular surface.
SALDO — Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance; Chapter 440 of this Code.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located and
designed in such a way as to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt or other material transported
by water during construction.
§ 430-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-202
430:16
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or any other introduction of
sediment into the waters of the commonwealth.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is accumulated
or deposited by the movement of water or air.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with loose
stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is directed for infiltration into
the underground water.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, man-made channels or storm drains) primarily used for collecting and
conveying stormwater runoff.
SHALLOW CONCENTRATED FLOW — Stormwater runoff flowing in shallow,
defined ruts prior to entering a defined channel or waterway.
SHEET FLOW — A flow process associated with broad, shallow water movement on
sloping ground surfaces that is not channelized or concentrated.
SOIL-COVER-COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation developed
by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/cover to a runoff parameter
called curve number (CN).
SOLICITOR — The Solicitor of Middletown Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
SOURCE WATER PROTECTION AREAS (SWPA) — The zone through which
contaminants, if present, are likely to migrate and reach a drinking water well or surface
water intake.
SPECIAL PROTECTION SUBWATERSHEDS — Watersheds that have been
designated in Pennsylvania Code, Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water
Quality Standards, as exceptional value (EV) or high quality (HQ) waters.
SPILLWAY — A conveyance that is used to pass the peak discharge of the maximum
design storm that is controlled by the stormwater facility.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under state regulations,
protection of designated and existing uses (see 25 Pa. Code, Chapters 93 and 96),
including:
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a designated use, such as cold water
fishery or potable water supply, which are listed in Chapter 93. These uses must be
protected and maintained under state regulations.
A.
Existing uses are those attained as of November 1975, regardless whether they
have been designated in Chapter 93. Regulated earth disturbance activities must
be designed to protect and maintain existing uses and maintain the level of water
quality necessary to protect those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain
water quality in special protection streams.
B.
Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical characteristics of
surface water bodies. After regulated earth disturbance activities are complete,
these characteristics can be impacted by addition of pollutants such as sediment
and changes in habitat through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result of
C.
§ 430-202 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-202
430:17
STORAGE-INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure based on
solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the change in storage)
with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm "event" occurs or is
exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See "return period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that conveys intercepted
runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes domestic sewage and industrial
wastes.
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation reaching the ground
surface.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY—Any structure, natural or man-made,
that, due to its condition, design or construction, conveys, stores or otherwise affects
stormwater runoff quality, rate or quantity. Typical stormwater management facilities
include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins, open channels, storm
sewers, pipes and infiltration structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The watershed plan known as the
"Neshaminy and Little Neshaminy Creeks or the Delaware River South Watershed Act
167 Stormwater Management Plan" for managing those land use activities that will
influence stormwater runoff quality and quantity and that would impact the Neshaminy
and Little Neshaminy Creeks or the Delaware River South Watersheds, adopted by
Bucks County as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the applicant
or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be managed at the particular
site of interest according to this chapter.
STREAM — A natural watercourse.
STREAM BUFFER — The land area adjacent to each side of a natural stream, essential
to maintaining water quality. (See "buffer.") (Not man-made.)
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert or other structure in excess of 100
feet in length, upstream to downstream, which encloses a regulated water of the
commonwealth.
STRIPPING — The removal of vegetation, including trees and topsoil. The normal
process of gardening or property maintenance shall be excluded from this definition.
SUBAREA (SUBWATERSHED) — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for
which stormwater management criteria has been established in the stormwater
management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any
means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes
in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by
the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot
development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural
changes in land surface area from those activities. Therefore, permanent discharges
to surface waters must be managed to protect the stream bank, streambed and
structural integrity of the waterway, to prevent these impacts.
§ 430-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-202
430:18
purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands,
ponds, springs and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface waters, or parts
thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface water runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME TO PEAK (Tp) — A factor used in conjunction with the application of the
Rational Method, which specifies a lag factor between the time of concentration (Tc) and
the peak runoff for a given watershed. For purposes of this chapter, Tp shall equal 3 for
the standard Rational Method, 5 for the Modified Rational Method and 7 for the DeKalb
Rational Method.
TIME-OF-CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time required for surface runoff to travel
from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point of interest within
the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland flow time and flow time in
pipes or channels, if any.
TOP-OF-BANK—Highest point of elevation in a stream channel cross section at which
a rising water level just begins to flow out of the channel and over the floodplain.
TOWNSHIP — Middletown Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER —
VERNAL POND — Seasonal depressional wetlands that are covered by shallow water
for variable periods from winter to spring but may be completely dry for most of the
summer and fall.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a defined bed
and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds,
springs and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface and underground
water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the
commonwealth.
WATERSHED—Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other body of water;
whether natural or artificial.
WELLHEAD —
A professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
duly appointed as the engineer for a township, planning agency or joint planning
commission.
A.
A professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
duly appointed as the Engineer for the Township by the Board of Supervisors to
perform the duties of Engineer as herein specified.
B.
A. A structure built over a well;
§ 430-202 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-202
430:19
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA — The surface and subsurface area surrounding a
water supply well, well field, or spring supplying a public water system, through which
contaminants are reasonably likely to move toward and reach the water source.
WET BASIN — Pond for urban runoff management that is designed to detain urban
runoff and always contains water.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, fens and
similar areas.
ZONING OFFICER — The Zoning Officer of Middletown Township, Bucks County,
Pennsylvania, so appointed by the Board of Supervisors.
B. The source of water for a well.
§ 430-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-202
430:20
ARTICLE III
Applicability
§ 430-301. Applicability; regulated activities.
§ 430-302. Exemptions in Neshaminy Creek and Delaware River South
A. This chapter shall apply to those areas of the Township that are located within the
Neshaminy Creek and Delaware River South watersheds, as those watersheds are
delineated by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or other
governmental agency with jurisdiction.
B. This chapter shall only apply to permanent structural and nonstructural stormwater
management BMPs constructed as part of any of the regulated activities listed in
this section.
C. This chapter contains only the stormwater management performance standards and
design criteria that are necessary or desirable from a watershed-wide perspective.
Localized stormwater management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type,
collection system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.) shall continue to
be regulated by Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development (SALDO), and
other applicable state regulations. In the event of a conflict between the standards
and design criteria of this chapter and those of the SALDO, those which are more
restrictive and minimize to a greater degree the impacts identified in § 430-102 of
this chapter, shall control.
D. The following activities are defined as "regulated activities" within the Neshaminy
Creek and Delaware River South watersheds and shall be and hereby are regulated
by this chapter, unless exempted by § 430-302 of this chapter:
(1) Land development;
(2) Subdivisions;
(3) Alteration of the natural hydrologic regime;
(4) Construction or reconstruction of or addition of new impervious or
semipervious surfaces (i.e., driveways, parking lots, roads, etc.), except for
reconstruction of roads;
(5) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings;
(6) Redevelopment;
(7) Diversion piping or encroachments in any natural or man-made channel;
(8) Nonstructural and structural stormwater management BMPs or appurtenances
thereto;
(9) Earth disturbance greater than 5,000 square feet;
(10) Any of the above regulated activities which were approved more than five
years prior to the effective date of this chapter and resubmitted for Township
approval.
§ 430-301 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-302
430:21
Watersheds.
A. Exemptions for regulated activities within the Neshaminy Creek Watershed are as
follows:
(1) The following land use activities are exempt from the drainage plan
submission requirements of Article IV of this chapter:
(a) Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
(b) Agriculture when operated in accordance with a conservation plan,
nutrient management plan or erosion and sedimentation control plan
approved by the County Conservation District, including activities such
as growing crops, rotating crops, tilling of soil and grazing animals.
Installation of new or expansion of existing farmsteads, animal housing,
waste storage and production areas having impervious surfaces that result
in a net increase in earth disturbance of greater than 5,000 square feet
shall not be exempt under this section.
(c) Forest management operations which are following the Department of
Environmental Protection's management practices contained in its
publication "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Guidelines for
Forestry" and are operating under an approved E&S Plan; except that
such operations shall comply with stream buffer requirements of
§ 430-506G of this chapter.
(d) Development, or redevelopment that has less than 2,000 square feet of
new/additional/replaced impervious surface/cover, or in the case of earth
disturbance only, less than 5,000 square feet of disturbance, is exempt
from this chapter.
(e) Road replacement or repairing. The foregoing criterion shall apply to the
total development even if the development is to take place in phases. The
date of the Township ordinance adoption shall be the starting point from
which to consider tracts as "parent tracts" in which future subdivisions
and respective earth disturbance computations shall be cumulatively
considered.
(2) The following land development and earth disturbance activities are exempt
from the water quantity control requirements of § 430-508 this chapter:
(a) A maximum of 2,000 square feet of new, additional or replacement
impervious surface, or in the case of earth disturbance only, that which
results in less than 5,000 square feet of impervious cover.
(b) Earth disturbance activities up to a maximum of 5,000 square feet. The
foregoing criteria shall apply to the total development even if the
development is to take place in phases. The date of the Township
ordinance adoption shall be the starting point from which to consider
tracts as "parent tracts" in which future subdivisions and respective earth
disturbance computations shall be cumulatively considered. Impervious
areas existing on the parent tract prior to adoption of this chapter shall not
§ 430-302 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-302
430:22
be considered in cumulative impervious area calculations for exemption
purposes. An exemption shall not relieve the applicant from
implementing such measures as are necessary to protect health, safety and
property.
(c) The water quality requirements of § 430-506 and groundwater recharge
goals of § 430-505 of this chapter shall be met even though a regulated
activity may be exempt from § 430-508 based on the criteria above.
B. Exemptions for regulated activities within the Delaware River South Watershed are
as follows:
(1) Any regulated activity that meets the exception criteria in the following table
is exempt from the drainage plan (Article IV) requirements of this chapter:
Total Parcel Size
(acre)
Impervious Area Exemption
(square feet)
Less than or equal to 1/4 1,200
Greater than 1/4 to 1 2,500
Greater than 1 5,000
(a) This criterion shall apply to the total development even if development is
to take place in phases. The date of the Township ordinance adoption
shall be the starting point from which to consider tracts as parent tracts in
which future subdivisions and respective impervious area computations
shall be cumulatively considered.
(b) This exemption shall not relieve the applicant from meeting the special
requirements for watersheds draining to high quality (HQ) or exceptional
value (EV) waters (§ 430-504) and requirements for groundwater
recharge (§ 430-505), water quality (§ 430-506) and stream-bank erosion
(§ 430-503).
C. Additional exemption criteria for the Neshaminy Creek and Delaware River South
Watersheds:
(1) An exemption shall not relieve the applicant from implementing such
measures as are necessary to protect the public health, safety and property.
(2) An exemption shall not relieve the applicant from meeting the requirements,
design standards and/or criteria of any other applicable section of this chapter,
including the special requirements for watersheds draining to high quality
(HQ) or exceptional value (EV) waters identified and source water protection
areas (SWPA) and requirements for nonstructural project design sequencing
(§ 430-504).
(3) If a drainage problem is documented or known to exist downstream of or
reasonable expected from the proposed activity, or if site conditions,
topography and/or soils warrant, then the Township may require the applicant
to comply with the drainage plan provisions of this chapter.
§ 430-302 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-302
430:23
(4) Emergency maintenance work performed for the protection of public health,
safety and welfare shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. A
written description of the scope and extent of any emergency work performed
shall be submitted to Middletown Township within two calendar days of the
commencement of the activity. If Middletown Township finds that the work is
not an emergency, then the work shall cease immediately and the requirements
of this chapter shall be addressed as applicable.
(5) Maintenance exemption. Any maintenance to an existing stormwater
management system made in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by Middletown Township and the Township Engineer.
§ 430-302 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-302
430:24
ARTICLE IV
Drainage Plan Requirements
§ 430-401. General requirements.
For any regulated activity in the Neshaminy Creek and Delaware River South
Watershed, the preliminary and final approval of subdivision and/or land development
plans; the issuance of any building or occupancy permit; or the commencement of any
earth disturbance activity shall not be given and shall not proceed until a drainage plan
for such activity has been found by the Township to be consistent with the stormwater
management plan and the other applicable provisions of this chapter, unless specifically
exempted from the provisions of this article.
§ 430-402. Drainage plan contents.
A drainage plan generally shall describe the project, including sequencing to minimize
stormwater impacts as described in § 430-504, calculations, maps and plans (which
may comprise any number sheets). A note on the maps shall refer to the associated
computations and erosion and sediment control plan by title and date. The cover sheet of
the computations, erosion and sediment control plan and post-construction stormwater
management plan shall refer to the associated maps by title and date. All drainage plans
shall be submitted to the Township in a format that is clear, legible and well-organized
so that compliance with this chapter may be readily ascertained. Failure to comply with
this requirement shall be grounds for rejecting the drainage plan and denying approval.
The following items shall be included in the drainage plan:
A. General.
(1) General description, in narrative form, of the project including those areas
described in § 430-504B.
(2) General description, in narrative form, of permanent stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications of the materials to be used
for stormwater management facilities.
(3) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural computations for all stormwater
management facilities.
(4) An erosion and sediment control plan, including all required reviews and
approvals by the Conservation District.
(5) A general description of nonpoint source pollution controls.
(6) The drainage plan application and completed fee schedule form and associated
fee.
(7) The Drainage Plan Checklist (Appendix C-2 to this chapter).58
(8) An operations and maintenance plan for all proposed best management
practices.
58. Editor's Note: Appendix C-2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 430-401 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-402
430:25
B. Maps. Map(s) of the project area shall be submitted on sheets 24 inches by 36
inches in size and/or shall be prepared in a form that meets the requirements for
recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Bucks County. If Chapter 440,
Subdivision and Land Development, has more stringent criteria than the
requirements listed below, then the more stringent criteria shall apply. The contents
of the map(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipal boundaries or other
identifiable landmarks.
(2) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of slopes greater than 15%,
five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(3) Existing streams, lakes, ponds or other waters of the commonwealth within the
project area.
(4) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries, stream buffers,
existing drainagecourses, areas of natural vegetation to be preserved, and the
total extent of the upstream area draining through the site.
(5) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers and
waterlines within 50 feet of property lines.
(6) An overlay showing soil names, boundaries and soil limitations (in tabular
format).
(7) Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount of impervious area
that would be added.
(8) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas and buildings.
(9) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes greater than
15%, five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(10) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner of the
property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the plan.
(11) The date of submission.
(12) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50 feet; for tracts
of 20 acres or more, the scale shall be one inch equals no more than 100 feet.
(13) A North arrow.
(14) The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the nearest foot and
bearings to the nearest degree.
(15) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(16) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the property
boundary that would be affected by the project.
(17) Location of all open channels and all downgradient receiving channels, swales,
waters where stormwater runoff or drainage will be discharged to.
§ 430-402 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-402
430:26
(18) Overland drainage patterns and swales and all downgradient receiving
channels, swales, waters where stormwater runoff or drainage will be
discharged to.
(19) A fifteen-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater management
facilities that would provide ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way.
(20) The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities.
(21) The location of all post-construction stormwater management facilities,
BMPs, etc.
(22) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for maintenance
of stormwater management facilities that would be located off site. All off-site
facilities shall meet the performance standards and design criteria specified in
this chapter.
(23) Post-construction stormwater management plans (aka "O&M Plan"), erosion
and sediment control plans, earth disturbance permits, and NPDES permits/
plans should be coordinated between Middletown Township, BCCD (Bucks
County Conservation District) and PA DEP (Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection).
(24) A statement, signed by the property owner or applicant, acknowledging the
stormwater management system, including all BMPs, are a permanent fixture
that can be altered or removed only after approval by the Township designee
of a revised plan, which shall be recorded with the record plan and which shall
be applicable to all future landowners.
(25) The following signature block for the Design Engineer: "I, (Design Engineer),
on this date (date of signature), hereby certify that the drainage plan meets all
design standards and criteria of the Neshaminy Creek Watershed Act 167
Stormwater Management Ordinance and/or Delaware South River Watershed
Act 167 Stormwater Management Ordinance."
(26) All plans shall include a plan note stating that the municipality shall have the
right to enter private property to inspect and repair, if necessary, any
stormwater management facility.
(27) All plans shall note that the stormwater management facilities are a permanent
part of the development and shall not be removed, altered or modified.
C. Supplemental information to be submitted to the Township.
(1) A written description of the following information shall be submitted by the
applicant and shall include:
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project designed in
accordance with § 430-504.
(b) Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this chapter.
(c) Stormwater management techniques to be applied both during and after
development.
§ 430-402 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-402
430:27
§ 430-403. Plan submission.
The Township shall require receipt of a complete drainage plan, as specified in this
chapter.
(d) Expected project time schedule.
(e) Development stages or project phases, if so proposed.
(f) An operation and maintenance plan in accordance with § 430-802 of this
chapter.
(2) An erosion and sediment control plan, when applicable, including all reviews
and approvals as may be required by DEP.
(3) A description of the effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and peak
flows) on adjacent properties and on any existing municipal stormwater
collection system that may receive runoff from the project site.
(4) A declaration of adequacy and highway occupancy permit from the PennDOT
District Office when utilization of a PennDOT storm drainage system is
proposed.
D. Stormwater management facilities.
(1) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan and described
in detail. Plan at a minimum should include pre- and post-drainage area maps,
an overall post-construction stormwater management (PCSWM) plan,
stormwater details sheets, landscaping (if low-impact development or
bioinfiltration, bioretention, or vegetated or wetland basins are proposed).
(2) When infiltration measures such as seepage pits, beds or trenches are used, the
locations of existing and proposed septic tank infiltration areas and wells must
be shown. Minimum front, side and rear yard setback distances should be
identified for distances to wells and septic areas, etc.
(3) All calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the design of the stormwater
management facilities must be shown.
A. Proof of application or documentation of required permit(s) or approvals for the
programs listed below, where required or applicable, shall be part of the plan:
(1) NPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction activities.
(2) DEP joint permit application.
(3) PennDOT Highway Occupancy Permit.
(4) Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway Management).
(5) Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management).
(6) Any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations.
(7) E&S BCCD permit.
§ 430-402 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-403
430:28
§ 430-404. Drainage plan review.
B. The plan shall be coordinated with the state and federal permit process and the
Township SALDO review process.
C. For projects that involve regulated activities and require SALDO approval, the
drainage plan shall be submitted by the applicant as part of the preliminary plan
submission and final plan submission.
D. For projects that involve regulated activities but that do not require SALDO
approval, see § 430-501 of this chapter for requirement(s) for submission and
approval of drainage plan. Six complete copies of the drainage plan shall be
submitted to the Township Department of Licenses and Inspections, which shall
distribute the plan as follows:
(1) Two copies to the Township designee accompanied by the requisite Township
review fee, as specified in this chapter.
(2) Two copies to the Conservation District, with property owner's completed
application.
(3) One copy to the Township Engineer.
(4) One copy to the County Planning Commission.
E. The Township designee shall review the drainage plan and fees for completeness
only.
A. The Township Engineer shall review the drainage plan for consistency with the
adopted Neshaminy Creek or Delaware River South Watershed Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan, and the applicable criteria set forth in Articles IV
and V of this chapter.
B. The Township Engineer shall review the drainage plan for any subdivision or land
development against the provisions of Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land
Development, not otherwise superseded by this chapter.
C. Following his review of the drainage plan, the Township Engineer shall notify the
applicant and the Township Manager in writing whether the drainage plan is
consistent with the stormwater management plan and the other applicable
provisions of this chapter. If the Township Engineer determines that the drainage
plan is inconsistent or noncompliant with, or does not meet or exceed the criteria of
the stormwater management plan and the other applicable provisions of this
chapter, the Township Engineer shall in his letter specify the reason(s) and specific
ordinance sections for the inconsistency or noncompliance. Such a determination
shall constitute a disapproval of the drainage plan.
D. The Township Engineer shall issue his written approval or disapproval within 45
days, or such time frame that is consistent with the Township Building Code and/or
Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development, whichever is longer. Any
drainage plan that has been disapproved may be revised and resubmitted consistent
with this chapter.
§ 430-403 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-404
430:29
§ 430-405. Modification of plans.
E. For regulated activities under this chapter that require an NPDES permit
application, the applicant shall forward a copy of the Township Engineer's letter to
the Conservation District, stating that the drainage plan is consistent with the
stormwater management plan. PA DEP and the Bucks County Conservation
District may consider the Township Engineer's review comments in determining
whether to issue a permit.
F. The Township shall not grant preliminary or final approval to any subdivision or
land development for regulated activities unless and until the drainage plan has
been found by the Township Engineer to be consistent with the stormwater
management plan and the applicable provisions of this chapter. All required permits
from DEP must be obtained prior to final approval of any subdivision or land
development.
G. No building or other permit for any regulated activity shall be approved and issued
by the Township unless and until the drainage plan has been found to be consistent
with the stormwater management plan and the other applicable provisions of this
chapter. All required permits from DEP must be obtained prior to issuance of a
building permit.
H. The applicant shall be responsible for completing as-built drawings of all
stormwater management facilities included in the approved drainage plan. The
record drawings (aka "as-built drawings") and an explanation of any discrepancies
with the design plans shall be submitted to the Township Engineer for final
approval. In no case shall the Township approve the record drawings until the
Township receives a copy of an approved declaration of adequacy from the
Township Engineer and/or highway occupancy permit from the PennDOT District
Office, NPDES permit, and any other applicable permits or approvals from DEP or
the Bucks County Conservation District. The above permits and approvals must be
based on the record drawings.
I. The Township's approval of a drainage plan shall be valid for a period not to exceed
five years commencing on the date that the Township signs the approved drainage
plan. If stormwater management facilities included in the approved drainage plan
have not been constructed or, if constructed, and record drawings of these facilities
have not been approved within this five-year time period, then the Township may
consider the drainage plan inconsistent or noncompliant and may revoke any and
all permits. Drainage plans that are determined to be inconsistent or noncompliant
by the Township Engineer shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 430-406 of
this chapter.
A. A modification to a submitted drainage plan under review by the Township for a
development site that involves the following shall require a resubmission to the
Township of a modified drainage plan consistent with § 430-403 of this chapter and
be subject to review as specified in § 430-404 of this chapter:
(1) Change in stormwater management facilities or techniques;
(2) Relocation or redesign of stormwater management facilities; or
§ 430-404 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-405
430:30
§ 430-406. Resubmission of inconsistent or noncompliant drainage plans.
An inconsistent or noncompliant drainage plan may be resubmitted with the revisions
addressing the Township Engineer's concerns documented in writing and addressed
to the Township Zoning Officer in accordance with § 430-403 of this chapter and
distributed accordingly and be subject to review as specified in § 430-404 of this chapter.
The applicable Township review and inspection fee must accompany a resubmission of
an inconsistent or noncompliant drainage plan.
(3) Is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the drainage
plan as determined by the Township Engineer.
B. A modification to an already approved or to an inconsistent or noncompliant
drainage plan shall be submitted to the Township, accompanied by the applicable
Township review and inspection fee. A modification to a drainage plan for which a
formal action has not been taken by the Township shall be submitted to the
Township, accompanied by the applicable Township review and inspection fee.
§ 430-405 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-406
430:31

ARTICLE V
Stormwater Management
§ 430-501. General requirements.
A. Applicants proposing regulated activities in Neshaminy Creek and Delaware River
South Watersheds which do not fall under the exemption criteria shown in
§ 430-302 shall submit a drainage plan consistent with the Neshaminy Creek and
Delaware River South Watershed Stormwater Management Plan to the Township
for review. The stormwater management criteria of this chapter shall apply to the
total proposed development even if development is to take place in stages.
B. The applicant is required to find practicable alternatives to the surface discharge of
stormwater, the creation of impervious surfaces and the degradation of waters of
the commonwealth, and must maintain as much as possible the natural hydrologic
regime.
C. The drainage plan must be designed consistent with the sequencing provisions of
§ 430-504 to ensure maintenance of the natural hydrologic regime and to promote
groundwater recharge and protect groundwater and surface water quality and
quantity. The drainage plan designer must proceed sequentially in accordance with
Article IV of this chapter.59
D. Stormwater drainage systems shall be designed in order to permit unimpeded flow
along natural watercourses, except as modified by stormwater management
facilities or open channels consistent with this chapter.
E. Existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto adjacent property shall
not be altered in any manner which could cause property damage without
permission of the affected property owner(s) and shall be subject to any applicable
discharge criteria specified in this chapter.
F. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge, whether proposed to be concentrated
or maintained as diffused drainage areas, shall be subject to any applicable
discharge criteria in the general direction of existing discharge, except as otherwise
provided by this chapter. If diffused drainage discharge is proposed to be
concentrated and discharged onto adjacent property, the applicant must document
that adequate downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion, sedimentation, flooding
or other impacts will result from the concentrated discharge.
G. Where a development site is traversed by existing streams, drainage easements shall
be provided conforming to the line of such streams. The terms of the easement shall
conform to the stream buffer requirements contained in § 430-506G of this chapter.
H. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that would be
located in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth or delineated wetlands shall
be subject to approval by DEP through the joint permit application or the
environmental assessment approval process or, where deemed appropriate, by the
DEP general permit process. When there is a question as to whether wetlands may
59. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 430-501 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-501
430:33
be involved, it is the responsibility of the applicant or his agent to show that the
land in question cannot be classified as wetlands, otherwise approval to work in the
area must be obtained from DEP.
I. Any proposed stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
would be located on state highway rights-of-way shall be subject to approval by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT).
J. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through seepage
beds, infiltration trenches, etc., is encouraged where soil conditions permit in order
to reduce the size or eliminate the need for detention facilities or other structural
BMPs.
K. All stormwater runoff shall be pretreated for water quality prior to discharge to
surface water or groundwater.
L. All regulated activities within the Township shall be designed, implemented,
operated and maintained to meet the purposes of this chapter, through these two
elements:
(1) Erosion and sediment control during the earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction); and
(2) Water quality protection measures after completion of earth disturbance
activities (i.e., after construction), including operations and maintenance.
M. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall commence until
the requirements of this chapter are met.
N. Post-construction water quality protection shall be addressed as required by
§ 430-506.
O. Operations and maintenance of permanent stormwater BMPs shall be addressed as
required by Article VIII.
P. All best management practices (BMPs) used to meet the requirements of this
chapter shall conform to the state water quality requirements and any more stringent
requirements as set forth by the Township.
Q. Techniques described in Appendix E to this chapter (Low-Impact Development
Practices)60 shall be considered because they reduce the costs of complying with the
requirements of this chapter and the state water quality requirements.
R. In selecting the appropriate BMPs or combinations thereof, the applicant shall
consider the following:
(1) Total contributing area.
(2) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
(3) Slope and depth to bedrock.
60. Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 430-501 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-501
430:34
§ 430-502. Permit requirements by other government entities.
The following permit requirements may apply to certain regulated earth disturbance
activities and must be met prior to commencement of regulated earth disturbance
activities, as applicable:
(4) Seasonal high-water table.
(5) Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
(6) Erodibility of soils.
(7) Land availability and configuration of the topography.
(8) Peak discharge and required volume control.
(9) Stream-bank erosion.
(10) Effectiveness of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality problems.
(11) The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
(12) The nature of the pollutant being removed.
(13) Maintenance requirements.
(14) Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat.
(15) Recreational value.
S. The applicant may meet the stormwater management criteria through off-site
stormwater management measures as long as the proposed measures are in the same
subwatershed as shown in Appendix D to this chapter.61
T. All best management practices (BMPs) used to meet the requirements of this
chapter shall conform to the state water quality requirements and any more stringent
requirements as determined by the Township.
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities subject to permit requirements by DEP
under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 105.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or adjacent to surface
waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands, subject to permit by DEP under
25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state highway
right-of-way, or require access from a state highway, shall be subject to approval
by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT).
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass or convey
61. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 430-501 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-502
430:35
§ 430-503. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth disturbance
activities.
§ 430-504. Nonstructural project design (sequencing to minimize stormwater
impacts).
flows from the tributary area and any facility which may constitute a dam subject
to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall commence until
the Township approves an erosion and sediment control plan for construction
activities.
B. DEP has regulations that require an erosion and sediment control plan under 25 Pa.
Code § 102.4(b).
C. The Bucks County Conservation District shall review and approve any earth
disturbance activity of 1,000 square feet or more.
D. In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,62 a DEP NPDES construction activities
permit is required for regulated earth disturbance activities when there is land
disturbance greater than one acre.
E. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance activities from
the appropriate DEP regional office or county conservation district must be
provided to the Township.
F. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required permit, as
required by DEP regulations, shall be available on the project site at all times.
G. Additional erosion and sediment control design standards and criteria are
recommended to be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed. They shall
include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from sedimentation
and compaction during the construction phase to maintain maximum
infiltration capacity. Barriers such as orange construction fencing should be
used to protect and keep construction traffic in the area where infiltration
BMPs are proposed. Inlet or pipes that are installed to these systems should be
completely sealed or protected and monitored until the drainage areas are
completely stabilized.
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until the entire
contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has achieved final
stabilization.
A. The design of all regulated activities shall include the following to minimize
stormwater impacts.
(1) The applicant shall find practicable alternatives to the surface discharge of
62. Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of the Pa. Code was reserved 10-8-2010. See now 25 Pa. Code Ch. 92a, National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permitting, Monitoring and Compliance.
§ 430-502 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-504
430:36
stormwater, such as those listed in Appendix B to this chapter, Table B-5,63
the creation of impervious surfaces and the degradation of waters of the
commonwealth, and must maintain as much as possible the natural hydrologic
regime of the site.
(2) An alternative is practicable if it is available and capable of implementation
after taking into consideration existing technology and logistics in light of
overall project purposes and other Township requirements.
(3) All practicable alternatives to the discharge of stormwater are presumed to
have less adverse impact on quantity and quality of waters of the
commonwealth unless otherwise demonstrated.
B. The applicant shall demonstrate that the regulated activities were designed in the
following sequence. The goal of the sequence is to minimize the increases in
stormwater runoff and impacts to water quality resulting from the proposed
regulated activity:
(1) Prepare an existing resource and site analysis map (ERSAM), showing
environmentally sensitive areas, including but not limited to steep slopes,
ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands, hydric soils, vernal pools (aka "natural
springs"), stream buffers, hydrologic soil groups, land development, any
existing recharge areas, potential infiltration areas or permeable soil areas and
other requirements outlined in Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land
Development, shall also be included.
(2) Establish a stream buffer according to § 430-506G.
(3) Prepare a draft project layout avoiding sensitive areas identified in
§ 430-504B(1) and minimizing total site earth disturbance as much as possible.
The ratio of disturbed area to the entire site area and measures taken to
minimize earth disturbance shall be included in the ERSAM.
(4) Identify site-specific existing conditions drainage areas, discharge points,
recharge areas and hydrologic soil groups A and B (areas conducive to
infiltration).
(5) Evaluate nonstructural stormwater management alternatives:
(a) Minimize earth disturbance.
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces.
(c) Break up large impervious surfaces.
(6) Satisfy groundwater recharge (infiltration) objective (§ 430-505) and provide
for stormwater pretreatment prior to infiltration.
(7) Provide for water quality protection in accordance with § 430-506, Water
quality requirements.
(8) Provide stream-bank erosion protection in accordance with § 430-507,
63. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 430-504 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-504
430:37
§ 430-505. Groundwater recharge.
Stream-bank erosion requirements.
(9) Determine the watershed and management district the site falls into (Appendix
D to this chapter64) and conduct an existing conditions runoff analysis.
(10) Prepare final project design to maintain existing conditions drainage areas and
discharge points, to minimize earth disturbance and impervious surfaces and,
to the maximum extent possible, ensure the remaining site development has no
surface or point discharge.
(11) Conduct a proposed conditions runoff analysis based on the final design that
meets the management district requirements (§ 430-508).
(12) Manage any remaining runoff prior to discharge, through detention,
bioretention, direct discharge or other structural control.
A. Maximizing the groundwater recharge capacity of the area being developed is
required. Design of the infiltration facilities shall consider groundwater recharge to
compensate for the reduction in the recharge that occurs when the ground surface is
disturbed or impervious surface is created. It is recommended that roof runoff be
directed to infiltration BMPs which may be designed to compensate for the runoff
from parking areas or driveways. These measures are required to be consistent with
§ 430-103 and take advantage of utilizing any existing recharge areas.
B. Infiltration may not be feasible on every site due to site-specific limitations such as
soil type. If it cannot be physically accomplished, then the design professional shall
be responsible to show that this cannot be physically accomplished. Soils testing
and geotechnical evaluation of the site soils should be performed and submitted to
verify that the infiltration requirements cannot be met. If it can be physically
accomplished, then the volume of runoff to be infiltrated shall be determined from
§ 430-505C(2), depending on demonstrated site conditions, and shall be the greater
of the two volumes.
C. Minimum requirements. Infiltration BMPs shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
(1) Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed areas shall be
selected based on suitability of soils and site conditions and shall be
constructed on soils that have the following characteristics:
(a) A minimum depth of 24 inches, preferably 36 inches, between the bottom
of the BMP and the top of the limiting zone (e.g., seasonal high-water
table, groundwater, bedrock, etc.).
(b) An infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional stormwater load and
dewater completely as determined by field tests conducted by the
applicant's design professional.
(c) The infiltration facility shall be capable of completely infiltrating the
64. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 430-504 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-505
430:38
retention (infiltration) volume (Rev) within four days (96 hours).
(d) Pretreatment shall be provided prior to infiltration.
(e) The requirements for recharge are applied to all disturbed areas, even if
they are ultimately to be an undeveloped land use such as grass, unless
the applicant can demonstrate through construction sequencing and use
of special construction techniques and machinery that this is not the case.
Studies have found that compaction of the soils during disturbance
reduces their infiltrative capacity.
(2) The recharge volume (Rev) shall be computed by first obtaining the infiltration
requirement using methods in either Subsection C(2)(a) or (b), then
multiplying by the total proposed impervious area. The overall required
recharge volume for a site is computed by multiplying total impervious area
by the infiltration requirement.
(a) NRCS Curve Number equation. The following criteria shall apply.
[1] The NRCS runoff shall be utilized to calculate infiltration
requirements (P) in inches.
Equation 405.1
For zero runoff: P = I (Infiltration) (inch) = (200/CN) - 2
Where:
P = I = infiltration requirement (inches)
CN = SCS (NRCS) curve number of the existing
conditions contributing to the recharge facility
[2] This equation can be displayed graphically in, and the infiltration
requirement can also be determined from, Figure 405.1.
[3] The recharge volume (Rev) required would therefore be computed
as:
Rev = I (inches) * percent impervious area (square feet)/12
(inches) = cubic feet (cf)
An asterisk (*) in equations denotes multiplication.
(b) Annual recharge water budget approach.
[1] Within the Neshaminy Creek Watershed it has been determined that
infiltrating 0.6 inches of runoff from the impervious areas will aid in
maintaining the hydrologic regime of the watershed. If the goals of
Subsection C(2)(a) cannot be achieved, then 0.6 inches of rainfall
shall be infiltrated from all impervious areas, up to an existing site
conditions curve number of 77. Above a curve number of 77,
Equation 405.1 or the curve in Figure 405.1 should be used to
determine the infiltration requirement.
§ 430-505 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-505
430:39
Where:
I = 0.6 inches
The recharge volume (Rev) required would therefore be computed
as: Rev = I (inches)/12 (inches) * impervious area (square feet) =
cubic feet (cf)
Figure 405.1.
Infiltration Requirement Based upon NRCS Curve Number
for the Neshaminy Creek Watershed:
[2] Within the Delaware River South Watershed, it has been determined
that infiltrating 0.5 inches of runoff from the impervious areas will
aid in maintaining the hydrologic regime of the watershed. If the
goals of Subsection C(2)(a) cannot be achieved, then 0.5 inches of
rainfall shall be infiltrated from all impervious areas, up to an
existing site conditions curve number of 81. Above a curve number
of 81, Equation 405.1 or the curve in Figure 405.2 should be used to
determine the infiltration requirement.
§ 430-505 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-505
430:40
Where:
I = 0.5 inches
The recharge volume (Rev) required would therefore be computed
as: Rev = I (inches)/12 (inches) * impervious area (square feet) =
cubic feet (cf)
Figure 405.2.
Infiltration Requirement Based upon NRCS Curve Number
for the Delaware River South Watershed:
Required Infiltration (I) in inches by NRCS CN
(3) The recharge values derived from these methods are the minimum volumes the
applicant must control through an infiltration/recharge BMP facility.
However, if a site has areas of soils where additional volume of infiltration can
be achieved, the applicant is encouraged to recharge as much of the stormwater
runoff from the site as possible.
D. Soils. A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be required to determine
the suitability of infiltration facilities. The evaluation shall be performed by a
qualified design professional and, at a minimum, address soil permeability, depth
to bedrock and subgrade stability. The general process for designing the infiltration
BMP shall be:
(1) Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and man-made features
within the site to determine general areas of suitability for infiltration
practices. In areas where development on fill material is under consideration,
conduct geotechnical investigations of subgrade stability; infiltration is not
permitted to be ruled out without conducting these tests.
(2) Provide field tests such as double-ring infiltrometer or hydraulic conductivity
§ 430-505 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-505
430:41
tests (at the level of the proposed infiltration surface) to determine the
appropriate hydraulic conductivity rate. Percolation tests are not recommended
for design purposes.
(3) Design the infiltration structure for the required retention (Rev) volume based
on field-determined capacity at the level of the proposed infiltration surface.
(4) Where the recharge volume requirement cannot be physically accomplished
due to the results of the field soils testing, supporting documentation and
justification shall be supplied to the Township with the drainage plan.
(5) If on-lot infiltration structures are proposed by the applicant's design
professional, it must be demonstrated to the Township that the soils are
conducive to infiltrate on the lots identified.
E. Stormwater hot spots. Following is a list of examples of designated hot spots. If a
site is designated as a hot spot, it has important implications for how stormwater is
managed. First and foremost, untreated stormwater runoff from hot spots shall not
be allowed to recharge into groundwater where it may contaminate water supplies.
Therefore, the Rev requirement shall not be applied to development sites that fit
into the hot spot category (the entire WQv must still be treated). Second, a greater
level of stormwater treatment shall be considered at hot spot sites to prevent
pollutant washoff after construction. The EPA's NPDES stormwater program
requires some industrial sites to prepare and implement a stormwater pollution
prevention plan.
(1) Examples of hot spots:
(a) Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities.
(b) Vehicle fueling stations.
(c) Vehicle service and maintenance facilities.
(d) Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities.
(e) Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.).
(f) Industrial sites (based on Standard Industrial Codes defined by the United
States Department of Labor).
(g) Marinas (service and maintenance).
(h) Outdoor liquid container storage.
(i) Outdoor loading/unloading facilities.
(j) Public works storage areas.
(k) Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials.
(l) Commercial container nursery.
(m) Other land uses and activities as designated by an appropriate review
authority.
§ 430-505 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-505
430:42
§ 430-506. Water quality requirements.
In addition to all other applicable provisions of this chapter, an applicant shall also
comply with the following water quality requirements of this article.
(2) The following land uses and activities are not normally considered hot spots:
(a) Residential streets and rural highways.
(b) Residential development.
(c) Institutional development.
(d) Office developments.
(e) Nonindustrial rooftops.
(f) Pervious areas, except golf courses and nurseries [which may need an
integrated pest management (IPM) plan].
(3) While large highways [average daily traffic volume (ADT) greater than
30,000] are not designated as a stormwater hot spot; however, it is important
to ensure that highway stormwater management plans adequately protect
groundwater.
F. Extreme caution shall be exercised where infiltration is proposed in source water
protection areas as defined by the local township or water authority.
G. Infiltration facilities shall be used in conjunction with other innovative or traditional
BMPs, stormwater control facilities, and nonstructural stormwater management
alternatives.
H. Extreme caution shall be exercised where salt or chloride (municipal salt storage)
would be a pollutant since soils do little to filter this pollutant and it may
contaminate the groundwater. The qualified design professional shall evaluate the
possibility of groundwater contamination from the proposed infiltration facility and
perform a hydrogeologic justification study if necessary.
I. The infiltration requirement in high quality or exceptional value waters shall be
subject to the Department's Chapter 93 antidegradation regulations.
J. An impermeable liner will be required in detention basins where the possibility of
groundwater contamination exists. A detailed hydrogeologic investigation may be
required by the Township.
K. The Township shall require the applicant to provide safeguards against groundwater
contamination for land uses that may cause groundwater contamination should
there be a mishap or spill.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall commence until
approval by the Township of a plan which demonstrates compliance with state
water quality requirements post construction is complete.
B. The BMPs shall be designed, implemented and maintained to meet state water
§ 430-505 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-506
430:43
quality requirements, and any other more stringent requirements as determined by
the Township.
C. To control post-construction stormwater impacts from regulated earth disturbance
activities, state water quality requirements can be met by BMPs, including site
design, which provide for replication of preconstruction stormwater infiltration and
runoff conditions, so that post-construction stormwater discharges do not degrade
the physical, chemical or biological characteristics of the receiving waters. As
described in the DEP Comprehensive Stormwater Management Policy (No.
392-0300-002, September 28, 2002), this may be achieved by the following:
(1) Infiltration: replication of preconstruction stormwater infiltration conditions;
(2) Treatment: use of water quality treatment BMPs to ensure filtering out of the
chemical and physical pollutants from the stormwater runoff; and
(3) Stream-bank and streambed protection: management of volume and rate of
post-construction stormwater discharges to prevent physical degradation of
receiving waters (e.g., from scouring and downcutting).
D. Developed areas shall provide adequate storage and treatment facilities necessary
to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
(1) The retention volume computed under § 430-505 may be a component of the
water quality volume if the applicant chooses to manage both components in a
single facility. If the retention volume is less than the water quality volume,
the remaining water quality volume may be captured and treated by methods
other than infiltration BMPs. The required water quality volume (WQv) is the
storage capacity needed to capture and treat a portion of stormwater runoff
from the developed areas of the site produced from 90% of the average annual
rainfall (P).
(2) To achieve this goal, the following criterion is established:
(a) The following calculation formula is to be used to determine the water
quality storage volume, (WQv), in acre-feet of storage for the Neshaminy
Creek, Little Neshaminy Creek, and Delaware South River watersheds:
Equation 406.1
WQv = [(P)(Rv)(A)]/12
Where:
WQv = Water Quality Volume (acre-feet)
P = 1.00 inch for Neshaminy Creek Watershed
P = 2.04 inches for the Delaware River South Watershed
(Region 5) (obtained from PennDOT Field Manual,
May 1986)
P = Rainfall amount equal to 90% of events producing this
rainfall (inches)
§ 430-506 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-506
430:44
A = Area of the project contributing to the water quality
BMP (acres)
Rv = 0.05 + 0.009(1), where 1 is the percent of the area that
is impervious surface [(impervious area/A) * 100]
(b) This volume requirement can be accomplished by the permanent volume
of a wet basin or the detained volume from other BMPs. Where
appropriate, wet basins shall be utilized for water quality control and shall
follow the guidelines of the BMP manuals referenced in Appendix F to
this chapter.65
(c) Release of water can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the invert of the
water quality orifice is at the invert of the facility). The design of the
facility shall provide for protection from clogging and unwanted
sedimentation.
E. For areas within defined special protection subwatersheds which include
exceptional value (EV) and high quality (HQ) waters, the temperature and quality
of water and streams shall be maintained through the use of temperature-sensitive
BMPs and stormwater-conveyance systems. For other waters, use of temperaturesensitive
BMPs and stormwater-conveyance systems should be considered as
temperature can negatively impact water quality and stream health.
F. To accomplish the above, the applicant shall submit original and innovative designs
to the Township Engineer for review and approval. Such designs may achieve the
water quality objectives through a combination of different BMPs.
G. If a perennial or intermittent stream passes through the site, the applicant shall
create a stream buffer extending a minimum of 50 feet to either side of the top-ofbank
of the channel. The buffer area shall be maintained with and encouraged to
use appropriate native vegetation. (Refer to Appendix H of Pennsylvania Handbook
of Best Management Practices for Developing Area for plant lists.) If the applicable
rear or side yard setback is less than 50 feet, the buffer width may be reduced to
25% of the setback to a minimum of 10 feet. If an existing buffer is legally
prescribed (i.e., deed, covenant, easement, etc.) and it exceeds the requirements of
this chapter, the existing buffer shall be maintained.
H. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance activities from
the appropriate DEP regional office must be provided to the Township.
I. Design of BMPs used for water quality control shall be in accordance with design
specifications outlined in the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual (Draft, January 2005) or other applicable manuals. The following factors
shall be considered when evaluating the suitability of BMPs used to control water
quality at a given development site:
(1) Total contributing drainage area.
(2) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
65. Editor's Note: Appendix F is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 430-506 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-506
430:45
§ 430-507. Stream-bank erosion requirements.
(3) Slope and depth to bedrock.
(4) Seasonal high-water table.
(5) Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
(6) Erodibility of soils.
(7) Land availability and configuration of the topography.
(8) Peak discharge and required volume control.
(9) Stream-bank erosion.
(10) Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality problems.
(11) The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
(12) The nature of the pollutant being removed.
(13) Maintenance requirements.
(14) Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat.
(15) Recreational value.
(16) Enhancement of aesthetic and property value.
J. To accomplish the above, the applicant shall submit original and innovative designs
to the Township for review and approval. Such designs may achieve the water
quality objectives through a combination of BMPs.
A. In addition to the control of water quality volume (in order to minimize the impact
of stormwater runoff on downstream stream-bank erosion), the primary
requirement is to design a BMP to detain the proposed conditions two-year, twentyfour-
hour design storm to the existing conditions one-year flow using the SCS Type
II distribution. Additionally, provisions shall be made (such as adding a small
orifice at the bottom of the outlet structure) so that the proposed conditions one-year
storm takes a minimum of 24 hours to drain from the facility from a point where
the maximum volume of water from the one-year storm is captured (i.e., the
maximum water surface elevation is achieved in the facility). Release of water can
begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the invert of the water quality orifice is at the
invert of the facility).
B. The minimum orifice size in the outlet structure to the BMP shall be three inches in
diameter where possible, and a trash rack shall be installed to prevent clogging. On
sites with small contributing drainage areas to this BMP that do not provide enough
runoff volume to allow a twenty-four-hour attenuation with the three-inch orifice,
the calculations shall be submitted showing this condition. Orifice sizes less than
three inches can be utilized, provided that the design will prevent clogging of the
intake.
C. In conditional direct discharge districts (District C) only (see § 430-508), the
§ 430-506 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-507
430:46
§ 430-508. Stormwater peak rate control and management districts.
objective is not to attenuate the storms greater than the two-year recurrence interval.
This can be accomplished by configuring the outlet structure not to control the
larger storms or by a bypass channel that diverts only the two-year stormwater
runoff into the basin or, conversely, diverts flows in excess of the two-year storm
away from the basin.
A. The Neshaminy Creek Watershed peak rate requirements and districts are as
follows:
(1) In order to implement the provisions of the Neshaminy Creek Watershed
Stormwater Management Plan, Middletown Township is hereby divided into
stormwater runoff districts, whereby specific peak release rates have been
established. The districts are as follows:
Stormwater Runoff Peak Rate Districts
RR-1 100% release rate
RR-3 75% release rate
DD Provisional direct discharge
LR Provisional lower reaches 100% release rate
(2) The exact location of the stormwater runoff peak rate district boundaries as
they apply to a given development site shall be determined by mapping the
boundaries using the two-foot or five-foot topographic contours provided as
part of the stormwater management plan developed for the site. The district
boundaries as originally drawn coincide with topographic divides or, in certain
instances, are drawn from the intersection of the watercourse and a physical
feature such as the confluence with another watercourse or a potential flow
obstruction (road, culvert, bridge, etc.) to the topographic divide consistent
with topography. The location of the stormwater management district
boundary on a stormwater management plan shall be reviewed and verified by
the Township Engineer.
(3) Additional stormwater design standards and criteria.
(a) In addition to the peak runoff rate requirements specified in Subsection
A(1) above, the erosion and sedimentation control (§ 430-503), the
nonstructural project design (§ 430-504), the groundwater recharge
(§ 430-505), the water quality (§ 430-506), and the stream-bank erosion
(§ 430-507) requirements shall be implemented. Standards for managing
runoff from each subarea in the Neshaminy Creek Watershed for the two-
, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and one-hundred-year design storms are
shown on the map in Appendix D.66 Development sites located in each of
the stormwater runoff peak rate districts must control proposed
conditions runoff rates to existing conditions runoff rates or percentages
thereof.
66. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 430-507 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-508
430:47
(b) General. Proposed conditions rates of runoff from any regulated activity
shall not exceed the peak release rates of runoff from existing conditions
for the design storms specified on the Stormwater Management District
Watershed Map (Appendix D to this chapter67 and § 430-508A(1) of this
chapter.
(c) District boundaries. The boundaries of the stormwater runoff peak rate
districts are shown on an official map that is available for inspection at
the Township office and County Planning offices. A copy of the official
map at a reduced scale is included in Appendix D to this chapter.68 The
exact location of the stormwater runoff peak rate district boundaries as
they apply to a given development site shall be determined by mapping
the boundaries using the two-foot topographic contours (or most accurate
data required) provided as part of the drainage plan.
(d) Sites located in more than one district. For a proposed development site
located within two or more stormwater management district category
subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall meet the runoff
peak rate/management district criteria for the district in which the
discharge is located. The calculated peak discharges shall apply
regardless of whether the grading plan changes the drainage area by
subarea. An exception to the above may be granted if discharges from
multiple subareas recombine in proximity to the site. In this case, peak
discharge in any direction may follow runoff peak rate/Management
District A criteria, provided that the overall site discharge meets the
runoff peak rate/management district criteria for which the discharge is
located.
(e) Off-site areas. Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development
site are not subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable
peak runoff rates. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed
to safely convey off-site flows through the development site.
(f) Site areas. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed development
activity differs significantly from the total site area, only the proposed
impact area utilizing stormwater management measures shall be subject
to the management district criteria. In other words, unimpacted areas
bypassing the stormwater management facilities would not be subject to
the runoff peak rate/management district criteria.
(g) Provisions must also be made for safely passing the runoff greater than
that occurring from the one-hundred-year design storm.
(h) For proposed development sites located partially within a release rate
district and partially within a provisional direct discharge district, in no
event shall a significant portion of the site area subject to the release rate
control be drained to a discharge point(s) located in the provisional direct
discharge district. All runoff from the site will be subject to the water
67. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
68. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 430-508 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-508
430:48
quality requirement as stated in § 430-506 of this article.
(i) Alternate criteria for redevelopment sites. For redevelopment sites, one
of the following minimum design parameters shall be accomplished,
whichever is most appropriate for the given site conditions as determined
by Township Engineer;
[1] Meet the full requirements specified by Table 508-1 and Subsection
A(3)(a) through (i); or
[2] Reduce the total impervious surface on the site by at least 20%,
based upon a comparison of existing impervious surface to proposed
impervious surface.
B. Delaware River South Watershed has been divided into stormwater management
districts as shown on the Watershed Map in Appendix D.69 In addition to the
requirements specified below, the erosion and sedimentation control (§ 430-503),
the nonstructural project design (§ 430-504), the groundwater recharge
(§ 430-505), the water quality (§ 430-506), and the stream-bank erosion
(§ 430-507) requirements shall be implemented.
(1) Standards for managing runoff from each subarea in the Delaware River South
Watershed is shown below. Development sites located in each of the A, B or
C, Districts must control post-development runoff rates to predevelopment
runoff rates for the design storms as follows:
Table 508-1
District
Design Storm Post
Development
Design Storm
Predevelopment
A 2-year 1-year
5-year 5-year
10-year 10-year
25-year 25-year
50-year 50-year
100-year 100-year
B 2-year 1-year
5-year 2-year
10-year 5-year
25-year 10-year
50-year 50-year
100-year 100-year
C* 2-year 1-year
5-year 2-year
69. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 430-508 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-508
430:49
* In District C, development sites which can discharge directly to the
Delaware River South main channel or major tributaries or indirectly to
the main channel through an existing stormwater drainage system (i.e.,
storm sewer or tributary) may do so without control of post-development
peak rate of runoff greater than the five-year storm. Sites in District C
will still have to comply with the groundwater recharge criteria, the water
quality criteria, and stream-bank erosion criteria. If the post-development
runoff is intended to be conveyed by an existing stormwater drainage
system to the main channel, assurance must be provided that such system
has adequate capacity to convey the flows greater than the two-year
predevelopment peak flow or will be provided with improvements to
furnish the required capacity. When adequate capacity in the downstream
system does not exist and will not be provided through improvements,
the post-development peak rate of runoff must be controlled to the
predevelopment peak rate as required in District A provisions (i.e., tenyear
post-development flows to ten-year predevelopment flows) for the
specified design storms.
(2) Post-development peak rates of runoff from any regulated activity shall meet
the peak release rates of runoff prior to development for the design storms
specified on the Stormwater Management District Watershed Map (Appendix
D70) and Subsection B(1).
(3) The boundaries of the Delaware River South Stormwater Management
Districts are shown on an official stormwater district map that is available for
inspections at the Township office. A copy of the map at a reduced scale is
included in Appendix D.71 The exact location of the stormwater management
district boundaries, as they apply to a given development site, shall be
determined by mapping the boundaries using the two-foot topographic
contours (or most accurate data required) provided as part of the drainage plan.
(4) For a proposed development site located within two or more stormwater
management district category subareas, the peak discharge rate from any
subarea shall be the predevelopment peak discharge for that subarea as
indicated in Subsection B(1). The calculated peak discharges shall apply
regardless of whether the grading plan changes the drainage area by subarea.
An exception to the above may be granted if discharges from multiple subareas
recombine in proximity to the site. In this case, peak discharge in any direction
may be a one-hundred-percent release rate, provided that the overall site
discharge meets the weighted average release rate.
(5) Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development site are not subject
to release rate criteria when determining allowable peak runoff rates.
However, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed to safely convey off-site
flows through the development site.
(6) Site areas. Where the area of a site being impacted by a proposed development
activity differs significantly from the total site area, only the proposed impact
70. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
71. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 430-508 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-508
430:50
area utilizing stormwater management measures shall be subject to the
management district criteria. Unimpacted or undisturbed areas that do flow
into or are bypassing the stormwater management facilities would not be
subject to the management district criteria.
(7) For any proposed development site not located in a provisional direct
discharge district, the applicant has the option of using a less restrictive runoff
control (including no detention) if the applicant can prove that no harm would
be caused by discharging at a higher runoff rate than that specified by the plan.
The no-harm option is used when a applicant can prove that the postdevelopment
hydrographs can match predevelopment hydrographs, or if it can
be proved that the post-development conditions will not cause increases in
peaks at all points downstream. Proof of no harm would have to be shown
based upon the following downstream impact evaluation, which shall include
a downstream hydraulic capacity analysis consistent with Subsection B(8) to
determine if adequate hydraulic capacity exists. The land applicant shall
submit to the Township this evaluation of the impacts due to increased
downstream stormwater flows in the watershed.
(a) The downstream impact evaluation shall include hydrologic and
hydraulic calculations necessary to determine the impact of hydrograph
timing modifications due to the proposed development upon a dam,
highway, structure, natural point of restricted stream flow, or any stream
channel section, established with the concurrence of the Township.
(b) The evaluation shall continue downstream until the increase in flow
diminishes due to additional flow from tributaries and/or stream
attenuation.
(c) The peak flow values to be used for downstream areas for the design
return period storms (two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and onehundred-
year) shall be the values from the calibrated model for the
Delaware River South Watershed. These flow values can be obtained
from the watershed plan.
(d) Applicant-proposed runoff controls that would generate increased peak
flow rates at storm drainage problem areas would, by definition, be
precluded from successful attempts to prove no harm, except in
conjunction with proposed capacity improvements for the problem areas
consistent with Subsection B(9).
(e) Financial considerations shall not constitute grounds for granting a noharm
exemption.
(f) Capacity improvements may be provided as necessary to implement the
no-harm option which proposes specific capacity improvements to
provide that a less stringent discharge control would not create any harm
downstream.
(g) No-harm justifications shall be submitted by the applicant as part of the
drainage plan submission per Article IV.
§ 430-508 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-508
430:51
§ 430-509. Calculation methodology.
(8) Any downstream hydraulic capacity analysis conducted in accordance with
this chapter shall use the following criteria for determining adequacy for
accepting increased peak flow rates:
(a) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey the
increased runoff associated with a one-and-one-half-year return period
event within their banks at velocities consistent with protection of the
channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities shall be based upon criteria
included in the Department of Environmental Protection's Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual.
(b) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
increased twenty-five-year return period runoff without creating any
hazard to persons or property.
(c) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass or
convey flows from the tributary area must be designed in accordance with
the Department of Environmental Protection's Chapter 105 regulations (if
applicable) and, at minimum, pass the increased twenty-five-year return
period runoff.
(9) Regional detention alternatives.
(a) For certain areas within the study area, it may be more cost-effective to
provide one control facility for more than one development site than to
provide an individual control facility for each development site. The
initiative and funding for any regional runoff control alternatives are the
responsibility of prospective applicants.
(b) The design of any regional control basins must incorporate reasonable
development of the entire upstream watershed. The peak outflow of a
regional basin would be determined on a case-by-case basis using the
hydrologic model of the watershed consistent with protection of the
downstream watershed areas. "Hydrologic model" refers to the calibrated
model as developed for the stormwater management plan. It is a
requirement that, even if regional basins are proposed for the water
quantity control, that the water quality, stream-bank erosion and recharge
criteria be accomplished on site, or as close to the source of the runoff as
possible.
A. Stormwater runoff from all development sites with a drainage area of greater than
200 acres shall be calculated using a generally accepted calculation technique that
is based on the NRCS Soil-Cover-Complex Method. Table 509-1 summarizes
acceptable computation methods, and the method selected by the design
professional shall be based on the individual limitations and suitability of each
method for a particular site. The Township may allow the use of the Rational
Method to estimate peak discharges from drainage areas that contain less than 200
acres. The Soil-Complex Method shall be used for drainage areas greater than 200
acres.
§ 430-508 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-509
430:52
Table 509-1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater Management Plans
Method
Method Developed
By Applicability
TR-20
(or commercial computer
package based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of full
hydrology computer model is
desirable or necessary
TR-55
(or commercial computer
package based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans within
limitations described in TR-55
HEC-1/HEC-HMS U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers
Applicable where use of full
hydrologic computer model is
desirable or necessary
PSRM Penn State University Applicable where use of a
hydrologic computer model is
desirable or necessary; simpler
than TR-20 or HEC-1
Rational Method (or
commercial computer
package based on
Rational Method)
Emil Kuichling (1889) For sites less than 200 acres, or
as approved by the Township
and/or Township Engineer
Other methods Varies Other computation
methodologies approved by the
Township and/or Township
Engineer
B. All calculations consistent with this chapter using the Soil-Cover-Complex Method
shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the various return period storms
according to the region in which they are located as presented in Table B-1 in
Appendix B-1 to this chapter.72 If a hydrologic computer model such as PSRM or
HEC-1/HEC-HMS is used for stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration of
rainfall shall be 24 hours. The Alternating Block Method shown in Figure B-1, or
the SCS Type II S Curve, Figure B-3, in Appendix B73, shall be used for the rainfall
distribution.
C. For the purposes of existing conditions flow rate determination, the undeveloped
portion of the site shall be considered as meadow in good condition, unless the
natural ground cover generates a lower curve (CN) number or Rational C value (i.e.,
forest), as listed in Table B-2 or B-3 in Appendix B to this chapter.74 For the
developed portion of the site, the CN or C value shall be based upon actual land
cover conditions.
72. Editor's Note: Appendix B-1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
73. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
74. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 430-509 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-509
430:53
§ 430-510. Other requirements.
D. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities consistent
with appropriate times of concentration for overland flow and return periods from
the Region 5 Curves from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Storm-
Duration-Frequency Chart (Figure B-4).75 Times of concentration for overland flow
shall be calculated using the methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time
to time by NRCS). Times of concentration for channel and pipe flow shall be
computed using Manning's equation.
E. Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions to be used in
the Soil-Cover-Complex Method shall be obtained from Table B-2 in Appendix B
to this chapter.76
F. Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for use in the
Rational Method shall be obtained from Table B-3 in Appendix B to this chapter.77
G. The designer shall consider that the runoff from proposed sites graded to the subsoil
will not have the same runoff conditions as the site under existing conditions, even
after topsoiling or seeding. The designer shall increase his proposed condition CN
or "C" to better reflect proposed soil conditions.
H. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning equation shall be used for
hydraulic computations, and to determine the capacity of open channels, pipes and
storm sewers. Values for Manning's roughness coefficient ("n") shall be consistent
with Table B-4 in Appendix B to this chapter.78
I. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be designed to meet
the performance standards of this chapter using any generally accepted hydraulic
analysis technique or method.
J. The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the performance
standards of this chapter shall be verified by routing the design storm hydrograph
through these facilities using the Storage-Indication Method. The design storm
hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation method that produces a full
hydrograph. The Township may approve the use of any generally accepted full
hydrograph approximation technique that shall use a total runoff volume that is
consistent with the volume from a method that produces a full hydrograph.
A. Any stormwater facility located on state highway rights-of-way shall be subject to
approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT).
B. All wet basin designs shall incorporate biologic controls consistent with the West
Nile virus guidance found in Appendix G.79
75. Editor's Note: See Appendix B which is included as an attachment to this chapter.
76. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
77. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
78. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
79. Editor's Note: Appendix G is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 430-509 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-510
430:54
C. Any stormwater management facility (i.e., detention basin) required or regulated by
this chapter, designed to store runoff and requiring a berm or earthen embankment,
shall be designed to provide an emergency spillway to handle flow up to and
including the one-hundred-year proposed conditions. The height of embankment
must provide a minimum one foot of freeboard above the maximum pool elevation,
computed when the facility functions for the one-hundred-year proposed conditions
inflow. Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety permit
under DEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in accordance with Chapter
105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105 concerning dam safety. Chapter 105
may be required to pass storms larger than the one-hundred-year event.
D. Any facilities that constitute water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges, outfalls or
stream enclosures), and any work involving wetlands governed by DEP Chapter
105 regulations (as amended or replaced from time to time by DEP), shall be
designed in accordance with Chapter 105 and will require a permit from DEP.
E. Any other drainage conveyance facility that does not fall under Chapter 105
regulations must be able to convey, without damage to the drainage structure or
roadway, runoff from the twenty-five-year design storm with a minimum one foot
of freeboard measured below the lowest point along the top of the roadway. Any
facility that constitutes a dam as defined in DEP Chapter 105 regulations may
require a permit under dam safety regulations. Any facility located within a
PennDOT right-of-way must meet PennDOT minimum design standards and
permit submission requirements.
F. Any drainage conveyance facility and/or channel not governed by Chapter 105
regulations must be able to convey, without damage to the drainage structure or
roadway, runoff from the one-hundred-year design storm. Conveyance facilities to
or exiting from stormwater management facilities (i.e., detention basins) shall be
designed to convey the design flow to or from that structure. Roadway crossings
located within designated floodplain areas must be able to convey runoff from a
one-hundred-year design storm. Any facility located within a PennDOT right-ofway
must meet PennDOT minimum design standards and permit submission
requirements.
G. Storm sewers must be able to convey proposed conditions runoff from a onehundred-
year design storm without surcharging inlets, where appropriate.
H. Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels, and at all
points of discharge.
I. The design of all stormwater management facilities shall incorporate sound
engineering principles and practices. The Township reserves the right to disapprove
any design that would result in construction in or continuation of a stormwater
problem area.
§ 430-510 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-510
430:55

ARTICLE VI
Inspections
§ 430-601. Conduct; revocation of permits; final inspections.
A. The Township Engineer or the Township designee shall inspect all phases of the
installation of the permanent BMPs and/or stormwater management facilities as
deemed appropriate by the Township Engineer.
B. During any stage of the work, if the Township Engineer or the Township designee
determines that the permanent BMPs and/or stormwater management facilities are
not being installed in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan,
the Township shall revoke any existing permits or other approvals and issue a
cease-and-desist order until a revised drainage plan is submitted and approved, as
specified in this chapter and until the deficiencies are corrected. In the event a
cease-and-desist order is issued as provided for in this section, the applicant shall
abide by, and ensure that all contractors, employees or workmen at the site abide
by, the cease-and-desist order.
C. A final inspection of all BMPs and/or stormwater management facilities shall be
conducted by the Township Engineer or his designee and to confirm compliance
with the approved drainage plan prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit.
§ 430-601 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-601
430:57

ARTICLE VII
Fees and Expenses
§ 430-701. Drainage plan review and inspection fee.80
Fees shall be established by the Township to defray plan review and construction
inspection costs incurred by the Township. All fees shall be paid by the applicant at
the time of drainage plan submission. A review and inspection fee schedule shall be
established by resolution of the Township governing body based on the size of the
regulated activity and based on the Township's costs for reviewing drainage plans and
conducting inspections pursuant to § 430-601. The Township shall periodically update
the review and inspection fee schedule to ensure that review costs are adequately
reimbursed.
§ 430-702. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall, at a minimum, cover:
A. Administrative costs.
B. The review of the drainage plan by the Township and the Township Engineer.
C. The site inspections.
D. The inspection of stormwater management facilities and drainage improvements
during construction.
E. The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management facilities and
drainage improvements presented in the drainage plan.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions regulated by this
chapter, correct violations, and assure proper completion of stipulated remedial
actions.
80. Editor's Note: Township fee schedules are on file in the Township Municipal Building and available to be viewed on the
Township's website at www.middletownbucks.org.
§ 430-701 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-702
430:59

ARTICLE VIII
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 430-801. Performance guarantee.
§ 430-802. Responsibilities for operations and maintenance of stormwater
controls and BMPs.
A. For subdivisions and land developments, the applicant shall provide a financial
guarantee to the Township for the timely installation and proper construction of all
stormwater management controls:
(1) As required by the approved drainage plan in an amount equal to the full
construction cost of the required controls as estimated by the Township
Engineer; or
(2) The amount and method of payment provided for in Chapter 440, Subdivision
and Land Development, § 440-606.
B. For other regulated activities, the Township may require a financial guarantee from
the applicant in an amount not to exceed the full construction cost of the required
controls.
A. No nonexempt regulated activities within the Township shall commence until
approval by the Township of a stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan that describes how the permanent (e.g., post construction)
stormwater controls and BMPs will be properly operated and maintained.
B. The following items shall be included in the stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan:
(1) Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the requirements for recording
at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Bucks County, and which shall be
submitted on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches in size. The contents of the map(s)
shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent stormwater
controls and BMPs;
(b) The location of the project site relative to highways, municipal
boundaries or other identifiable landmarks;
(c) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet, or others as
appropriate;
(d) Existing streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within the project
site area;
(e) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries, sinkholes,
streams, existing drainagecourses, and areas of natural vegetation to be
preserved;
(f) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers, and
§ 430-801 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-802
430:61
§ 430-803. Township review of stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan.
waterlines within 50 feet of property lines of the project site;
(g) Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative cover,
including the type and amount of impervious area that would be added;
(h) Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings; and
(i) A fifteen-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater controls and
BMPs that would provide ingress to and egress from a public right-ofway.
(2) All plans shall include a plan note stating that the Township shall have the
right to enter private property to inspect and repair, if necessary, any
stormwater management facility;
(3) All plans shall note that the stormwater management facilities are a permanent
part of the development and shall not be removed, altered or modified;
(4) A description of how each permanent stormwater control and BMP will be
operated and maintained, and the identity and contact information associated
with the person(s) responsible for operations and maintenance;
(5) The name of the project site, the name and address of the owner of the
property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the plan; and
(6) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the stormwater
controls and BMPs are permanent fixtures that can be altered or removed only
after written approval by the Township designee, upon recommendation of the
Township Engineer.
C. The stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan for the project
site shall establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance of
all permanent stormwater controls and BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately owned and in
which streets, sewers and other public improvements are to be dedicated to the
Township, stormwater controls and BMPs may also be dedicated to and
maintained by the Township;
(2) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single ownership, or if
sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned and
maintained, then the operation and maintenance of stormwater controls and
BMPs shall be the responsibility of the owner or private management entity.
D. The Township, upon the recommendation of the Township Engineer, shall make
the final determination on the continuing operations and maintenance
responsibilities. The Township reserves the right to accept or reject the operations
and maintenance responsibility for any or all of the stormwater controls and BMPs.
A. The Township Engineer shall review the stormwater control and BMP operations
§ 430-802 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-803
430:62
§ 430-804. Adherence to approved stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan.
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater control and BMP
required by an approved stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan
or to allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to an approved
stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan.
§ 430-805. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately owned
stormwater controls and BMPs.
§ 430-806. Stormwater management easements.
and maintenance plan for consistency with the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and any permits issued by DEP.
B. The Township Engineer shall notify the applicant, in writing, whether the
stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan is approved.
C. The Township shall require a record drawing (aka "as-built plan") of all stormwater
controls and BMPs and an explanation of any discrepancies with the operations and
maintenance plan.
D. Upon approval of the stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance
plan, the applicant shall provide a electronic copy, in a usable format, of a plan
showing the location of stormwater facilities to be used in the Township's NPDES
plan.
A. Prior to final approval of a site's stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan, the applicant shall sign and record an operations and
maintenance agreement with the Township covering all stormwater controls and
BMPs that are to be privately owned. The operations and maintenance agreement
shall be transferred with transfer of ownership. The operations and maintenance
agreement shall be substantially the same as the agreement in Appendix A to this
chapter.81
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined necessary to
guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater
controls and BMPs. The agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Township Solicitor.
A. Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for off-site
stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the Township Engineer.
B. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the applicant or property
owner if necessary for access for inspections and maintenance, or the preservation
of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration and detention areas and other
stormwater controls and BMPs by persons other than the property owner. The
purpose of the easement shall be specified in any agreement under § 430-805.
81. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 430-803 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-807
430:63
§ 430-807. Recording of approved stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan and related agreements.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent stormwater controls and BMPs will
be placed, constructed or implemented, as described in the stormwater control and
BMP operations and maintenance plan, shall record the following documents in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds for Bucks County within 15 days of approval of the
stormwater control and BMP operations plan by the Township:
(1) The operations and maintenance plan, or a summary thereof;
(2) Operations and maintenance agreements under § 430-805; and
(3) Easements under § 430-806.
B. The Township may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the project site
upon discovery of failure on the part of the owner to comply with this section.
§ 430-807 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-807
430:64
ARTICLE IX
Prohibitions
§ 430-901. Prohibited discharges.
A. No person in the Township shall allow, or cause to allow, stormwater discharges
into the Township's separate storm sewer system which are not composed entirely
of stormwater, except as provided in Subsection B below and discharges allowed
under a state or federal permit.
B. Discharges that may be allowed based on a finding by the Township that the
discharge(s) do not significantly contribute to pollution to surface waters of the
commonwealth are:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources including dechlorinated waterline and fire hydrant
flushings.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Routine external building washdown (which does not use detergents or other
compounds).
(5) Air-conditioning condensate.
(6) Water from individual residential car washing.
(7) Springs.
(8) Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains.
(9) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(10) Lawn watering.
(11) Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials
have not occurred (unless all spill material has been removed) and where
detergents are not used.
(12) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(14) Water from crawl spaces.
C. In the event that the Township determines that any of the discharges identified in
Subsection B significantly contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth,
or is so notified by DEP, the Township will notify the responsible person to cease
the discharge.
D. Upon notice provided by the Township under Subsection C, the discharger will
have a reasonable time, as determined by the Township, to cease the discharge,
consistent with the degree of pollution caused by the discharge.
§ 430-901 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-901
430:65
§ 430-902. Prohibited connections.
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in § 430-901B above:
§ 430-903. Roof drains.
§ 430-904. Alteration of BMPs.
E. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under state law.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows any
nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water,
to enter the separate storm sewer system, and any connections to the storm drain
system from indoor drains and sinks; and
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the
separate storm sewer system, which has not been documented in plans, maps or
equivalent records, and approved by the Township.
A. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers or roadside
ditches in order to promote overland flow and infiltration/percolation of stormwater
where advantageous to do so.
B. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers,
connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be permitted on a caseby-
case basis as determined by the Township.
C. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to the
maximum extent practicable.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing stormwater
control or BMP, unless it is part of an approved maintenance program, without the
written approval of the Township.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into a
stormwater control or BMP or within a drainage easement, which would limit or
alter the functioning of the stormwater control or BMP, without the written
approval of the Township.
§ 430-901 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-904
430:66
ARTICLE X
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 430-1001. Right of entry.
§ 430-1002. Public nuisance.
§ 430-1003. Enforcement generally.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of the
Township may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the Township to
inspect the implementation, condition or operation and maintenance of the
stormwater controls or BMPs in regard to any aspect governed by this chapter.
B. Stormwater control and BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on
behalf of the Township ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the Township shall have the right to temporarily
locate on any stormwater control or BMP in the Township such devices as are
necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges from such
stormwater control or BMP.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Township access to a stormwater control or
BMP is a violation of this article.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Township Code Enforcement Office or by any
persons or agency designated by the Board of Supervisors from time to time.
B. Whenever the Township finds that a person has violated any provision of this
chapter or engaged in or suffered any act or omission that is prohibited by this
chapter, the Township may order compliance by written notice to the responsible
person. Such notice may, without limitation, require the following remedies:
(1) Performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
(2) Elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices or operations;
(4) Abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards
and the restoration of any affected property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) Reimbursement of all costs incurred by the Township in connection with the
violation and its remediation or attempted remediation;
(7) Implementation of stormwater controls and BMPs; and
§ 430-1001 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-1003
430:67
§ 430-1004. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
§ 430-1005. Violations and penalties.
(8) Operation and maintenance of stormwater controls and BMPs.
C. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time
limit for correction of these violation(s). Said notice may further advise that, if
applicable, should the violator fail to take the required action within the established
deadline, the work may be done by the Township or its designee and that the
expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
D. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such person to the
penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative
and shall not prevent the Township from pursuing any and all other remedies
available in law or equity.
E. Any and all costs and fees incurred by the Township in addressing, inspecting,
remedying, prosecuting and otherwise in connection with a violation, including fees
of the Township Solicitor and Township Engineer, may be assessed against the
property owner and, if not paid, shall constitute a lien on the subject property.
A. Any building, land development or other permit or approval issued by the Township
may be suspended or revoked by the Township for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the permit;
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter; or
(3) The creation of any condition or of any act during construction or development
which constitutes or creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution or which
endangers the life, health or property of others.
B. A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the Township when:
(1) The Township Engineer or designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the stormwater controls and BMPs or the elimination of the
hazard or nuisance; and/or
(2) The Township is satisfied that the violation of the ordinance, law or rule and
regulation has been corrected.
C. A permit or approval that has been revoked by the Township cannot be reinstated.
The applicant may apply for a new permit under the procedures outlined in this
chapter.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not
less than $500 or more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs. Each
day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense, and the
applicable fines are cumulative.
B. In addition, the Township, through its Solicitor, may institute injunctive, mandamus
or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement
§ 430-1003 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-1005
430:68
§ 430-1006. Notification.
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter, or
fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued hereunder, the Township shall
provide written notification of the violation. Such notification shall state the nature of
the violation(s) and establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Failure to
comply within the time specified shall subject such person to the penalty provisions of
this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the
Township from pursuing any and all remedies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner
of the real property on which any regulated activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or
has occurred, to comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 430-1007. Enforcement.
The Township Code Enforcement Office is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all
of the provisions of this chapter. All inspections regarding compliance with the drainage
plan shall be the responsibility of the Township Engineer or other qualified persons
designated by the Township.
of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue
restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other
appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. A set of design plans approved by the Township shall be on file at the site
throughout the duration of the construction activity. Periodic inspections may be
made by the Township, Township Engineer or designee during construction.
B. Adherence to approved plan. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
to undertake any regulated activity under § 430-301 on any property except as
provided for in the approved drainage plan and pursuant to the applicable
requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control
structure required by the drainage plan pursuant to this chapter or to allow the
property to remain in a condition which does not conform to the approved drainage
plan.
C. At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the release of the
performance guarantee, the owner or his representatives shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect, surveyor or
other qualified person verifying that all permanent facilities have been
constructed according to the plans and specifications and approved revisions
thereto.
(2) Provide a set of as-built (record) drawings.
D. After receipt of the certification by the Township, a final inspection shall be
conducted by the Township Engineer or designated representative to certify
compliance with this chapter.
E. An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the certification of completion
pursuant to Subsection C(1) has been secured and all other applicable provisions of
this chapter have been satisfied. The occupancy permit shall be required for each
§ 430-1005 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EARTH § 430-1007
430:69
§ 430-1008. Appeals.
lot owner and/or applicant for all subdivisions and land development in the
Township.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee may appeal to
the Township Board of Supervisors within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Township Board of Supervisors may
appeal to the County Court of Common Pleas in the county where the activity has
taken place within 30 days of the Township decision.
§ 430-1007 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 430-1008
430:70
Chapter 431
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY CREEK WATERSHED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction standards — See Ch. 190.
Soil erosion, sedimentation and grading control — See Ch.
411.
Stormwater management and earth disturbance — See Ch.
430.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 440.
Zoning — See Ch. 500.
§ 430-1008 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 430-1008
431:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 431-101. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Neshaminy Creek Watershed
Stormwater Management Ordinance" (aka Neshaminy/Little Neshaminy Stormwater
Management Ordinance).
§ 431-102. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
§ 431-103. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare within
the Neshaminy Creek watershed by maintaining the natural hydrologic regime and
by minimizing the harms and maximizing the benefits described in § 431-102 of this
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting from
development and redevelopment throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity
of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to convey
and manage stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood reduction
efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge,
and threatens public health and safety.
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting from land
development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can also harm surface
water resources by changing the natural hydrologic patterns, accelerating stream
flows (which increase scour and erosion of streambeds and stream banks, thereby
elevating sedimentation), destroying aquatic habitat, and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals and
pathogens.
C. A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM), including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing accelerated runoff, is
fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare and the protection of the people of
the municipality and all the people of the commonwealth, their resources and the
environment.
D. Stormwater is an important water resource by providing groundwater recharge for
water supplies and baseflow of streams, which also protects and maintains surface
water quality.
E. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an essential
component in successfully addressing stormwater.
F. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to implement a program
of stormwater controls. These municipalities are required to obtain a permit for
stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer systems under the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
§ 431-101 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-103
431:3
chapter through provisions designed to:
§ 431-104. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff, surface
water and groundwater quality and quantity by the authority of:
§ 431-105. Applicability; regulated activities.
All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff, including
land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to regulation by this chapter.
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including regulations at 25
Pa. Code 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim and restore the existing and designated
uses of the waters of this commonwealth.
B. Minimize increases in stormwater volume and control peak flows.
C. Minimize impervious surfaces.
D. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater planning and
management.
E. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
F. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, requiring a minimum of
structures and relying on natural processes.
G. Focus on infiltration of stormwater to maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent
degradation of surface water and groundwater quality, and to otherwise protect
water resources.
H. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
I. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
J. Provide standards to meet National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit requirements.
K. Address certain requirements of the Municipal Separate Stormwater Sewer System
(MS4) NPDES Phase II Stormwater Regulations.
L. Provide for proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater management
facilities and best management practices (BMPs) that are implemented in the
municipality.
A. Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.82
B. Cite applicable municipal code, [e.g., Second Class Township Code (Act 69 of
1933, P.L. 103; 53 P.S. § 65101, as amended) and the Borough Code (Act 581 of
1965, P.L. 1656; 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq., as amended83)].
82. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
83. Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 431-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 431-105
431:4
Regulated activities include, but are not limited to:
§ 431-106. Exemptions.
A. Land development.
B. Subdivisions.
C. Prohibited or polluted discharges.
D. Alteration of the natural hydrologic regime.
E. Construction or reconstruction of, or addition of new impervious or semipervious
surfaces (i.e., driveways, parking lots, roads, etc.), except for reconstruction of
roads where there is no increase in impervious surface.
F. Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
G. Redevelopment.
H. Diversion piping or encroachments in any natural or man-made channel.
I. Nonstructural and structural stormwater management best management practices
(BMPs) or appurtenances thereto.
A. Regulated activities that create impervious surfaces smaller than or equal to 1,000
square feet are exempt from the peak rate control requirements and the SWM site
plan preparation located in Article IV of this chapter unless the activity is found to
be a significant contributor of pollution to the waters of this commonwealth.
B. Regulated activities that create impervious surfaces between 1,001 square feet up
to and including 5,000 square feet are exempt only from the peak rate control
requirements of this chapter.
§ 431-105 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-106
431:5
(Refer to Appendix I84 which contains the Small Project SWM Site Plan for small
regulated activities creating impervious surface between 1,000 square feet up to
and including 5,000 square feet. The Small Project SWM Site Plan provides small
regulated activities with the opportunity to submit a SWM site plan without having
to hire professional services.)
Table 106.1
Impervious Surface Exemption Thresholds for the Neshaminy Creek
Watershed
Ordinance Article
or Section
Type of
Project
Proposed Impervious Surface
0 to 1,000
square feet
1,001 to 5,000
square feet
5,000 +
square feet
Article IV, SWM
Site Plan
Requirements
Development Exempt Not exempt Not exempt
§ 431-303, Volume
control
requirements
Development Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
§ 431-304, Peak
rate control
requirements
Development Exempt Exempt Not exempt
Erosion and
sediment pollution
control
requirements
Must comply with Title 25, Chapter 102 of the Pennsylvania
Code and any other applicable state, county and municipal
codes.
C. Agricultural activity is exempt from the peak rate control requirements and SWM
site plan preparation requirements of this chapter, provided the activities are
performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Ch. 102.
D. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the peak rate control
requirements and SWM Site Plan preparation requirements of this chapter provided
the activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter
102.
E. Any aspect of BMP maintenance to an existing SWM system made in accordance
with plans and specifications approved by the Township is exempt.
F. The use of land for gardening for home consumption is exempt from the
requirements of this chapter.
G. Exemptions from any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the applicant from
the requirements in § 431-301D through L.
H. Additional exemption criteria:
(1) Exemption responsibilities. An exemption shall not relieve the applicant from
84. Editor's Note: Appendix I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 431-106 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 431-106
431:6
§ 431-107. Repealer.
Any other ordinance or ordinance provision of the municipality inconsistent with any of
the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 431-108. Compatibility with other ordinance or legal requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of the
responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance.
implementing such measures as are necessary to protect public health, safety
and property.
(2) Drainage problems. Where drainage problems are documented or known to
exist downstream of or are expected from the proposed activity, the
municipality may deny exemptions.
(3) Exemptions are limited to specific portions of this chapter.
(4) HQ and EV streams. The municipality may deny exemptions in high quality
(HQ) or exceptional value (EV) waters and source water protection areas
(SWPA).
§ 431-106 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-108
431:7

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 431-201. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted
as follows:
§ 431-202. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through the
combined action of man's activity and the natural processes of a rate greater than would
occur because of the natural process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture such as
agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy use areas. This includes
the work of producing crops including tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking,
harrowing, planting, harvesting crops or pasturing and raising of livestock and
installation of conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area
is not considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of the moving
of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also the changing of surface
conditions by causing the surface to be more or less impervious as the result of changing
the land cover, including the water, vegetation and bare soil.
APPLICANT — A person who has filed an application for approval to engage in any
regulated activity defined in § 431-105 of this chapter.
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS — Engineering or site drawings maintained by the contractor
as he constructs the project and upon which he documents the actual locations of the
building components and changes to the original contract documents. These documents,
or a copy of same, are turned over to the qualified professional at the completion of the
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number
includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine
gender include feminine gender, and words of feminine gender include masculine
gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specific example
but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and
character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, corporation, unit of government, or any other similar
entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and "should" are
permissive.
E. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed, maintained
or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained."
§ 431-201 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-202
431:9
project.
BANKFULL — The channel at the top-of-bank or point from where water begins to
overflow onto a floodplain.
BASEFULL — Portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater; the sustained
discharge that does not result from direct runoff or from water diversions, reservoir
releases, piped discharges, or other human activities.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from regulated activities,
to meet state water quality requirements, to promote groundwater recharge, and to
otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped
into one of two broad categories or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In this
chapter, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related
practices that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical device or
practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs include,
but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices, from large-scale retention
ponds and constructed wetlands to small-scale underground treatment systems,
infiltration facilities, filter strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable
paving, grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent appurtenances to the
project site.
BIORETENTION — A stormwater retention area that utilizes woody and herbaceous
plants and soils to remove pollutants before infiltration occurs.
BUFFER — The area of land immediately adjacent to any stream, measured
perpendicular to and horizontally from the top-of-bank on both sides of a stream (see
"top-of-bank").
CHANNEL — An open drainage feature through which stormwater flows. Channels
include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made watercourses, swales, streams,
ditches, canals and pipes that convey continuously or periodically flowing water.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Bucks County Conservation District.
CULVERT — A structure with its appurtenant works, which carries water under or
through an embankment or fill.
CURVE NUMBER — Value used in the Soil-Cover-Complex Method. It is a measure
of the percentage of precipitation which is expected to run off from the watershed and is
a function of the soil, vegetative cover, and tillage method.
DAM — A man-made barrier, together with its appurtenant works, constructed for
the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid or semifluid. A dam may
include a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad or other purposes, which
impounds or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PA
DEP).
DESIGNEE — The agent of the Bucks County, Bucks County Conservation District,
§ 431-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 431-202
431:10
and/or agent of the governing body involved with the administration, review or
enforcement of any provisions of this chapter by contract or memorandum of
understanding.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL (QUALIFIED) — A Pennsylvania-registered professional
engineer, registered landscape architect or registered professional land surveyor trained
to develop stormwater management plans.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a
storm event measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., a five-year storm) and duration
(e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard stormwater
runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate.
Detention basins are designed to drain completely soon after a rainfall event and become
dry until the next rainfall event.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and released into the
waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — A person that seeks to undertake a land development or subdivision.
DEVELOPMENT — Any human-induced change to improved or unimproved real
estate, whether public or private, including but not limited to land development,
construction, installation or expansion of a building or other structure, land division,
street construction, drilling and site alteration, such as embankments, dredging,
grubbing, grading, paving, parking or storage facilities, excavation, filling, stockpiling
or clearing. As used in this chapter, development encompasses both new development
and redevelopment.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract or parcel of land where any regulated
activity set forth in § 431-105 is planned, conducted or maintained.
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE DISCHARGE — Drainage discharge that is not confined to a
single point location or channel, including sheet flow or shallow concentrated flow.
DISCHARGE —
DISCHARGE POINT — The point of discharge for a stormwater facility.
DISCONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DIA) — An impervious or impermeable
surface that is disconnected from any stormwater drainage or conveyance system and
is redirected or directed to a pervious area, which allows for infiltration, filtration and
increased time of concentration, as specified in Appendix F, Disconnected Impervious
Area.85
DISTURBED AREAS — Unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance activity is
occurring or has occurred.
(verb) To release water from a project, site, aquifer, drainage basin or other point of
interest.
A.
(noun) The rate and volume of flow of water such as in a stream, generally
expressed in cubic feet per second. See also "peak discharge."
B.
85. Editor's Note: Appendix F is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 431-202 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-202
431:11
DITCH — A man-made waterway constructed for irrigation or stormwater conveyance
purposes.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility
designed to transport stormwater runoff that includes channels, swales, pipes, conduits,
culverts and storm sewers.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing the
use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the municipality after the SWM site plan
has been approved.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity that
disturbs the surface of land, including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading,
excavations, embankments, land development, agricultural plowing or tilling, timber
harvesting activities, road maintenance activities, mineral extraction, and the moving,
depositing, stockpiling or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EMERGENCY SPILLWAY — A conveyance area that is used to pass peak discharge
greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the stormwater facility.
ENCROACHMENT — A structure or activity that changes, expands or diminishes the
course, current or cross section of a watercourse, floodway or body of water.
EXISTING RESOURCES AND SITE ANALYSIS MAP — A base map which
identifies fundamental environmental site information, including floodplains, wetlands,
topography, vegetative site features, natural areas, prime agricultural land and areas
supportive of endangered species.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including water/stream
channels, is worn away by water, wind or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A site-specific plan identifying
BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation. For agricultural plowing or
tilling activities, the erosion and sediment control plan is that portion of a conservation
plan identifying BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality which satisfy
Pennsylvania Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality
Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to antidegradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS—The initial condition of a project site prior to the proposed
alteration.
EXISTING RECHARGE AREA — Undisturbed surface area or depression where
stormwater collects and a portion of which infiltrates and replenishes the groundwater.
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land areas from
the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of the commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any natural
source or as delineated by applicable Department of Housing and Urban Development,
Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard Boundary Map as being a special flood
hazard area.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
§ 431-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 431-202
431:12
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and associated
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include timber inventory
and preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets,
logging road design and construction, timber harvesting, and reforestation.
FREEBOARD—A vertical distance between the elevation of the design high-water and
the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, swale or diversion berm. The space is required as a
safety margin in a pond or basin.
GOVERNING BODY — Elected municipal officials of municipalities (e.g., township
supervisors or township council or borough council).
GRADE —
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the earth's surface that supplies wells and springs
and is often between saturated soil and rock.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE—The replenishment of existing natural underground
water supplies from rain or overland flow.
HEC-HMS — The United States Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering
Center (HEC) - Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS). This model was used to model the
Neshaminy Creek Watershed during the Act 167 Plan development and was the basis for
the standards and criteria of this chapter.
HIGH QUALITY WATERS — Surface waters having quality which exceeds levels
necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife and recreation in and on
the water by satisfying Pennsylvania Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter
93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(a).
HOT SPOT—An area where land use or activity generates highly contaminated runoff,
with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater.
Typical pollutant loadings in stormwater may be found in Chapter 8, Section 6 of
the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP), No. 363-0300-002 (2006). More
information concerning hot spots may be found in § 431-306A of this chapter.
HYDROGRAPH — A graph representing the discharge of water versus time for a
selected point in the drainage system.
HYDROLOGIC REGIME — The hydrologic cycle or balance that sustains quality
and quantity of stormwater, baseflow, storage and groundwater supplies under natural
conditions.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — A classification of soils by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service, formerly the Soil Conservation Service, into four runoff potential
groups. The groups range from A soils, which are very permeable and produce little
(noun) A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground, specified in percent
and shown on plans as specified herein.
A.
(verb) To finish the surface of a roadbed, the top of an embankment, or the bottom
of excavation.
B.
§ 431-202 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-202
431:13
runoff, to D soils, which are not very permeable and produce much more runoff.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the
ground. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, streets, sidewalks, pavement
roofs, or driveway areas. Any surface areas designed to be gravel or crushed stone shall
be regarded as impervious surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain stormwater
runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILL DEVELOPMENT — Development that occurs on smaller parcels that remain
undeveloped but are within or in very close proximity to urban or densely developed
areas. Infill development usually relies on existing infrastructure and does not require an
extension of water, sewer or other public utilities.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is absorbed
by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated downward to recharge
groundwater.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff into the
underground water (e.g., french drains, seepage pits or seepage trenches).
INITIAL ABSTRACTION (IA) — The value used to calculate the volume or peak rate
of runoff in the Soil-Cover-Complex Method. It represents the depth of rain retained
on vegetation plus the depth of rain stored on the soil surface plus the depth of rain
infiltrated prior to the start of runoff.
INLET — The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A stream that flows only part of the time. Flow
generally occurs for several weeks or months in response to seasonal precipitation or
groundwater discharge.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface depressions,
sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface, underground drainage, and caves.
Karst is formed on carbonate rocks, such as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land
for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether
proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot
or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively,
between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means
of or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups, or other features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.86
C.
§ 431-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 431-202
431:14
permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) PRACTICES — Practices that will minimize
proposed conditions runoff rates and volumes, which will minimize needs for artificial
conveyance and storage facilities.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff conveyance
used as a reach in the Neshaminy Creek hydrologic model.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for calculation of
velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per second) in open
channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope. Open channels
may include closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for a municipality,
planning agency or joint planning commission.
MUNICIPALITY — Township of Middletown, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
NATURAL HYDROLOGIC REGIME — See "hydrologic regime."
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION—Pollution that enters a water body from diffuse
origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible, confined or discrete
conveyances.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES — Water flowing in stormwater collection
facilities, such as pipes or swales, which is not the result of a rainfall event or snowmelt.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal government's
system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act, which is delegated to PA DEP
in Pennsylvania.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation
Service).
OUTFALL — "Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where the
municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of the commonwealth.
OUTLET—Points of water disposal to a stream, river, lake, tidewater or artificial drain.
PARENT TRACT — The parcel of land from which a land development or subdivision
originates, determined from the date of municipal adoption of this chapter.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm
event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (PSRM) — The computer-based hydrologic model
developed at the Pennsylvania State University.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A stream which contains water at all times except during
extreme drought.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit or similar structure (including appurtenances) that
conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION —The planning commission of Middletown Township.
86. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 431-202 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-202
431:15
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but
not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit from which stormwater is or
may be discharged, as defined in state regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.87
POST CONSTRUCTION — Period after construction during which disturbed areas
are stabilized, stormwater controls are in place and functioning and all proposed
improvements in the approved land development plan are completed.
PREDEVELOPMENT — See "existing condition."
PRETREATMENT —Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to provide storage or
filtering to trap coarse materials and other pollutants before they enter the system but not
necessarily designed to meet the volume requirements of § 431-303.
PERVIOUS SURFACE—A surface that allows the infiltration of water into the ground.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in the
municipality are planned, conducted or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work required by the
ordinance.
RATIONAL METHOD — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak flow.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration of rainfall,
other surface waters or land application of water or treated wastewater.
RECORD DRAWINGS — Original documents revised to suit the as-built conditions
and subsequently provided by the Engineer to the client. The Engineer reviews the
contractor's as-built drawings against his/her own records for completeness, then either
turns these over to the client or transfers the information to a set of reproducibles, in
both cases for the client's permanent records. Record drawings are not the same as record
plans submitted for recording with the County in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247).
REDEVELOPMENT — Any development that requires demolition or removal of
existing structures or impervious surfaces at a site and replacement with new impervious
surfaces. Maintenance activities such as top-layer grinding and repaving are not
considered to be redevelopment. Interior remodeling projects and tenant improvements
are also not considered to be redevelopment. Utility trenches in streets are not considered
redevelopment, unless more than 50% of the street width, including shoulders, is
removed and repaved.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any activities that
involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that may affect stormwater
runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,88 25 Pa. Code Chapter
102, or the Clean Streams Law.
87. Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of the Pa. Code was reserved 10-8-2010. Defined terms can now be found at 25 Pa. Code
§ 92a.2.
88. Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of the Pa. Code was reserved 10-8-2010. See now 25 Pa. Code Ch. 92a, National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permitting, Monitoring and Compliance.
§ 431-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 431-202
431:16
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of existing conditions peak rate of runoff from a
site or subarea to which the proposed conditions peak rate of runoff must be reduced to
protect downstream areas.
REPAVING — Replacement of the impervious surface that does not involve
reconstruction of an existing paved (impervious) surface.
REPLACEMENT PAVING — Reconstruction of and full replacement of an existing
paved (impervious) surface.
RETENTION BASIN — A structure in which stormwater is stored and not released
during the storm event. Retention basins are designed for infiltration purposes and do
not have an outlet. The retention basin must infiltrate stored water in four days or less.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff that is
captured and not released directly into the surface waters of the commonwealth during
or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The probability an event will occur in any given year. Typically
displayed as a whole number, e.g., twenty-five-year event, and represents the inverse
of the frequency of that event. For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall
gives the probability, 1/25 or 4%, that size storm will occur in any given year.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the existing road cross
section, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road surfaces, cutting road
banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches and other similar activities.
ROOF DRAINS—A drainage conduit or pipe that collects water runoff from a roof and
leads it away from the structure.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SALDO — Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance; Chapter 440, Subdivision
and Land Development, of this Code.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a product of
erosion.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or any other introduction of
sediment into the waters of the commonwealth.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is accumulated
or deposited by the movement of water or air.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with loose
stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is directed for infiltration
into the underground water. More information on seepage pits may be found in the
Pennsylvania BMP Manual, December 2006, Chapter 6, Section 4.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, man-made channels or storm drains) primarily used for collecting and
conveying stormwater runoff.
SHALLOW CONCENTRATED FLOW — Stormwater runoff flowing in shallow,
defined ruts prior to entering a defined channel or waterway.
SHEET FLOW — A flow process associated with broad, shallow water movement on
§ 431-202 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-202
431:17
sloping ground surfaces that is not channelized or concentrated.
SOIL-COVER-COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation developed
by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/cover to a runoff parameter
called curve number (CN).
SOURCE WATER PROTECTION AREAS (SWPA) — The zone through which
contaminants, if present, are likely to migrate and reach a drinking water well or surface
water intake.
SPECIAL PROTECTION SUBWATERSHEDS — Watersheds that have been
designated in Pennsylvania Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water
Quality Standards, as exceptional value (EV) or high quality (HQ) waters.
SPILLWAY — A conveyance that is used to pass the peak discharge of the maximum
design storm that is controlled by the stormwater facility.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements to
protect, maintain, reclaim and restore water quality under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm "event" occurs or is
exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See "return period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that conveys intercepted
runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes domestic sewage and industrial
wastes.
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation reaching the ground
surface.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Is
abbreviated as BMPs or SWM BMPs throughout this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY—Any structure, natural or man-made,
that, due to its condition, design or construction, conveys, stores or otherwise affects
stormwater runoff quality, rate or quantity. Typical stormwater management facilities
include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins, open channels, storm
sewers, pipes and infiltration structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The watershed plan known as the
"Neshaminy Creek Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan," for managing
those land use activities that will influence stormwater runoff quality and quantity and
that would impact the Neshaminy Creek watershed, adopted by Bucks and Montgomery
Counties as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167).
STORMWATER SWM SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the applicant or his
representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be managed at the particular site of
interest according to this chapter.
STREAM — A flow of water in a natural channel or bed, as a brook, rivulet or a small
river
STREAM BUFFER — The land area adjacent to each side of a stream essential to
maintaining water quality. (See "buffer.")
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert or other structure in excess of 100
§ 431-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 431-202
431:18
feet in length, upstream to downstream, which encloses a regulated water of the
commonwealth.
STREAM-BANK EROSION — The widening, deepening or headward cutting of
channels and waterways, caused by stormwater runoff or bankfull flows.
SUBAREA (SUBWATERSHED) — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for
which stormwater management criteria have been established in the stormwater
management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any
means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes
in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by
the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot
development, provided the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any
residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands,
ponds, springs and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface waters, or parts
thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface water runoff.
SWM SITE PLAN — The documentation of the stormwater management system to be
used for a given development site, the contents of which are established in § 431-402.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME-OF-CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time required for surface runoff to travel
from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point of interest within
the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland flow time and flow time in
pipes or channels, if any.
TOP-OF-BANK—Highest point of elevation in a stream channel cross section at which
a rising water level just begins to flow out of the channel and over the floodplain.
VEGETATED SWALE — A natural or man-made waterway, usually broad and
shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to convey surface water.
VERNAL POOL — Seasonal depressional wetlands that are covered by shallow water
for variable periods from winter to spring but may be completely dry for most of the
summer and fall.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a defined bed
and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds,
springs and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface water and underground
water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the
commonwealth.
WATERSHED—Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other body of water,
whether natural or artificial.
§ 431-202 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-202
431:19
WET BASIN — Pond for urban runoff management that is designed to detain urban
runoff and always contains water.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, fens and
similar areas.
§ 431-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 431-202
431:20
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management
§ 431-301. General requirements.
A. Applicants proposing regulated activities in the Neshaminy Creek Watershed that
do not fall under the exemption criteria shown in § 431-106 shall submit a
stormwater management (SWM) site plan consistent with the Neshaminy Creek
Watershed SWM Plan to the municipality for review. The SWM criteria of this
chapter shall apply to the total proposed development even if development is to take
place in stages. Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required. No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality issues
written approval of a SWM site plan which demonstrates compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
B. SWM site plans approved by the municipality, in accordance with Article IV, shall
be on-site throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
C. The municipality may, after consultation with the Department of Environmental
Protection (PA DEP), approve measures for meeting the state water quality
requirements other than those in this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum
requirements of and do not conflict with state law, including but not limited to the
Clean Streams Law.89
D. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment (E&S) control
best management practices (BMPs) shall be designed, implemented, operated and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g., during
construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this chapter and to meet all
requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.
Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual, No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as
amended and updated.
E. For all regulated activities, implementation of the volume controls in § 431-303 of
this chapter is required.
F. Impervious areas.
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the impervious areas
in the total proposed development even if development is to take place in
stages.
(2) For development taking place in stages, the entire development plan must be
used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total impervious area on
the parcel is subject to the requirements of this chapter
G. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created, increased, decreased,
relocated or otherwise altered without written notification of the adjacent property
89. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 431-301 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-301
431:21
owner(s). Such stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
H. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety and property;
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands and wooded areas.
(b) Create, maintain, repair or extend riparian buffers.
(c) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(d) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
(e) Disconnect impervious surfaces (i.e., disconnected impervious areas,
DIAs) by directing runoff to pervious areas, wherever possible. See
Appendix F for detail on DIAs.90
(3) To the maximum extent practicable, incorporate the techniques for low-impact
development practices (e.g., protecting existing trees, reducing area of
impervious surface, cluster development, and protecting open space) described
in the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP) No.
363-0300-002 (2006). See Appendix E for a summary description.91
I. Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable, and located
to maximize the use of natural on-site infiltration features while still meeting the
other requirements of this chapter.
J. The design of all facilities over karst shall include an evaluation of measures to
minimize the risk of adverse effects.
K. Storage facilities should completely drain both the volume control and rate control
capacities over a period of time not less than 24 and not more than 72 hours from
the end of the design storm.
L. The design storm volumes to be used in the analysis of peak rates of discharge
should be obtained from the Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States,
Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, United States Department of Commerce, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland. NOAA's
Atlas 14 can be accessed at http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
M. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated
and maintained to meet the purposes and requirements of this chapter and to meet
all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams
Law,92and the Storm Water Management Act.93
90. Editor's Note: Appendix F is included as an attachment to this chapter.
91. Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
92. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 431-301 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 431-301
431:22
§ 431-302. Permit requirements by other governmental entities.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other code, law, regulation or ordinance.
§ 431-303. Volume control.
N. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual (PA BMP Manual).
A. Volume controls will mitigate increased runoff impacts, protect stream channel
morphology, maintain groundwater recharge, and contribute to water quality
improvements. Stormwater runoff volume control methods are based on the net
change in runoff volume for the two-year storm event.
B. Volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm Method in
Subsection B(1) or the Simplified Method in Subsection B(2) below. For regulated
activities equal to or less than one acre, this chapter establishes no preference for
either methodology; therefore, the applicant may select either methodology on the
basis of economic considerations, the intrinsic limitations of the procedures
associated with each methodology, and other factors. All regulated activities greater
than one acre must use the Design Storm Method.
(1) Design Storm Method (any regulated activity). This method requires detailed
modeling based on site conditions. For modeling assumptions refer to
§ 431-305A.
(a) Post-development total runoff should not be increased from
predevelopment total runoff for all storms equal to or less than the twoyear
twenty-four-hour duration precipitation.
(b) The following applies in order to estimate the increased volume of runoff
for the two-year twenty-four-hour duration precipitation event:
[1] To calculate the runoff volume (cubic feet) for existing site
conditions (predevelopment) and for the proposed developed site
conditions (post development), it is recommended to use the Soil-
Cover-Complex Method as shown on the following page. Table B-3
in Appendix B94 is available to guide a qualified professional and/or
an applicant to calculate the stormwater runoff volume. The
calculated volume shall be either reused, evapotranspired or
infiltrated through structural or nonstructural means.
[2] Soil-Cover-Complex Method:
93. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
94. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 431-301 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-303
431:23
Step 1: Runoff (inches) = Q = (P - 0.2S)2/(P + 0.8S)
Where:
P = 2-year rainfall (inches)
S = (1,000/CN) - 10, the potential maximum retention
(including initial abstraction, Ia)
Step 2: Runoff Volume (cubic feet) = Q x Area x 1/12
Where:
Q = Runoff (inches)
Area = SWM Area (square feet)
(2) Simplified Method (regulated activities less than or equal to one acre):
(a) Stormwater facilities shall capture the runoff volume from at least the
first two inches of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
Volume (cubic feet) = (2-inch runoff/12 inches) * impervious surface
(square feet)
(b) At least the first inch of runoff volume from the new impervious surfaces
shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow — i.e., it shall not be
released into the surface waters of the commonwealth. The calculated
volume shall be either reused, evapotranspired or infiltrated through
structural or nonstructural means.
Volume (cubic feet) = (1-inch runoff/12 inches) * impervious surface
(square feet)
(c) Infiltration facilities should be designed to accommodate the 0.5 inch of
the permanently removed runoff.
(d) No more than one inch of runoff volume from impervious surfaces shall
be released from the site. The release time must be over 24 hours to 72
hours.
(3) Stormwater control measures. The applicant must demonstrate how the
required volume is controlled through stormwater best management practices
(BMPs) which shall provide the means necessary to capture, reuse, evaporate,
transpire or infiltrate the total runoff volume.
(a) If natural resources exist on the site, the applicant is required to submit a
SWM site plan and shall determine the total acreage of protected area
where no disturbance is proposed. The acreage of the protected area
should be subtracted from the total site area and not included in the
stormwater management site area acreage used in determining the
volume controls.95
95. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 431-303 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 431-303
431:24
Stormwater Management Site Area =
Total Site Area (for both predevelopment and post-development
conditions) - Protected Area
[1] Natural resource areas should be calculated based upon the
municipality's own natural resource protection ordinance. If no
ordinance exists, see Table B-2 in Appendix B for guidance to assess
the total protected area.96 For additional reference see Chapter 5,
Section 5.4.1 of the PA BMP Manual.
(b) Calculate the volume controls provided through nonstructural BMPs.
Table B-5 in Appendix B is recommended as guidance.97
(c) Volume controls provided through nonstructural BMPs should be
subtracted from the required volume to determine the necessary structural
BMPs.
Required Volume
Control (cubic feet) —
Nonstructural
Volume Control
(cubic feet)
=
Structural Volume
Requirement (cubic
feet)
(d) Calculate the volume controls provided through structural BMPs. Table
B-6 in Appendix B is recommended as guidance.98 See PA BMP Manual
Chapter 6 for description of the BMPs.
(e) Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed areas shall
be selected based on the suitability of soils and site conditions (see Table
B-6 in Appendix B for a list of infiltration BMPs).99 Infiltration BMPs
shall be constructed on soils that have the following characteristics:
[1] A minimum soil depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the
infiltration BMPs and the top of bedrock or seasonally high-water
table.
[2] An infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional stormwater
load and dewater completely as determined by field tests. A
minimum of 0.2 inches/hour should be utilized and for acceptable
rates a safety factor of 50% should be applied for design purposes
(e.g., for soil which measured 0.4 inch/hour, the BMP design should
use 0.2 inch/hour to ensure safe infiltration rates after construction).
[3] All open-air infiltration facilities shall be designed to completely
infiltrate runoff volume within three days (72 hours) from the start
of the design storm.
(f) Soils. A soils evaluation of the project site shall be required to determine
96. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
97. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
98. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
99. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 431-303 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-303
431:25
§ 431-304. Stormwater peak rate control and management districts.
Peak rate controls for large storms, up to the one-hundred-year event, are essential in
order to protect against immediate downstream erosion and flooding. The following
peak rate controls have been determined through hydrologic modeling of the Neshaminy
Creek Watershed.
the suitability of infiltration facilities. All regulated activities are required
to perform a detailed soils evaluation by a qualified design professional
which at minimum address soil permeability, depth to bedrock, and
subgrade stability. The general process for designing the infiltration BMP
shall be:
[1] Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and man-made
features within the site to determine general areas of suitability for
infiltration practices. In areas where development on fill material is
under consideration, conduct geotechnical investigations of
subgrade stability; infiltration may not be ruled out without
conducting these tests.
[2] Provide field tests such as double-ring infiltrometer or hydraulic
conductivity tests (at the level of the proposed infiltration surface) to
determine the appropriate hydraulic conductivity rate. Percolation
tests are not recommended for design purposes.
[3] Design the infiltration structure based on field-determined capacity
at the level of the proposed infiltration surface and based on the
safety factor of 50%.
[4] If on-lot infiltration structures are proposed, it must be demonstrated
to the municipality that the soils are conducive to infiltrate on the
lots identified.
[5] An impermeable liner will be required in detention basins where the
possibility of groundwater contamination exists. A detailed
hydrogeologic investigation may be required by the municipality.
A. Standards for managing runoff from each subarea in the Neshaminy Creek
Watershed for the two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and one-hundred-year design
storms are shown in Table 304.1. Development sites located in each of the
management districts must control proposed development conditions runoff rates to
existing conditions runoff rates for the design storms in accordance with Table
304.1 following.
§ 431-303 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 431-304
431:26
Table 304.1
Peak Rate Runoff Control Standards by Stormwater Management Districts
in the Neshaminy Creek Watershed
(includes Little Neshaminy Creek)
District
Design Storm, Post
Development
(proposed conditions)
Design Storm, Predevelopment
(existing conditions)
A 2-year
5-year
10-year
25-year
50-year
100-year
1-year
5-year
10-year
25-year
50-year
100-year
B 2-year
5-year
10-year
25-year
50-year
100-year
1-year
2-year
5-year
10-year
25-year
50-year
C 2-year
5-year
10-year
25-year
50-year
100-year
2-year
5-year
10-year
25-year
50-year
100-year
B. General. Proposed conditions rates of runoff from any regulated activity shall not
exceed the peak release rates of runoff from existing conditions for the design
storms specified on the Stormwater Management District Watershed Map
(Appendix D100) and in this section of the chapter.
C. District boundaries. The boundaries of the stormwater management districts are
shown on official maps and are available for inspection at the municipal office and
100.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 431-304 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-304
431:27
§ 431-305. Calculation methodology.
county planning offices. A copy of the map at a reduced scale, and four other maps
with zoomed-in extents, are included in Appendix D.101 The exact location of the
stormwater management district boundaries as they apply to a given development
site shall be determined by mapping the boundaries using the two-foot topographic
contours (or most accurate data required) provided as part of the SWM site plan.
D. Sites located in more than one district. For a proposed development site located
within two or more stormwater management district category subareas, the peak
discharge rate from any subarea shall meet the management district criteria for the
district in which the discharge is located.
E. Off-site areas. When calculating the allowable peak runoff rates, developers do not
have to account for runoff draining into the subject development site from an offsite
area. On-site drainage facilities shall be designed to safely convey off-site flows
through the development site.
F. Site areas. The stormwater management site area is the only area subject to the
management district criteria. Nonimpacted areas or nonregulated activities
bypassing the stormwater management facilities would not be subject to the
management district criteria.
G. Alternate criteria for redevelopment sites. For redevelopment sites, one of the
following minimum design parameters shall be accomplished, whichever is most
appropriate for the given site conditions, as determined by the Township:
(1) Meet the full requirements specified by Table 304.1 and Subsections A
through F; or
(2) Reduce the total impervious surface on the site by at least 20%, based upon a
comparison of existing impervious surface to proposed impervious surface.
A. The following criteria shall be used for runoff calculations.
(1) For development sites not considered redevelopment, the ground cover used to
determine the existing conditions runoff volume and flow rate shall be as
follows:
(a) Wooded sites shall use a ground cover of "woods in good condition." A
site is classified as wooded if a continuous canopy of trees exists over 1/4
acre.
(b) The undeveloped portion of the site, including agriculture, bare earth, and
fallow ground, shall be considered as "meadow in good condition," unless
the natural ground cover generates a lower curve number (CN) or rational
"c" value (i.e., woods) as listed in Table B-4 or B-7 in Appendix B of this
chapter.102
(2) For development and redevelopment sites, the ground cover used to determine
101.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
102.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 431-304 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 431-305
431:28
the existing conditions runoff volume and flow rate for the developed portion
of the site shall be based upon actual land cover conditions. If the developed
site contains impervious surfaces, 20% of the impervious surface area shall be
considered meadow in the model for existing conditions.
B. Stormwater runoff peak discharges from all development sites with a drainage area
equal to or greater than 200 acres shall be calculated using a generally accepted
calculation technique that is based on the NRCS Soil-Cover-Complex Method.
Table 305.1 summarizes acceptable computation methods. The method selected by
the design professional shall be based on the individual limitations and suitability
of each method for a particular site. The municipality may allow the use of the
Rational Method (Q = CIA) to estimate peak discharges from drainage areas that
contain less than 200 acres.
Q = Peak flow rate, cubic feet per second (cfs)
C = Runoff coefficient, dependent on land use/cover
I = Design rainfall intensity, inches per hour
A = Drainage area, acres.
C. All calculations consistent with this chapter using the Soil-Cover-Complex Method
shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the various return period storms
according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Atlas
14 rain data corresponding to the Doylestown rain gage, seen in Table B-1 in
Appendix B.103 The SCS Type II rainfall curve from NOAA is found on Figure B-1
in Appendix B. This data may also be directly retrieved from the NOAA Atlas 14
website: hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/orb/pa_pfds.html. If a hydrologic computer
model such as PSRM or HEC-1/HEC-HMS is used for stormwater runoff
calculations, then the duration of rainfall shall be 24 hours.
Table 305.1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater Management Plans
Method
Method Developed
By Applicability
TR-20
(or commercial computer
package based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of full
hydrology computer model is
desirable or necessary.
TR-55
(or commercial computer
package based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans within
limitations described in TR-55.
HEC-1/HEC-HMS U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers
Applicable where use of full
hydrologic computer model is
desirable or necessary.
103.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 431-305 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-305
431:29
Table 305.1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater Management Plans
Method
Method Developed
By Applicability
PSRM Penn State
University
Applicable where use of a
hydrologic computer model is
desirable or necessary; simpler
than TR-20 or HEC-1.
Rational Method
(or commercial computer
package based on
Rational Method)
Emil Kuichling
(1889)
For sites less than 200 acres, or
as approved by the municipality
and/or Municipal Engineer.
Other methods Varies Other computation
methodologies approved by the
municipality and/or Municipal
Engineer.
D. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities consistent
with appropriate times-of-concentration for overland flow and return periods from
NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 2.1. Times-of-concentration for overland flow
shall be calculated using the methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time
to time by NRCS). Times-of-concentration for channel and pipe flow shall be
computed using Manning's equation.
E. Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions to be used in
the Soil-Cover-Complex Method shall be based on Table B-4 in Appendix B.104
F. Runoff coefficients ("C") for both existing and proposed conditions for use in the
Rational Method shall be consistent with Table B-7 in Appendix B.
G. Runoff from proposed sites graded to the subsoil will not have the same runoff
conditions as the site under existing conditions because of soil compaction, even
after topsoiling or seeding. The proposed condition "CN" or "C" shall increase by
5% to better reflect proposed soil conditions.
H. The Manning equation is preferred for one-dimensional, gradually-varied, openchannel
flow. In other cases, appropriate applicable methods should be applied;
however, early coordination with the municipality is necessary.
I. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be designed to meet
the performance standards of this chapter using the generally accepted hydraulic
analysis technique or method of the municipality.
J. The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the performance
standards of this chapter shall be verified by routing the design storm hydrograph
104.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 431-305 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 431-305
431:30
§ 431-306. Other requirements.
through these facilities using the Storage-Indication Method. For drainage areas
greater than 200 acres in size, the design storm hydrograph shall be computed
using a calculation method that produces a full hydrograph. The municipality may
approve the use of any generally accepted full hydrograph approximation technique
that shall use a total runoff volume that is consistent with the volume from a method
that produces a full hydrograph.
A. Hot spots.
(1) The use of infiltration BMPs is prohibited on hot spot land use areas. Examples
of hot spots are listed in Appendix G.105
(2) Stormwater runoff from hot spot land uses shall be pretreated. In no case may
the same BMP be employed consecutively to meet this requirement. Guidance
regarding acceptable methods of pretreatment is located in Appendix G.
B. West Nile Virus guidance requirements. All wet basin designs shall incorporate
biologic controls consistent with the West Nile Guidance found in Appendix H.106
105.Editor's Note: Appendix G is included as an attachment to this chapter.
106.Editor's Note: Appendix H is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 431-305 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-306
431:31

ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
§ 431-401. General requirements.
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter, the preliminary or final approval of
subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of any building or occupancy
permit, the commencement of any earth disturbance or activity may not proceed until the
property owner or applicant or his/her agent has received written approval of a SWM site
plan from the municipality and an approval of an adequate erosion and sediment (E&S)
control plan review from the municipality or county conservation district.
§ 431-402. SWM site plan requirements.
The SWM site plan shall consist of a general description of the project, including
calculations, maps and plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the associated
computations and E&S control plan by title and date. The cover sheet of the
computations and E&S control plan shall refer to the associated maps by title and date.
All SWM site plan materials shall be submitted to the municipality in a format that is
clear, concise, legible, neat and well-organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall not
be accepted for review and shall be returned to the applicant. The following items shall
be included in the SWM site plan:
A. General.
(1) General description of the project including plan contents described in
§ 431-402B.
(2) General description of proposed SWM techniques to be used for SWM
facilities.
(3) Complete hydrologic and hydraulic computations for all SWM facilities.
(4) All reviews and letters of adequacy from the conservation district for the
erosion and sedimentation plan as required by Township, county or state
regulations.
(5) A general description of proposed nonpoint source pollution controls.
(6) The SWM site plan application and completed fee schedule form and
associated fee for all regulated activities not already paying fees under the
SALDO regulations. (Appendix C-1.107)108
(7) The SWM Site Plan Checklist. (Appendix C-2.)109
(8) Appropriate sections from the municipality's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (Chapter 440), and other applicable local ordinances,
shall be followed in preparing the SWM site plan.
107.Editor's Note: Appendix C-1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
108.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
109.Editor's Note: Appendix C-2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 431-401 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-402
431:33
B. SWM site plans shall provide the following information:
(1) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(2) A determination of natural site conditions and stormwater management needs.
This shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Site features.
[1] The location of the project relative to highways, municipal
boundaries or other identifiable landmarks.
[2] The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers,
and waterlines on site and to within 50 feet of property lines.
[3] Proposed structures, roads, paved areas and buildings.
[4] The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
[5] Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including drainage
structures, pipes, open channels, and swales. At a minimum this
should include pre-drainage and post-drainage area maps, an overall
post-construction stormwater management plan, stormwater details
sheets, and landscape plans (if proposing bioretention facilities, lowimpact
development, bioretention, or vegetative basins).
[6] The locations and minimum setback distances of existing and
proposed on-lot wastewater facilities and water supply wells.
[7] The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities.
[8] The location of proposed septic tank infiltration areas and wells in
cases where groundwater recharge measures such as seepage pits,
beds or trenches are proposed.
(b) Natural site conditions.
[1] An existing resource and site analysis map (ERSAM) showing
environmentally sensitive areas, including, but not limited to, steep
slopes, ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands, hydric soils, hydrologic soil
groups A and B, vernal pools, stream buffers, open channels,
existing recharge areas, and floodplains. The area of each of these
sensitive areas shall be calculated and should be consistent with the
runoff volume calculation in § 431-303B(3)(a).
[2] A detailed site evaluation for projects proposed in areas of frequent
flooding, karst topography, and other environmentally sensitive
areas, such as brownfields and source water protection areas.
[3] Existing and proposed contour lines (two feet).
[4] The total extent of the drainage area upstream from the site and all
downgradient receiving channels, swales and waters to which
§ 431-402 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 431-402
431:34
stormwater runoff or drainage will be discharged.
(c) Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as specified
in this chapter, or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate that the
maximum practicable measures have been taken to meet the requirements
of this chapter, including the recommendations and general requirements
in § 431-301.
(d) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality, and
peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic features and on any
existing stormwater conveyance system that may be affected by the
project.
(3) The format of the plan shall include the following:
(a) The expected project time schedule.
(b) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner of the
property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the plan.
(c) The date of submission.
(d) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50 feet; for
tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale shall be one inch equals no more than
100 feet.
(e) A North arrow.
(f) An access easement around all stormwater management facilities is
required that would provide ingress to and egress from a public right-ofway.
The size of the easement shall be commensurate with the
maintenance and access requirements determined in the design of the
BMP.
(g) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the property
boundary that would be affected by the project.
(h) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities. All facilities shall
meet the performance standards and design criteria specified in this
chapter.
(i) The following signature block for the design engineer: "I, (Design
Engineer), on this date (date of signature), hereby certify that the SWM
site plan meets all design standards and criteria of the Neshaminy Creek
Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Ordinance or Plan."
(j) A statement, signed by the applicant, acknowledging that any revision to
the approved SWM site plan must be approved by the municipality and
that a revised E&S plan must be submitted to the conservation district.
(4) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as prepared for
and submitted to the approval authority.
§ 431-402 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-402
431:35
§ 431-403. Plan submission.
The municipality requires submission of a complete SWM site plan, as specified in this
chapter.
§ 431-404. Stormwater management (SWM) site plan review.
(5) The SWM site plan shall include an operations and maintenance (O&M) plan
for all existing and proposed physical stormwater management facilities, as
well as schedules and costs for O&M activities. This plan shall address longterm
ownership and responsibilities for O&M.
A. Proof of application or documentation of required permit(s) or approvals for the
programs listed below shall be part of the plan:
(1) NPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction activities.
(2) Any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations.
B. Six copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted to the following agencies:
(1) Two copies to the municipality accompanied by the requisite municipal review
fee, as specified in this chapter.
(2) Two copies to the county conservation district.
(3) One copy to the Municipal Engineer (where applicable).
(4) One copy to the County Planning Commission/Department if the regulated
activity is also required to submit a subdivision and/or land development plan
to the County Planning Commission in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipal Planning Code.
C. Any submissions to the agencies listed above that are found to be incomplete shall
not be accepted for review and shall be returned to the applicant with a notification
in writing of the specific manner in which the submission is incomplete.
D. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the municipality or PA DEP.
A. The SWM site plan shall be reviewed by a qualified professional on behalf of the
municipality for consistency with the provisions of this chapter. After review, the
qualified professional shall provide a written recommendation for the municipality
to approve or disapprove the SWM site plan. If it is recommended to disapprove the
SWM site plan, the qualified professional shall state the reasons for the disapproval
in writing. The qualified professional also may recommend approval of the SWM
site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide the acceptable conditions for
approval in writing. The SWM site plan review and recommendations shall be
completed within the time allowed by the Municipalities Planning Code for
reviewing subdivision plans.
B. The municipality will notify the applicant in writing within 45 days whether the
SWM site plan is approved or disapproved. If the SWM site plan involves a
subdivision and land development plan, the notification period is 90 days. If a
§ 431-402 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 431-404
431:36
§ 431-405. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in SWM BMPs
or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM BMPs, or that is
necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the SWM site plan, as
determined by the municipality, shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM site
plan in accordance with this article.
§ 431-406. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions addressing the
municipality's concerns, to the municipality in accordance with this article. The
applicable review fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 431-407. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
The municipality's approval of an SWM site plan authorizes the regulated activities
contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity of five years following
the date of approval. The municipality may specify a term of validity shorter than five
years in the approval for any specific SWM site plan. Terms of validity shall commence
on the date the municipality signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If an approved
SWM site plan is not completed according to § 431-407 within the term of validity, the
municipality may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke any and all
permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by the municipality shall be
resubmitted in accordance with § 431-406 of this chapter.
longer notification period is provided by other statute, regulation or ordinance, the
applicant will be so notified by the municipality. If the municipality disapproves the
SWM site plan, the municipality shall cite the reasons for disapproval in writing.
§ 431-404 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-407
431:37

ARTICLE V
Inspections
§ 431-501. Inspections.
A. The municipality shall inspect all phases of the installation of the best management
practices (BMPs) and/or stormwater management (SWM) facilities as deemed
appropriate by the municipality.
B. During any stage of the work, if the municipality determines that the BMPs and/or
stormwater management facilities are not being installed in accordance with the
approved SWM site plan, the municipality shall revoke any existing permits or
other approvals and issue a cease and desist order until a revised SWM site plan is
submitted and approved, as specified in this chapter, and until the deficiencies are
corrected.
C. A final inspection of all BMPs and/or stormwater management facilities may be
conducted by the municipality to confirm compliance with the approved SWM site
plan prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit.
D. The applicant and/or developer shall be responsible for providing as-built plans of
all SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The as-built plans and an
explanation of any discrepancies, which were reviewed and received approval by
the municipality, shall be submitted to the municipality.
E. The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion signed by a
qualified professional verifying that all SWM BMPs have been constructed
according to the approved plans and specifications. If any qualified professionals
contributed to the construction plans, they must sign and seal the completion
certificate.
§ 431-501 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-501
431:39

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 431-601. Municipal stormwater management (SWM) site plan review and
inspection fee.110
Fees shall be established by the municipality to cover plan review and construction
inspection costs incurred by the municipality. All fees shall be paid by the applicant
at the time of SWM site plan submission. A review and inspection fee schedule shall
be established by resolution of the municipal governing body based on the size of the
regulated activity and based on the municipality's costs for reviewing SWM site plans
and conducting inspections pursuant to § 431-501. The municipality shall periodically
update the review and inspection fee schedule to ensure that review costs are adequately
reimbursed.
§ 431-602. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter (unless otherwise waived by the municipality) shall, at
a minimum, cover:
A. Administrative costs.
B. The review of the stormwater (SWM) site plan by the municipality.
C. The review of as-built drawings.
D. The site inspections.
E. The inspection of SWM facilities and drainage improvements during construction.
F. The final inspection at the completion of the construction of the SWM facilities and
drainage improvements presented in the SWM site plan.
G. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions regulated by this
chapter, correct violations, and assure proper completion of stipulated remedial
actions.
110.Editor's Note: Township fee schedules are on file in the Township Municipal Building and available to be viewed on the
Township's website at www.middletownbucks.org.
§ 431-601 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-602
431:41

ARTICLE VII
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 431-701. Performance guarantee.
§ 431-702. Responsibilities for operations and maintenance (O&M) of stormwater
facilities and BMPs.
A. For subdivisions and land developments, the applicant shall provide a financial
guarantee to the municipality for the timely installation and proper construction of
all stormwater management (SWM) facilities as:
(1) Required by the approved SWM site plan, equal to or greater than the full
construction cost of the required controls; or
(2) The amount and method of payment provided for in Chapter 440, Subdivision
and land Development, of this Code.
B. For other regulated activities, the municipality shall require a financial guarantee
from the applicant.
A. The owner of any land upon which stormwater facilities and BMPs will be placed,
constructed or implemented, as described in the stormwater facility and BMP O&M
plan, shall record the following documents in the office of the Recorder of Deeds
for Bucks County, within 90 days of approval of the stormwater facility and BMP
O&M plan by the municipality:111
(1) The O&M plan, or a summary thereof;
(2) O&M agreements under § 431-704; and
(3) Easements under § 431-705.
B. The municipality may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the project site
upon discovery of failure on the part of the owner to comply with this section.
C. The following items shall be included in the stormwater facility and BMP O&M
plan:
(1) Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the requirements for recording
at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Bucks County, and shall be
submitted on sheets no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches. The contents of the
map(s) shall include, but not be limited to:112
(a) Clear identification of the location and nature of stormwater facilities and
BMPs.
(b) The location of the project site relative to highways, municipal
boundaries or other identifiable landmarks.
(c) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet, or others as
111.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
112.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 431-701 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-702
431:43
appropriate.
(d) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within the project
site area.
(e) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries, sinkholes,
streams, existing drainagecourses, and areas of natural vegetation to be
preserved.
(f) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers and
waterlines on site and within 50 feet of property lines of the project site.
(g) Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative cover,
including the type and amount of impervious area that would be added.
(h) Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
(i) A twenty-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater facilities and
BMPs that would provide ingress to and egress from a public right-ofway.
(2) A description of how each stormwater facility and BMP will be operated and
maintained, and the identity and contact information associated with the
person(s) responsible for O&M.
(3) The name of the project site, the name and address of the owner of the
property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the plan.
(4) A statement, signed by the facility owner, acknowledging that the stormwater
facilities and BMPs are fixtures that can be altered or removed only after
approval by the municipality.
D. The stormwater facility and BMP O&M plan for the project site shall establish
responsibilities for the continuing O&M of all stormwater facilities and BMPs, as
follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately owned and in
which streets, sewers and other public improvements are to be dedicated to the
municipality, stormwater facilities and BMPs may also be offered for
dedication to and maintained by the municipality.
(2) If a plan includes O&M by single ownership, or if sewers and other public
improvements are to be privately owned and maintained, the O&M of
stormwater facilities and BMPs shall be the responsibility of the owner or
private management entity.
E. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing O&M
responsibilities. The municipality reserves the right to accept or reject the O&M
responsibility for any or all of the stormwater facilities and BMPs.
F. Facilities, areas or structures used as BMPs shall be enumerated as permanent real
estate appurtenances and recorded as deed restrictions or conservation easements
that run with the land.
§ 431-702 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 431-702
431:44
§ 431-703. Municipal review of stormwater facilities and BMP operations and
maintenance plan.
§ 431-704. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately owned
stormwater facilities and BMPs.
§ 431-705. Stormwater management easements.
G. The O&M plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that runs with the
land.
H. The municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for any failure to
satisfy the provisions of this article and this chapter.
A. The municipality shall review the stormwater facilities and BMP O&M plan for
consistency with the purposes and requirements of this chapter and any permits
issued by PA DEP.
B. The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing whether the stormwater
facility and BMP O&M plan is approved.
C. The municipality shall require a record drawing of all stormwater facilities and
BMPs.
A. The owner shall sign an O&M agreement with the municipality covering all
stormwater facilities and BMPs that are to be privately owned. The O&M
agreement shall be transferred with transfer of ownership. The agreement shall be
substantially the same as the agreement in Appendix A.113
B. Other items may be included in the O&M agreement where determined necessary
to guarantee the satisfactory O&M of all stormwater controls and BMPs. The O&M
agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of the municipality.
C. The owner is responsible for the O&M of the SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to
adhere to the O&M agreement, the municipality may perform the services required
and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien
against the property.
A. The owner must obtain all necessary real estate rights to install, operate and
maintain all stormwater facilities in the SWM site plan.
B. The owner must provide the municipal easements or other appropriate real estate
rights to perform inspections and maintenance for the preservation of stormwater
runoff conveyance, infiltration and detention areas.
113.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 431-702 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-705
431:45

ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 431-801. Prohibited discharges.
§ 431-802. Roof drains.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative BMPs and, to
the maximum extent practicable, satisfy the criteria for disconnected impervious areas
(DIAs).
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows any
nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water
to enter the waters of the commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow or cause to allow discharges into surface waters of this
commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except: 1) as
provided in Subsection C below; and 2) discharges allowed under a state or federal
permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to be
significant contributors to pollution to the waters of the commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities;
(2) Potable water sources, including waterline flushing;
(3) Irrigation drainage;
(4) Air-conditioning condensate;
(5) Springs;
(6) Water from crawl space pumps;
(7) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(8) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains;
(9) Lawn watering;
(10) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges [per Department of Environmental
Protection (PA DEP) requirements];
(11) Uncontaminated groundwater;
(12) Water from individual residential car washing; and/or
(13) Routine external building washdown (which does not use detergents or other
compounds).
D. In the event that the municipality or PA DEP determines that any of the discharges
identified in Subsection C significantly contribute to pollution of the waters of this
commonwealth, the municipality or PA DEP will notify the responsible person(s)
to cease the discharge.
§ 431-801 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-803
431:47
§ 431-803. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any stormwater
management (SWM) best management practices (BMPs) facilities, areas or
structures unless it is part of an approved maintenance program, and written
approval of the municipality has been obtained.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into a
stormwater facility or BMP or within a drainage easement which would limit or
alter the functioning of the stormwater facility or BMP, without the written
approval of the municipality.
§ 431-803 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 431-803
431:48
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 431-901. Right of entry.
§ 431-902. Inspection.
Stormwater management (SWM) best management practices (BMPs) should be
inspected for proper operation by the landowner or the owner's designee (including
the municipality for dedicated and owned facilities), according to the following list of
minimum frequencies:
§ 431-903. Enforcement.
All inspections regarding compliance with the stormwater management (SWM) site plan
and this chapter shall be the responsibility of the municipality.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of the
municipality may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the
municipality to inspect the implementation, condition or operation and maintenance
of the stormwater facilities or best management practices (BMPs) in regard to any
aspect governed by this chapter.
B. Landowners with stormwater facilities and BMPs on their property shall allow
persons working on behalf of the municipality ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to temporarily
locate on any stormwater facility or BMP in the municipality such devices as are
necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges from such
stormwater facilities or BMP.
A. Annually for the first five years;
B. Once every three years thereafter;
C. During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater storm; and/or
D. As specified in the operations and maintenance (O&M) agreement.
A. Whenever the municipality finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed
to meet a requirement of this chapter, the municipality may order compliance by
written notice to the responsible person. Such notice may, without limitation,
require the following remedies:
(1) Performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
(2) Elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices or operations;
(4) Abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards
and the restoration of any affected property;
§ 431-901 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-903
431:49
§ 431-904. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
§ 431-905. Violations and penalties.
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) Implementation of stormwater facilities and best management practices
(BMPs); and
(7) Operation and maintenance (O&M) of stormwater facilities and BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time
limit for correction of these violation(s). Said notice may further advise that, if
applicable, should the violator fail to take the required action within the established
deadline, the work will be done by the municipality and the expense may be
charged to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified may subject a violator to the penalty
provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall
not prevent the municipality from pursuing any and all other remedies available in
law or equity.
A. Any building, land development or other permit or approval issued by the
municipality may be suspended or revoked, in whole or in part, by the municipality,
for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the permit;
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter; or
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during construction
or development which constitutes or creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution or
which endangers the life, health or property of others.
B. A suspended permit may be reinstated by the municipality, when:
(1) The municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the stormwater
facilities and BMPs or the elimination of the hazard or nuisance; and
(2) The municipality is satisfied that all applicable violations in this chapter have
been corrected.
C. Any permit or approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under the procedures outlined
in this chapter.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to penalties that
may range from liens against the property to fines for each violation, recoverable
with costs. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense,
and the applicable fines are cumulative.
B. In addition, the municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus or any other
appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this
chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining
§ 431-903 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 431-905
431:50
§ 431-906. Appeals.
orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms
of remedy or relief.
A. As per the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), Section 909.1(9),
any person aggrieved by any action pursuant to this chapter may appeal to the
municipality's Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Township's Board of Supervisors
relevant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the County Court of
Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place within 30 days of
the municipal decision.
§ 431-905 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NESHAMINY § 431-906
431:51

Chapter 436
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 363.
Shade trees — See Ch. 462.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 440.
Telecommunications franchises — See Ch. 453.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 470.
Zoning — See Ch. 500.
§ 431-906 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 431-906
436:1

ARTICLE I
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. 78-22 (Ch. 21, Part 2, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 436-101. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
FOOTPATH — A footpath is that portion of any parcel of real estate outside of the
cartway but within the right-of-way or future right-of-way which is not paved and is
customarily used by pedestrians in the regular course of travel over the parcel.
PARTY IN CONTROL — The party in control of a parcel of real estate shall be the
tenant or occupant of said real estate; or in case the real estate is unoccupied, the party
in control shall be the owner of said real estate.
SIDEWALK — A sidewalk is the hard or paved portion of any parcel of real estate
which is customarily used by pedestrians in the regular course of travel over the parcel.
§ 436-102. Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks, footpaths and/or drainage
facilities.
Within 24 hours after each fall of snow or sleet, or within 24 hours after ice has
formed on any sidewalk, footpath and/or drainage facility situate in the Township of
Middletown, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, it shall be the duty of the party in control of
the real estate on which such sidewalk, footpath and/or drainage facility is located to
clear and remove all such ice, snow or sleet from the aforesaid sidewalk, footpath and/
or drainage facility in front of and around the aforesaid real estate and to keep said area
clear.
§ 436-103. Minimum requirements.
The party in control shall clear said sidewalk or footpath to a minimum width of 36
inches regardless of the width of the sidewalk or footpath. In clearing a sidewalk, all ice,
snow and sleet shall be removed to the surface of the sidewalk. In clearing a footpath, it
is sufficient if all ice, snow and sleet is removed so as to cause the path to be no more
than two inches from the ground surface.
§ 436-104. Disposal of snow.
All snow, ice and sleet removed from a parcel of real estate shall not be deposited in the
street.
§ 436-105. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13;
6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section of this article
§ 436-101 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 436-105
436:3
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 436-106. Continuing offenses.
In the event that any such person or persons shall not remove such ice, snow and sleet
from the aforesaid sidewalks, footpaths and/or gutters, every day that the same shall
remain on such sidewalks and/or gutters shall constitute a separate offense, punishable
by like fine or penalty, and such occasion on which such ice, snow or sleet is deposited
in the street shall constitute a separate offense punishable by like fine or penalty.
§ 436-107. Election to pay fine.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article after issuance of a notice of
violation by the Board of Supervisors or its authorized agent setting forth the amount of
the fine as hereinbefore provided may, within five days, at his election, plead guilty to
the violation by signing such notice and paying said fine without costs of prosecution at
the Township office in lieu of a hearing before the Magisterial District Judge.
§ 436-108. Removal by Township; lien. [Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06;
12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
In any case where the owner, occupant or person having possession of or the control over
any such lot or parcel of real estate shall be unknown or shall not reside within the limits
of the Township of Middletown aforesaid, it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to
notify the Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of the location of such lot or lots, and
thereupon the said Board of Supervisors shall cause the ice, snow or sleet to be removed
from the sidewalks and/or gutters of such lot or parcel of real estate without delay, and
the cost thereof shall be referred to the Township Solicitor, who shall enter a municipal
lien against such real estate in such manner and at such time as municipal liens are, in
such cases, made and filed, and such municipal lien, when so filed, shall be a valid lien
upon such real estate.
§ 436-109. Effect on other provisions.
Whenever the requirements of this article are in conflict with other requirements of the
ordinances of the Township, the most restrictive or those imposing the higher standards
shall govern.
§ 436-105 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 436-109
436:4
ARTICLE II
Street Excavations
[Adopted 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13 (Ch. 21, Part 1, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 436-201. Definitions and interpretation.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates otherwise:
EXCAVATION — Any activity within the right-of-way of any street, alley or cartway
which involves cutting, breaking or disturbing the surface thereof. In this article, the term
"opening" shall have essentially the same meaning as "excavation."
PERSON—Any natural person, partnership, firm, association, corporation or municipal
authority. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter.
STREET—Any public street, avenue, road, square, alley, highway or other public place
located in the Township of Middletown and established for the use of vehicles, but shall
not include state highways.
§ 436-202. Permit required to make opening or excavation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to make any excavation of any kind in any
of the streets in the Township of Middletown without first securing a permit therefor, as
hereinafter provided.
§ 436-203. Application for permit.
Any person who shall desire to make any opening or excavation in any of the streets
in the Township of Middletown shall make application to the Director of Public Works
in writing for that purpose. Such application shall be made upon blanks to be furnished
by the Township of Middletown and shall set forth the name of the applicant, the exact
location of the proposed opening or excavation, and the approximate size or depth
thereof, and shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that the work shall be
done in full compliance with the ordinances of the Township of Middletown and the laws
of the commonwealth in relation thereto, and that the applicant shall well and truly save,
defend and keep harmless the Township of Middletown from and indemnify it against
any and all actions, suits, demands, payments, costs and charges for or by reason of the
proposed opening or excavation, and all damages to persons or property resulting in any
manner therefrom or occurring in the prosecution of the work connected therewith, or
from any other matter, cause or thing relating thereto.
§ 436-204. Permit fee.114
Before any permit shall be issued to open or excavate any street in the Township of
Middletown, the applicant shall pay a permit fee in the amount fixed according to a
schedule established pursuant to resolution. When application shall be made to open
or excavate any longitudinal opening or excavation in excess of 10 feet, before any
114.Editor's Note: Township fee schedules are on file in the Township Municipal Building and available to be viewed on the
Township's website at www.middletownbucks.org.
§ 436-201 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 436-204
436:5
permit shall be issued so to open or excavate, the applicant shall pay, in addition to such
minimum fee, an additional fee at the rate for each 100 feet or fraction thereof to be
opened or excavated upon such street, pursuant to the fee schedule.
§ 436-205. Issuance of permits restricted.
Permits shall be issued only to persons furnishing public utility services or the owner or
owners of the real property adjoining the location where such opening or excavation is
to be made.
§ 436-206. Information contained on permit.
Any permit issued hereunder shall specify the exact location where the opening or
excavation is to be made, the approximate permitted size or depth thereof, and the time
within which the work for which the permit is granted is to be completed.
§ 436-207. Permit approval.
A permit may be issued to the applicant after all the requirements therefor have been
filled. If the application is disapproved, written notice of disapproval, together with
reasons therefor, shall be given to the applicant.
§ 436-208. Responsibility to contact utilities.
The work authorized by the permit is subject to all the provisions of the Act of December
10, 1974, P.L. 852, No. 287, 73 P.S. § 176 et seq., as amended or supplemented from
time to time. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to contact the utilities that have
recorded their facilities in compliance with said Act. A partial list of utilities providing
services in the Township of Middletown and their office addresses may be obtained from
the County Recorder of Deeds.
§ 436-209. Refilling of opening or excavation; restoration of surface;
responsibility for defects occurring within two years.
Any person who shall open or excavate any street in the Township of Middletown
shall thoroughly and completely refill the opening or excavation in such a manner as
to prevent any settling thereafter, and shall restore the surface to the same condition
as it was before the opening or excavation, and such restoration shall be in accordance
with the specifications of the Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, which are hereby adopted as specifications of the Township of
Middletown for restoration of surfaces of streets in the Township of Middletown. As
restored, the surface shall conform to the proper grade and be of the same surface
covering as the part of the thoroughfare immediately adjoining the opening. If within two
years after the restoration of the surface, as herein provided, defects shall appear therein
resulting from defective backfilling by the applicant, the applicant shall reimburse the
Township of Middletown for the cost of all necessary repairs to the permanent paving.
§ 436-210. Responsibility of permit holder for certain work; right of Township to
do certain work; charges.
All other work in connection with openings in any street, including excavation,
§ 436-204 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 436-210
436:6
protection, refilling and temporary paving, shall be done by or for the person to whom or
which the permit has been issued, at his or its expense, and all such work shall be subject
to the provisions of this article and to the supervision and approval of the designated
official, provided that the Director of Public Works may, if he deems it necessary to
the proper performance of the work, require that cutting of the surface of streets and
the backfilling of all excavations therein shall be done by the Township of Middletown,
in which event the applicant shall pay the actual cost of the work performed by the
Township of Middletown.
§ 436-211. Requirements for work; correction of unsatisfactory work; completion
of incomplete work.
A. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from the curbline into the
highway a distance greater than one foot beyond the center line of the street before
being refilled and the surface of the highway restored to a condition safe and
convenient for travel.
B. No more than 500 feet longitudinally shall be opened in any street at any one time.
C. The work of excavation shall be so conducted as not to interfere with the water
mains, sewers or their connections with the houses, or any other subsurface lines or
constructions, until permission of the proper authorities in connection with such
subsurface lines or constructions shall have been obtained.
D. No tunneling shall be allowed without the express approval of the Township of
Middletown and permission therefor endorsed upon the permit. The backfilling of
a tunnel excavation shall be made only in the presence of the Director of Public
Works or an inspector designated by him and shall be done only in a method
approved by him.
E. All openings or excavations shall be backfilled promptly with modified 2A stones
and thoroughly compacted in layers, each of which layers shall not exceed eight
inches in depth. Backfilling shall be placed to within 10 inches of the surface.
F. A temporary paving of coldpatch premix, thoroughly bound and compacted, shall
be installed flush with the surface of the adjoining paving and maintained for a
period of 90 days.
G. On concrete base streets, such base shall be replaced with concrete, and the
minimum size of the opening or excavation shall be 16 square feet.
H. During the making of any excavation in the street, every necessary and reasonable
precaution shall be taken by the applicant and the parties making the same to keep
the street in a safe and passable condition both day and night by guards, barriers,
lanterns and other devices, and all excavating permits granted hereunder are granted
under and subject to the express condition that the person to whom the same is
issued shall indemnify, save and keep harmless the Township of Middletown from
any loss in damages, or otherwise whatsoever, which may or shall be occasioned at
any time by the said excavation or by any leak, explosion or other injury from any
pipe, apparatus, conduit or any other matter placed in the said excavation.
I. The applicant shall notify the Director of Public Works when the opening or
§ 436-210 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 436-211
436:7
§ 436-212. Emergency openings.
In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface pipe, line,
construction or apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person owning or responsible for
such pipe, line, construction or apparatus to commence an excavation to remedy such
condition before securing a permit, provided that application for a permit shall be
made immediately and not later than the next business day thereafter and that all other
provisions of this article are fully complied with. If any such emergency condition shall
not be immediately attended to by the owner or person responsible for such pipe, line,
construction or apparatus, the Director of Public Works, after such notice as he shall
deem necessary under the circumstances of the particular case, shall proceed to do the
work necessary and required by such emergency and charge the same on the basis of cost
plus 20% to such owner or person.
§ 436-213. Restrictions regarding trees and shrubbery.
The permission herein granted does not confer upon the permittee or its contractors the
right to cut, remove or destroy trees or shrubbery within the legal right-of-way except
under specifications, regulations and conditions as the Township of Middletown may
prescribe.
§ 436-214. Work necessitating opening or excavation to be done prior to street
improvement and not until five years thereafter; exception.
The Director of Public Works shall give timely notice to all persons owning property
abutting on any street within the Township of Middletown about to be paved or
improved and to all public utility companies operating in the Township of Middletown,
and all such persons and utility companies shall make all water, gas or sewer
connections, as well as any repairs thereto which would necessitate excavation of said
street, within 30 days from the giving of such notice, unless such time is extended in
writing for cause shown by the Director of Public Works. New paving shall not be
opened or excavated for a period of five years after the completion thereof, except in
case of emergency, the existence of which emergency and the necessity for the opening
or excavating of such paving to be determined by the Director of Public Works. If it is
sought to excavate upon or open a sewer within five years after the completion of the
paving, the applicant shall make written application to the Board of Supervisors, and
a permit for such opening shall be issued only after express approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
excavation is ready for backfilling before any backfilling is done, when backfilling
work is completed, when the temporary paving has been installed and when the
street has been permanently restored so that inspections may be made.
J. In the event that any work performed by or for a permit holder shall, in the opinion
of the Director of Public Works, be unsatisfactory and the same shall not be
corrected in accordance with his instructions within the time fixed by him, or in the
event that the work for which the permit was granted is not completed within the
time fixed by the Director of Public Works, the Township of Middletown may
proceed to correct such unsatisfactory work or complete any such work not
completed and charge the cost thereof, plus 20%, to the applicant.
§ 436-211 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 436-215
436:8
§ 436-215. Permittee responsibilities for future relocation of work.
If at any time in the future the roadway is widened, reconstructed or the alignment or
grades are changed, the permittee further agrees to change or relocate all or any part
of the structures covered by this permit which interfere with the improvement of the
roadway at its own cost and expense.
§ 436-216. Conditions for laying and extending utility lines.
No new water, sewer, steam or gas main or electric, telephone or other utility line shall
hereafter be laid or constructed, and no such existing main or line shall be extended, in
any of the streets of the Township of Middletown until the plan therefor shall have been
first filed with the Director of Public Works and such plan, and the exact location of
such main or line, approved by him. The Director of Public Works shall not approve the
locating of any such main or line at a depth of less than 30 inches from the surface of
the street unless he shall be convinced that locating the same at a depth of more than 30
inches from the surface is impossible or impractical.
§ 436-217. Bond required.
No company, corporation or association shall dig up any street or alley without first
giving to the Township of Middletown a bond with some acceptable trust or surety
company as surety, in the sum determined by the schedule of fees, conditioned for
the faithful performance of these provisions and also for any and all damages, claims,
demands, suits, costs and counsel fees occasioned or arising from the digging up,
opening or closing of said streets and alleys.
§ 436-218. Payment for work done by Township.
Payment for all work done by the Township of Middletown under the provisions hereof
shall be made by the person made liable therefor under the provisions hereof within
30 days after a bill therefor is sent to such person by the Township of Middletown.
Upon failure to pay such charges within such time, the same shall be collectible by the
Township of Middletown by an action in assumpsit or in the manner provided by law for
the collection of municipal claims.
§ 436-219. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section of this article
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 436-220. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to laying sidewalks or curbs.
§ 436-215 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 436-220
436:9

ARTICLE III
Curb Cuts and/or Driveway Construction Permits
[Adopted 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13 (Ch. 21, Part 3, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 436-301. Width of driveways.
All private driveways hereafter constructed across any pavement shall be of a width not
less than eight feet and the curb shall be curved back to the street edge of the footwalk
on a radius of 1 1/2 feet.
§ 436-302. Permit required.
Before any private driveway may be constructed across a sidewalk and before any
curb cut may be made, a permit shall be obtained from the Township of Middletown.
All driveways shall be laid according to specifications furnished by the Township of
Middletown at the time the permit is granted.
§ 436-303. Fee.
The fee for a driveway or curb cut permit shall be fixed pursuant to a resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 436-304. Sidewalk not to be disturbed.
All paved portions of the sidewalk must not be disturbed, and the height and grade of
same must remain the same as before the driveway was constructed. The balance of
the pavement shall remain the same height and grade as before the construction of the
driveway.
§ 436-305. Rectification of improper work.
In case any person shall construct a driveway or a curb cut and shall not conform to
the requirements of this article, the Board of Supervisors may order such person, firm
or corporation to remove the improper work and replace the same in compliance with
this article. Notice to remove and replace improper work shall be given by registered
or certified mail, and shall state that the person, firm or corporation shall have 10 days
from receipt of the notice to comply therewith. Upon noncompliance, the Township of
Middletown may do or cause the requested repairs to be done and may levy the cost of
its work on such owner as a property lien to be collected in any manner provided by law.
§ 436-306. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article or who
shall fail to obtain a permit before constructing a private driveway or making a curb cut,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the
manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules
of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus
costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section of this
article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 436-301 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 436-306
436:11

ARTICLE IV
Throwing Objects in Public Thoroughfares
[Adopted 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13 (Ch. 6, Part 3, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 436-401. Prohibited acts. [Amended 4-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-03]
No person shall intentionally throw, kick, shoot, drop or cause to be propelled in any
manner any solid object from any location adjacent to or upon any street or roadway
within the Township and into or onto any motor vehicle or similar instrumentality of
transportation located on such street or roadway.
§ 436-402. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section of this article
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 436-401 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 436-402
436:13

ARTICLE V
Curb and Sidewalk Maintenance
[Adopted 3-30-1993 by Ord. No. 93-04 (Ch. 21, Part 4, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 436-501. Definitions.
The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section, except in those instances where the context clearly and unequivocably
indicates otherwise:
DETERIORATED CURBS AND SIDEWALKS — Curbs and sidewalks which have
cracks, breaks or missing pieces, are heaving or settling, have an unacceptable wearing
course or do not conform to the established line and grade.
DRIVEWAY APRON—That portion of the driveway extending from the point of curb
depression at the road line to the sidewalk.
GOOD CONDITION — Conforms to the established line and grade, free from cracks,
breaks or missing pieces, and having an acceptable wearing course.
PROPERTY OWNER — Any person, group of persons or legal entity which has legal
title to a property located in the Township of Middletown.
TOWNSHIP — Township of Middletown, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 436-502. Duty of property owner to maintain curbs, sidewalks and driveway
aprons. [Amended 5-17-1994 by Ord. No. 94-07]
The owners of all properties located in the Township of Middletown shall maintain,
repair and keep in good condition all curbs, sidewalks and driveway aprons extending
on or along the side or sides of their property bordering on public roads or rights-ofway
owned by the Township of Middletown or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for
the full length and distance of their property's frontage on such road or right-of-way.
It is specifically provided that the fact that such curb, sidewalk or driveway apron may
be located within the public right-of-way shall not exonerate the owner of private land
bordering on such right-of-way from his/her duty to maintain such improvements.
§ 436-503. State roads and highways.
In the event that any deteriorated curb, sidewalk, driveway apron or portion thereof, in
need of repair or replacement borders or is adjacent to a road or highway owned by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Township shall comply with all state regulations
and requirements that may be applicable prior to the enforcement of this article.
§ 436-504. Enforcement.
If the Township determines that a deteriorated curb, sidewalk or driveway apron, or any
portion thereof, needs repair or replacement because it constitutes, in the opinion of the
responsible Township officer, a danger or a hazard to pedestrians or otherwise a threat
to the public safety, the Township shall notify the property owner by certified mail to
repair or replace any deteriorated curbs, sidewalks or driveway aprons within 60 days of
receipt of said letter.
§ 436-501 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 436-505
436:15
§ 436-505. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-17-1994 by Ord. No. 94-07;
6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article or
property owner who fails to repair or replace deteriorated curbs, sidewalks or driveway
aprons within 60 days after receiving notice from the Township to do so, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 plus costs
for the first violation. Unless the owner shall pay said fine and costs and come into
compliance with this article within 30 days after conviction of the first violation, he shall
be subject to an additional fine of not less than $250 plus costs without further notice
from the Township. After conviction of the second violation, the owner shall have a
final period of 30 days to pay the fine or fines and costs and to come into compliance
or be subject to an additional fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each
day that a violation of this article continues or each section of this article which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 436-506. Annual road replacement.
This article shall not replace the procedure or requirements used by the Township in its
annual road replacement program.
§ 436-505 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 436-506
436:16
ARTICLE VI
Right-of-Way Encroachment
[Adopted 1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 99-01 (Ch. 21, Part 5, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 436-601. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
RIGHT-OF-WAY—The land set aside for use as a street, alley or other means of travel,
including that deemed necessary to provide adequate width for future improvements.
§ 436-602. Restrictions regarding rights-of-way.
§ 436-603. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation to establish
gardens, place plantings or trees, or to place, erect or build or cause to be placed,
erected or built any fixed or portable sports equipment, including but not limited to
basketball and/or hockey nets, play equipment, other structures, objects or materials
of any kind, on public grounds, rights-of-way, sidewalks or other public areas.
B. Property owners adjacent to a right-of-way shall have the responsibility for
maintenance and repair of the paved and unpaved areas within said right-of-way,
including curbs and sidewalks.
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
this article shall, for each and every such violation, upon conviction thereof before
any Magisterial District Judge, be subject to a fine or penalty not in excess of $300
for each and every such offense.
B. The proceedings for the recovery of such fine or penalty for the violations of the
provisions of this article may be commenced either by warrant or summons at the
discretion of the Magisterial District Judge before whom the proceedings are
commenced, and all and every such fine or penalty so recovered shall be paid to the
Treasurer of the Township of Middletown for the use of the said Township, and
upon judgement being rendered against any such person by summary conviction or
by proceedings by summons, on default of the payment of such fine or penalty
imposed and the costs, may be sentenced to imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
C. The imposition of one fine or penalty for any violation of this article shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such person or persons, firm or
corporation shall be required to remedy such violation forthwith after notice to do
so; each day that the prohibited condition is maintained shall constitute a separate
offense.
D. The Township, after effectuating the appropriate notice to any person or persons,
firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article requiring removal of said
encroachment within 10 days of the notice, and said person, firm or corporation's
failure to remove said encroachment within 10 days, is authorized to remove the
encroachment and collect the cost of removal together with the penalties imposed
by this article or under the law for collection of municipal liens. [Added 10-7-2003
§ 436-601 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 436-603
436:17
by Ord. No. 03-20]
§ 436-603 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 436-603
436:18
ARTICLE VII
Rights-of-Way Management
[Adopted 8-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-05115]
§ 436-701. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Middletown Township Rights-of-Way Management
Ordinance."
§ 436-702. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and abbreviations
shall have the meanings ascribed to them below. When not inconsistent with the context,
words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number
include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number:
AFFILIATE — A person:
CABLE SERVICE — The same meaning as used in the Communications Act.
COMMUNICATIONS ACT—The Communications Act of 1934, as amended as of the
time of enactment of this article.
EQUIPMENT — Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain a facility in the
public way.
EXEMPT — A service which is provided to residences or a person conducting business
within the service area but which is exempt from the provisions of this article under
§ 436-704B of this article.
FACILITY — Any tangible asset in the public way used or required to provide a
nonexempt service to residences or businesses within the service area.
GRANTEE — A person who enjoys a nonexclusive privilege to occupy or use a
public way to provide nonexempt service under this article and who is in continuous
compliance with this article.
GROSS REVENUE — All gross revenue of grantee or any affiliate of grantee derived
With a direct or indirect ownership interest in the subject entity of 5% or more
or which controls such interest, including forms of ownership such as general,
limited, or other partnership interests, direct ownership interests, limited liability
companies and other forms of business organizations and entities, but not including
corporations;
A.
With a stock interest in the subject entity where the subject entity is a corporation
and such stockholder or its nominee is an officer or director of the grantee or who
directly or indirectly owns or controls 5% or more of the outstanding stock, whether
voting or nonvoting; or
B.
Which controls grantee and/or is controlled by or is under common control with
such person or entity.
C.
115.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. VII, Rights-of-Way Management, adopted 2-14-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-03.
§ 436-701 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 436-702
436:19
from the use or occupancy of public ways for the provision of nonexempt services to
persons having a residence or to persons conducting business in the service area. Gross
revenue shall include amounts earned, regardless of:
NONEXEMPT — A service which is provided to residences or a person conducting
business within the service area, but which service is not exempt from the provisions of
this article under § 436-704B of this article.
PERSON —
PUBLIC UTILITY CORPORATION — Shall have the same meaning as ascribed in
Title 15 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes.
PUBLIC WAY — The surface of, and the space above and below, any public street,
unopened right-of-way, highway, turnpike, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard,
sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle, or other public right-of-way held
by the Township in the service area. "Public way" shall also mean any easement now or
hereafter held by the Township within the service area for the purpose of public travel
and/or for utility and/or public service use dedicated for compatible uses.
SERVICE AREA — The present municipal boundaries of the Township and shall
include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middletown, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee thereof
§ 436-703. Registration.
Each person, other than on a transitory basis, which occupies or uses or seeks to
occupy or use a public way to provide a nonexempt service to residences or to a person
Whether the amounts are paid in cash, in trade, or by means of some other benefit
to grantee or its affiliates;
A.
Whether the services with which the revenue is associated are provided at cost or
the revenue amount can be matched against an equivalent expenditure; and/or
B.
How the amounts are initially recorded by grantee or its affiliates. Gross revenue
shall not be a net of:
Expense, including but not limited to any operating expense; capital expense;
sales expense; or commission;
(1)
(2) Any accrual, including, without limitation, any accrual for commissions; or
Any other expenditure, regardless of whether such expense, deduction,
accrual, or expenditure reflects a cash payment.
(3)
C.
Any natural person, sole proprietorship, partnership, association, limited liability
company, corporation or other form of organization authorized to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; and
A.
Provides or seeks to provide one or more nonexempt services to residences or a
person conducting business within the service area. A governmental entity or a
municipal authority is not a "person."
B.
§ 436-702 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 436-703
436:20
conducting business within the service area, or places any equipment or facility in a
public way other than on a transitory basis, including persons with installation and
maintenance responsibilities by lease, sublease or assignment, to provide a nonexempt
service to residences or to a person conducting business within the service area must
register with the Township. Registration is accomplished by filing with the Township a
completed provider certification in the form shown at Appendix A to this article.116
§ 436-704. Grant; exemptions.
A. Grant. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, repair, remove, relocate or
perform any work on or use any facilities or any part thereof in a public way unless
in compliance with this article. Continuous compliance with this article grants to
grantee a nonexclusive privilege to construct, repair, remove, relocate or perform
any work on or use any facilities or any part thereof in the public ways within the
service area and to occupy or use the public ways for the purpose of providing
nonexempt service to residences or a person conducting business within the service
area.
B. Exemptions. This article shall not apply to occupation or use of the public ways by
a public utility corporation to provide:
(1) The transportation of passengers or property or both as a common carrier by
means of elevated street railway, inclined plane railway, railroad, street
railway or underground street railway, trackless-trolley omnibus or by any
combination of such means.
(2) The transportation of artificial or natural gas, electricity, petroleum or
petroleum products or water or any combination of such substances for the
public.
(3) The production, generation, manufacture, transmission, storage, distribution or
furnishing of natural or artificial gas, electricity, steam, air-conditioning or
refrigerating service, or any combination thereof, to or for the public.
(4) The diverting, developing, pumping, impounding, distributing or furnishing of
water from either surface or subsurface sources to or for the public.
(5) The collection, treatment or disposal of sewage for the public.
(6) The conveyance or transmission of messages or communications by telephone
or telegraph for the public.
(7) The diverting, pumping or impounding of water for the development or
furnishing of hydroelectric power to or for the public.
(8) The transportation of oxygen or nitrogen, or both, by pipeline or conduit for
the public.
(9) Any ancillary service reasonably necessary or appropriate for the
accomplishment of services specified in Subsection B(1) to (8), including the
placement, maintenance and removal of aerial, surface and subsurface public
116.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 436-703 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 436-704
436:21
§ 436-705. Standards of service.
utility facilities thereon or therein.
(10) Cable service.
C. Not a cable system. This article does not authorize a person to provide cable service.
A person seeking to provide cable service must obtain permission from the
Township under separate legislation of the Township.
D. Not a pole attachment agreement. This article does not authorize the grantee to
attach to any Township pole or other Township structure in a public way devices
for the intentional transmission or radiation of radio frequency emissions or energy
through the ether by any means now known or hereafter developed. A person
seeking to make such attachment must obtain permission from the Township under
an agreement with the Township or under separate legislation of the Township.
A. Conditions of street occupancy. All facilities and equipment installed or erected by
the grantee pursuant to the terms hereof shall be located so as to cause a minimum
of interference with the proper use of public ways and with the rights and
reasonable convenience of property owners who own property that adjoins any of
said public ways.
B. Restoration of public ways. If during the course of grantee's construction, operation,
and/or maintenance of its facilities and equipment there occurs a disturbance of any
public way by grantee, grantee shall, at its expense, replace and restore such public
way to a condition which existed immediately prior to such disturbance. If grantee
excavates the surface of any public way, grantee shall be responsible for restoration
of the public way and its surface within the area affected by the excavation. The
Township reserves the right, after providing notice to grantee, to remove and/or
repair any work done by grantee which is inadequate. The reasonable cost thereof,
including the cost of inspection and supervision, shall be paid by the grantee. All
excavations made by grantee in the public way shall be properly safeguarded for
the prevention of accidents.
C. Trees and shrubbery. The grantee shall notify the Township and all affected
property owners regarding grantee's need to trim trees or other natural growth upon
and overhanging public ways so as to prevent the branches of such trees from
coming in contact with its facilities or equipment. Trimming shall be limited to the
area required to clear its facilities or equipment.
D. Safety requirements. All such work in the public ways shall be performed in
accordance with applicable safety codes and technical requirements.
E. Maps. Prior to beginning any construction of facilities, grantee shall provide the
Township with a construction schedule for work in the public ways, which schedule
shall be updated as changed. Upon completion of initial construction and upon
completion of construction of any modification to its facilities, grantee shall
provide the Township with a map showing the location of its installed facilities in
the public ways. Such maps shall be provided in both paper form, as well as in an
electronic format for placement on the Township's GIS system. Annually thereafter,
grantee shall provide a map to the Township showing the location of grantee's
§ 436-704 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 436-705
436:22
§ 436-706. Rental.
facilities in the public ways on a scale of 150 feet per inch or whatever standard
scale the Township adopts for general use.
F. Excavations. Grantee may make excavations in public ways for any facility subject
to obtaining excavation permits from the Township. Prior to doing such work,
grantee must apply for, and obtain, appropriate permits from the Township and give
appropriate notices to any other licensees and/or permittees of the Township and/or
other units of government owning or maintaining facilities which may be affected
by the proposed excavation.
G. Reservation of Township public ways.
(1) Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the Township or other
agency of government or municipal authority from constructing sewers,
grading, paving, repairing and/or altering any street and/or laying down,
repairing and/or removing water mains and/or constructing and/or establishing
any other public work or improvement. If any of the grantee's facilities or
equipment interferes with the construction or repair of any street or public
improvement, including construction, repair or removal of a sewer or water
main, the grantee's facilities or equipment shall be removed or replaced in the
manner the respective Township or other agency of government or municipal
authority shall direct.
(2) Any and all such removal or replacement shall be at the expense of the grantee.
Should grantee fail to remove, adjust or relocate its facilities by the date
established by the Township or other agency of government or municipal
authority, the Township or other agency of government or municipal authority
may cause and/or effect such removal, adjustment or relocation, and the
expense thereof shall be paid by grantee, including all reasonable costs and
expenses incurred by the Township or other agency of government or
municipal authority due to grantee's delay.
A. In consideration of occupying or using the public ways under this article, grantee
shall pay to Township a rental equal to 5% of gross revenue.
B. The rental shall be assessed on a calendar quarterly basis and shall be payable to the
Township no later than 45 days after the expiration of the calendar quarter for which
payment is due. Grantee shall file with the Township a complete and accurate
statement, under notarial seal, at the end of each calendar year quarter certified as
true and correct by a representative of grantee, authorized to make such
certification, explaining how the payment was calculated. In connection with the
rental payment due on February 14, the grantee shall also submit to the Township,
on that date or no later than six months thereafter, a detailed statement by an officer
of the grantee certified by the grantee's independent certified public accountant
verifying the accuracy of the gross revenue and rental payments for the previous
calendar year, with a detailed breakdown and explanation of the calculation by each
month.
C. Grantee shall keep accurate books of account which shall clearly support the
§ 436-705 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 436-706
436:23
§ 436-707. Insurance, indemnification and bonds or other surety.
calculation of rentals and describe in sufficient detail the amounts attributable
to each specific component of gross revenue. Such books of account and all
supplemental information and source documents in support thereof, including,
but not limited to, third-party remittances and contract documents, shall be made
available to the Township and its authorized representatives for examination at
a location in Bucks County, Pennsylvania, at any time during regular business
hours on 10 days' prior written notice and from time to time for the purpose of
verifying or identifying rentals owed to the Township. Grantee shall exercise its
best efforts to obtain financial records of affiliates for the Township for the purpose
of verifying the accuracy of the rental payments. The Township shall have the
right to examine and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under
this article; provided, however, that such examination shall take place within 48
months following the close of each year. Any additional amount due to Township
as a result of the examination and recomputation shall be paid within 30 days
following written notice to grantee by the Township, which notice shall include a
copy of the examination report. In the event that said examination determines that
funds are owed to the Township in an amount in excess of 2%, the cost of said
examination shall be borne by the grantee and reimbursed to the Township within
30 days following written notice to grantee.
D. In the event that any rental or other payment is not made or the requisite
documentation and certification is not provided on or before the applicable dates
heretofore specified, interest shall be compounded daily and set at the one-year
United States Treasury Bill rate existent on the date payment was due, plus three
percentage points. Any amount recomputed to reflect correct payment due shall
bear interest as described from the date such payment was originally due.
A. Grantee shall save the Township, its agents, employees and elected and appointed
officials, harmless from and against all claims, damages, losses and expenses,
including reasonable attorneys' fees, sustained on account of any suit, judgment,
execution, claim or demand whatsoever arising out of the construction, leasing,
operation or maintenance of the grantee's equipment, facilities, and services
specified by this article, whether or not any act or omission complained of is
authorized, allowed and/or prohibited by the chapter and the rights granted
thereunder.
B. Insurance coverage.
(1) Grantee shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect throughout the term
of this article insurance with an insurance company licensed to do business
and doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and acceptable to
the Township. All companies will be required to be rated A-VII or better by
A.M. Best or A or better by Standard and Poors. Grantee shall provide the
Township with proof of such insurance so required.
(2) Grantee shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect, at Grantee's sole
expense, insurance coverage in the following types and minimum amounts:
§ 436-706 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 436-707
436:24
Type Amount
Workers' compensation and statutory
employers liability
$100,000/$500,000/$100,000
Commercial general (public) liability, to
include coverage for the following
where the exposure exists:
Premises operations Combined single limit for bodily
injury and property damages
$2,000,000 per occurrence or its
equivalent
Independent contractors
Products/completed operations
Personal injury
Contractual liability
Explosion, collapse and
underground property damage
Comprehensive vehicle insurance
coverage for loading and unloading
hazards, for:
Owned/leased vehicles Combined single limit of bodily
injury and property damage
$1,000,000 per occurrence or its
equivalent
Nonowned vehicles
Hired vehicles
(3) The Township shall receive, without expense, copies of certificates of
insurance evidencing coverage stated above.
(4) Grantee agrees that with respect to the above-required insurance, all insurance
certificates will contain the following required provisions:
(a) Name the Township and its officers, employees, board members and
elected and appointed officials as additional insured parties (as the
interests of each insured may appear) as to all applicable coverage (except
workers' compensation);
(b) Provide for 60 days' written notice to the Township for cancellation,
nonrenewal, or material change; and
(c) Provide that all provisions of this article concerning liability, duty, and
standard of care, including the indemnity provisions, shall be
underwritten by contractual coverage sufficient to include such
obligations within applicable policies, subject to policy terms and
conditions.
(5) Companies issuing the insurance policies shall have no recourse against the
§ 436-707 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 436-707
436:25
§ 436-708. Enforcement, violations and penalties.
§ 436-709. Miscellaneous provisions.
Township for payment of any premiums or assessments which all are set
at the sole risk of the grantee. Insurance policies obtained by grantee shall
provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of
subrogation against the Township in connection with any damage covered by
these policies.
C. Grantee shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, and file with the
Township, a corporate surety bond with a surety company authorized to do business
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in the amount of 15% of grantee's estimated
costs to secure grantee's performance of its obligations and faithful adherence to all
requirements of this article.
(1) No action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such bond shall
affect the Township's rights to demand full and faithful performance under this
article or limit grantee's liability for damages.
(2) The bond shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby understood
and agreed that this bond may not be cancelled by the surety nor any intention
not to renew be exercised by the surety until sixty (60) days after receipt by
the Township of Middletown, by registered mail, of written notice of such
intent."
D. All expenses of the above-noted insurance and bond shall be paid by the grantee.
E. The insurance policies mentioned herein shall contain an endorsement stating the
following: "Should any policies of insurance be cancelled or coverages be reduced,
before the expiration date of said policies of insurance, the issuer shall deliver sixty
(60) days' advance written notice to the Township."
F. Neither the provisions of this article nor any insurance accepted by the Township
pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the Township thereunder, shall be
construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee and/or limit the liability of
the grantee under the ordinance issued hereunder and/or for damages, either to the
full amount of the bond or otherwise.
A. General. In addition to all other rights, remedies and powers reserved and/or
retained by the Township under this article or otherwise, the Township reserves the
right to bring a civil action to collect any sums due to the Township by grantee and/
or forfeit or revoke all privileges of grantee under this article in the event of willful
or repeated violation of this article.
B. Penalties. Any person which commits or suffers the violation of this article shall,
upon being found liable in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a fine of $600 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys'
fees incurred by the Township. A separate offense shall arise for each day or portion
thereof in which a violation is found to exist or for each section of this article which
is found to have been violated. In addition, the Township also may enforce this
article by an action brought in equity.
§ 436-707 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 436-709
436:26
A. Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. The grantee shall at all times be
subject to the exercise of the police power of the Township. The grantee shall
comply with all lawful ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations of the
Township, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the United
States of America which are now in effect or hereafter enacted.
B. Conflict. Whenever the requirements of this article are in conflict with other
requirements of the ordinances of the Township of Middletown, the most restrictive
or those imposing the highest standards shall govern. Privileges granted by this
article do not constitute a waiver or impairment of the rights of the Township at law
or equity now or henceforth existing to proceed versus grantee for enforcement of
the ordinance or violation of this article or ordinances of the Township.
C. Effective date. This article shall become effective five days after the date of its
within enactment.
D. Severability. The provisions of this article are severable. If any section, clause,
sentence, part or provision thereof shall be held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional
by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the court shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining sections, clauses, sentences, parts or provisions of this
article. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this
article would have not been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional
section, clause, sentence or part of a provision had been included herein.
§ 436-709 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 436-709
436:27

Chapter 440
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Advisory Council — See Ch. 38.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 76.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 312.
Solid waste — See Ch. 418.
Stormwater management — See Chs. 430 and 431.
Nonresidential unit tax — See Ch. 448, Art. V.
Shade trees — See Ch. 462.
Zoning — See Ch. 500.
§ 436-709 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 436-709
440:1

ARTICLE I
Authority
§ 440-101. Adoption.
§ 440-102. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the division and development
of land within Middletown Township, pursuant to the authority set forth in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., setting forth the
procedures to be followed by the Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors in
order to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community.
§ 440-103. Intent. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-16; 8-16-2000 by Ord. No.
00-09]
It is the general intent of this chapter to regulate the division and development of land as
to:
A. The Board of Supervisors of Middletown Township, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, has adopted, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, this chapter governing the subdivision and development of land within
Middletown Township.
B. This chapter shall become effective and shall remain in effect until modified,
amended or rescinded by the Board of Supervisors.
C. The existing ordinance, adopted August 9, 1967, and entitled "Middletown
Township Subdivision and Land Development Regulations," and all supplements
and amendments thereto, are hereby repealed. Provided, however, if the present
ordinance is held to be ineffective or invalid by reason of some irregularity in or
impediment to its passage, this repealer shall also be ineffective as aforesaid. Then
and in that event, the ordinance of 1967, together with its supplements and
amendments, would necessarily remain in full force and effect.
A. Regulate the flow of traffic in the streets and highways.
B. Further the orderly and appropriate use of land.
C. Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers.
D. Facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, stormwater management,
sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds and other public facilities.
E. Assure sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation, and to provide for
the harmonious development of Middletown Township.
F. Coordinate existing streets with proposed streets, parks or other features of the
Township.
G. Ensure adequate open space for traffic, recreation, light and air.
H. Provide proper distribution of population.
§ 440-101 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-103
440:3
§ 440-104. Short title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Middletown Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance."
§ 440-105. Scope.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, any subdivision or land development
filed thereafter shall be in conformity with this chapter and all standards and
specifications adopted as part of this chapter.
§ 440-106. Interpretation.
§ 440-107. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that:
I. Give effect to the policies and proposals of the Comprehensive Plan for
Middletown Township.
J. Plan and manage stormwater runoff by regulating subdivisions and land
developments in a manner consistent with the Neshaminy Creek Watershed
Stormwater Management Plan and other relevant stormwater management.117
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements to meet
the above-stated purpose and intent. When provisions, standards and specifications
of this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any state statute, other
ordinance or regulation, this chapter shall be controlling unless specified to the
contrary.
B. This chapter does not repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with
existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically or
explicitly repealed by this chapter, or any private restrictions placed upon property
by covenant, deed or other private agreement unless repugnant hereto.
C. Provisions in the Middletown Township Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 500)
providing for varying design standards shall not be considered to be in conflict with
the provisions of this chapter.
A. If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision of this chapter to be
invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of such decision shall be limited
to those provisions which are expressly stated in the decision to be invalid or
ineffective, and all other provisions of this chapter shall continue to be separately
and fully effective.
B. If a court of competent jurisdiction finds the application of any provision or
provisions of this chapter to any lot, building or other structure, or tract of land, to
be invalid or ineffective, in whole or in part, the effect of such decision shall be
limited to the person, property or situation immediately involved in the controversy,
and the application of any such provision to other persons, property or situations
117.Editor's Note: See Ch. 431, Stormwater Management for Neshaminy Creek Watershed.
§ 440-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-107
440:4
§ 440-108. Jurisdiction. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
shall not be affected.
C. This chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
provision not been included herein.
A. Subdivision and development control.
(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any land in the Township, or any other
person, firm or corporation, to subdivide any lot, tract or parcel of land, or lay
out, construct, open or dedicate for public use or travel any street, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, drainage facilities or other facilities in connection
therewith, or for the common use of occupants of buildings within the
subdivision or land development, unless and until final plans of such
subdivision or development shall:
(a) Have been prepared by a registered professional engineer or registered
land surveyor;
(b) Signed by the record owners of the land, and said signature notarized; and
(c) Submitted to and approved in writing thereon by the Township Board of
Supervisors and recorded in the Bucks County Recorder of Deeds Office
in Doylestown, Pennsylvania.
(2) Before the approval of a plat by the Township, a copy shall be transmitted to
the Bucks County Planning Commission, and that Commission shall make a
report thereon to the Board of Supervisors. Pending the receipt and
consideration of such report, the Township shall defer action thereon, but if
such report is not received by the Township within 30 days from the
submission, or within such further time as may be agreed upon by the
Township, the Township may proceed to action thereon.
B. Sale of lots; issuance of building permits for erection of buildings.
(1) No lot or condominium unit in a subdivision may be sold and no permit to
erect, alter or repair any building upon land in a subdivision or land
development may be issued unless and until a plan has received final approval
and until the municipal improvements required by the Board of Supervisors in
connection therewith have either been constructed or guaranteed as hereinafter
provided.
(2) No building in a subdivision or land development depending on ingress and
egress upon the improvement of any street or streets herein provided for shall
be permitted to be occupied before improvements are fully completed from a
now existing paved street to and across the front of the lot on which the
building is located and/or to a sufficient depth along the side of the lot to
service any driveway, driveways or parking spaces.
(3) No building depending upon public water and sewer facilities shall be
permitted to be occupied before such facilities are fully provided and
operational.
§ 440-107 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-108
440:5

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 440-201. General interpretation. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-16]
§ 440-202. Specific terms defined. [Amended 3-19-1991 by Ord. No. 91-15;
12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13; 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-16; 8-16-2000 by Ord. No.
00-09]
Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following words and phrases shall have,
for the purpose of this chapter, the meanings in the following clauses:
AGENT—Any person, other than the developer, who, acting for the developer, submits
to the Board of Supervisors subdivision or land development plans for the purpose of
obtaining approval thereof.
APPLICANT — Any person, landowner or developer who has filed an application with
the Board of Supervisors for a subdivision or land development for the purpose of
obtaining approval thereof.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether preliminary,
tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of construction or
development, including but not limited to an application for a building permit, for the
approval of a subdivision plat or plan, or for the approval of a development plan.
A. Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following words and phrases shall
have for the purpose of this chapter the meanings in the following clauses.
(1) For the purpose of this chapter, words and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
(a) Words used in the present tense include the future.
(b) The singular includes the plural.
(c) The word "person" includes a corporation, partnership and association or
other legal entity, as well as the individual.
(d) The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel."
(e) The word "Commission" and the words "Planning Commission" always
mean the Middletown Township Planning Commission.
(f) The word "Supervisors" and the words "Board of Supervisors" always
mean the Middletown Township Board of Supervisors.
(g) The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be
construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be
occupied."
(h) The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory. The word "may" is
permissive.
B. Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of standard
usage.
§ 440-201 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-202
440:7
ARCHITECT — A professional architect registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant to the Act of May 2,
1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164) known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945."118
BUFFER — A strip of land established to protect adjacent land uses. Buffer yards are
intended to visually soften the outline of buildings, to screen glare and noise and to
create a visual barrier between adjacent land uses.
BUILDING — A structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof which is
intended to be used for shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property. The word
"building" shall include any part thereof.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line parallel to the street line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the minimum front yard required for the district in which
the lot is located.
CARTWAY — The hard or paved surface portion of any street right-of-way, or that
portion of a street right-of-way customarily used by vehicles in the regular course of
travel over the street.
CUL-DE-SAC — A secondary street with one end open for vehicular and pedestrian
access and the other end terminating in a vehicular turnaround. The minimum length for
a cul-de-sac shall be 250 feet. The minimum outside turning radius for a cul-de-sac shall
be 40 feet.
DENSITY — A measure of the number of dwelling units per unit of area. It shall be
expressed in dwelling units per acre. The measure is arrived at by dividing the number
of dwelling units by the base site area.
DESIGN STANDARDS — Regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter imposing
standards by which a subdivision or land development is developed.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of a landowner, or tenant with the permission
of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or a land
development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a planned
residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location
and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development,
streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phrase
"provisions of development plan" when used in this chapter shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any ditch, pipe, culvert, storm sewer or structure designed,
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building located on the same lot as a
principal building and clearly incidental to the principal building. Any portion of a
principal building devoted or intended to be devoted to an accessory use is not an
accessory building.
A.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted, or is intended to be
conducted, the principal use of the lot on which it is located.
B.
118.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 440-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-202
440:8
intended or constructed for the purpose of diverting surface water from or carrying
surface waters off streets, public rights-of-way, parks, recreational areas or any part of
any subdivision or land development.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a building and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking and eating by one family.
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to
and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity.
ENGINEER—A professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ENGINEERING CONSIDERATIONS —
All engineering responsibilities as herein defined shall be those of the Engineer(s)
for the Township. The Engineer(s) will review the plan and any accompanying
material for the proposed subdivision or land development and make his findings
known in a report to the Middletown Township Planning Commission and the
Board of Supervisors. The report will be considered by the Planning Commission
when reviewing the proposal.
A.
The Engineers' responsibility in the review of subdivision and land development
proposals shall include, but not be limited to, the following engineering
considerations. The Engineer(s) shall make recommendations concerning approval
or disapproval of the application based upon these considerations as they are
reflected in the plans submitted:
(1) Dimensions and areas of lots and/or parcels.
Existing and proposed contours in relation to the proposed use and that of
adjacent properties.
(2)
(3) Soil conditions; proposed erosion controls.
Surface and subsurface drainage conditions and proposed stormwater
management plan.
(4)
(5) Lighting plans.
(6) Utility plan, easement requirements.
Road specifications, widths, cross sections, alignment, profiles and
intersections.
(7)
(8) Location and design of entrance and existing accessways.
Sewage disposal system, sewage collection system and sewage transmission
system.
(9)
(10) Conformance to Middletown Township Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 500).
Acceptability of materials and construction indicated in final plans and
specifications.
(11)
(12) Anticipated traffic generated by the proposal.
B.
§ 440-202 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-202
440:9
EROSION — The process by which soil and bedrock are worn away by the action of
wind, water, climate or chemical action.
FLOODPLAIN — Areas adjoining streams, ponds or lakes subject to the one-hundredyear
recurrence-interval flood. The areas considered to be floodplain within Middletown
Township shall include those areas identified as being subject to the one-hundred-year
flood in the Flood Insurance Study for Middletown Township prepared by the Federal
Insurance Administration, dated June 1979, and the accompanying Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map dated December 4, 1979.
FLOODPLAIN SOILS — Areas subject to periodic flooding and listed in the Soil
Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties, Pennsylvania, United States Department of
Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, July 1975 (or latest revised), as
"soils subject to periodic flooding." Such soils include the following:
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES — Surfaces which do not absorb rain. All buildings,
parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, swimming pools, lakes, ponds, gravelcovered
areas and any areas in concrete and asphalt, including porous asphalt paving,
shall be considered impervious surfaces within this definition. In addition, paved areas
and other areas determined by the Township Engineer to be impervious within the
meaning of this definition will also be classed as impervious surfaces.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO — The impervious surface ratio is a measure of
the intensity of use of a piece of land. It is measured by dividing the total area of all
impervious surfaces within the site by the base site area.
IMPROVED PUBLIC STREET — Any street for which the Township, county or
commonwealth has maintenance responsibility and which has an approved surface.
(13) Water supply and distribution systems.
FLOODWAY—That portion of the floodplain, including the watercourse channel
and adjacent land areas, which must be reserved to carry the one-hundred-year
recurrent-interval flood without cumulatively increasing that flood elevation more
than one foot.
A.
B. FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain which is outside the floodway.
APPROXIMATE ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOODPLAIN — That portion of the
floodplain for which no detailed flood profiles or one-hundred-year elevations have
been provided.
C.
A. Alluvial land (Ae).
B. Alton gravelly loam, flooded (A1A).
C. Bowmansville silt loam (Bo).
D. Hatboro silt loam (Ha).
E. Marsh (Mh).
F. Pope loam (PaA).
G. Rowland silt loam (Ro).
§ 440-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-202
440:10
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical additional installations and changes, such as
streets, curbs, sidewalks, water mains, sewers, drainage facilities, public utilities and
other appropriate items, required to render land suitable for the use proposed.
LAKES AND PONDS — Natural or artificial bodies of water which retain water year
round. Artificial ponds may be created by dams or result from excavation. Lakes are
bodies of water two or more acres in extent. Ponds are any water bodies less than two
acres in extent.
LAKE AND POND SHORELINES — The landside edges of lakes and ponds from
established shoreline to an upland boundary. Lake and pond shorelines shall be measured
100 feet from the spillway crest elevation.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LANDOWNER—The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the holder
of an option or contract to purchase, a lessee if he is authorized under the lease to
exercise the rights of the landowner, or other persons having a proprietary interest in
land.
LOT — A parcel of land used or set aside and available for use as the site of one or
more buildings and buildings accessory thereto for any other purpose, in one ownership
and not divided by a street nor including any land within the limits of a public or private
street right-of-way upon which said lot abuts, even if fee to such way is in the owner
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land
for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether
proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot
or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively,
between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means
of or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups or other features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
The following shall not be considered a land development:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or singlefamily
semidetached dwelling into not more than three residential units, unless
such units are intended to be a condominium;
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm building, on a lot or lots
subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines of an
enterprise which would be considered an amusement park. For the purposes
of this exemption, an amusement park is defined as a tract or area used
principally as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides. This
exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park
until initial plans for the expanded area have been approved by the
municipality.
(3)
C.
§ 440-202 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-202
440:11
of the lot. A "lot" for the purpose of this chapter may or may not coincide with a lot on
record.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of the individual parcels
of land as shown on a subdivision, excluding any area within an existing or designated
future street right-of-way, or any area of required open space or the area of any
easements and including the area of any easements.
LOT, CORNER—A lot which has an interior angle of less than 135° at the intersection
of two street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered
a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at the points beginning with the lot or at the
points of intersection of the side lot lines with the street right-of-way lines intersect at an
interior angle of less than 135°.
LOT LINE — Any boundary line of a lot.
MANAGER — The Manager is the Township Manager appointed as such by the
Township Board of Supervisors.
MEDIATION —A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a dispute mutually
select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and settling their differences,
culminating in a written agreement which the parties themselves create and consider
reasonable.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent
occupancy, office or space of assembly contained in one unit, or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated
towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used
without a permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the
necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon
of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PAD — That part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the
placement of the mobile home, appurtenant structures or additions.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so
designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home lots for the placement
thereon of mobile homes.
MONUMENT — A stone or concrete monument with a flat top at least four inches
square, containing a reference point, and at least 24 feet in length. It is recommended
that the bottom sides be at least two inches greater than the top to minimize movement
caused by frost.
OPEN SPACE — Land which shall be kept open in perpetuity and shall be restricted
from future development. Open space shall be permanent and inviolate. To qualify as
open space, such land shall be used only for open space uses: recreation, amenity, buffer
or resource protection. Open space shall not include land occupied by nonrecreational
buildings or structures, roads or road rights-of-way, easements, parking lots, land
reserved for future parking lots, stormwater detention basins or retention basins, or the
yards or lots of dwelling units.
OPEN SPACE RATIO — The open space ratio is a measure of intensity of land use. It
§ 440-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-202
440:12
is arrived at by dividing the total amount of open space within the site by the base site
area.
PARKING SPACE — An area on a lot used for parking a vehicle, to which there is
access from a street.
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision or land development plan,
including all required supplementary data, prepared for official recording as required by
statute to define property rights, proposed streets and other improvements.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A formal subdivision or land development plan (and
including all required supplementary data), showing the existing features of the tract and
its proposed street and lot layout as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of a
final plan.
PLAN, RECORD — An exact copy of the final plan which bears the signed and dated
approval of all necessary signatures.
PLAN, SKETCH — An informal plan, indicating salient existing features of a tract and
its surroundings and the general layout of the proposed subdivision or land development.
This plan is not a formal submission under the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
PLAT—The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether preliminary or
final.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the Board
of Supervisors or Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain public comment,
prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July 3, 1986
(P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act," 53 P.S. § 271 et seq.119
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive weeks in
a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice shall state the time
and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the
hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication
shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
RESIDENTIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARD SUBDIVISION — A performance
standard shall be considered a subdivision or land development for the purpose of the
procedural sections of this chapter. It is a subdivision or land development for which
the developer chooses to use the performance standards set forth in the Township of
Middletown Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 500).
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land set aside for use as a street, alley or other means of travel.
A. Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other public areas;
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly owned or
operated facilities; and
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
119.Editor's Note: The Act was repealed 10-15-1998 by P.L. 729, No. 93; see now 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 440-202 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-202
440:13
RUNOFF—The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given watershed after
a fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs off the surface of the land.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is accumulated
or deposited by wind, water or gravity. Once this matter is deposited (or remains
suspended in water), it is usually referred to as "sediment."
SEWER —
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of roadway visible to the driver of a passenger
vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is unobstructed by traffic.
SITE — A parcel or parcels of land intended to have one or more buildings or intended
to be subdivided into one or more lots.
SITE AREA — All land area within the site as defined in the deed. This area shall be
determined from an actual site survey rather than from a deed description.
SITE AREA, BASE—The area of the site remaining after subtracting land which is not
contiguous, land previously subdivided, and road and utility rights-of-way from the site
area.
SITE AREA, BUILDABLE — The area of the site which may be altered, disturbed
or regraded for development purposes. The buildable site area could contain buildings,
roads, parking areas, sewage systems and stormwater management facilities. The
buildable site area would not contain required open space, recreation areas and natural
resource protection areas.
SOLAR ENERGY —
EXISTING RIGHT-OF-WAY — The legal right-of-way as established by the
commonwealth or other appropriate governing authority and currently in existence.
A.
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right-of-way deemed necessary to provide
adequate width for future street improvements.
B.
PUBLIC SEWER — Any municipally or privately owned sewer system in which
sewage is collected from buildings from more than one lot and/or dwelling unit and
piped to an approved sewage disposal plant. It may also be referred to as "off-lot"
or "off-site" sewer. This shall include capped sewers.
A.
PRIVATE SEWER —An on-lot approved disposal system generally providing for
disposal of effluent for only one building or a group of buildings on a single lot.
B.
SOLAR ENERGY — Radiant energy (direct, diffuse or reflected) received from
the sun at wavelengths suitable for conversion into thermal, chemical or electrical
energy.
A.
SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTOR — Any device, structure or part of a device or
structure which is used primarily to transform solar energy into thermal, chemical
or electrical energy. It includes any space or structural component specifically
designed to retain heat derived from solar energy.
B.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A complete design or assembly consisting of
a solar energy collector, an energy storage facility (where appropriate) and
components for the distribution of transformed energy to the extent they cannot be
C.
§ 440-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-202
440:14
STEEP SLOPES — Areas where the average slope exceeds 8% which, because of this
slope, are subject to high rates of stormwater runoff and, therefore, erosion and flooding.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN—The plan for managing stormwater runoff
adopted by Bucks County for the Neshaminy Creek Watershed as required by the Act of
October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167),120 and known as the "Storm Water Management
Act." (See § 440-406 of this chapter for the stormwater management provisions.)
STREET —
used jointly with a conventional energy system. Passive solar energy systems are
included in this definition but not to the extent that they fulfill structural or other
functions.
ACTIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar system that requires external
mechanical power (fans or pumps) to move a conductive medium (water, antifreeze
or freon) to the interior of a building for heating or cooling.
D.
PASSIVE SOLAR SYSTEM — A solar energy system that uses natural properties
of materials and architectural components to collect and store solar energy. In some
cases, external mechanical power (fan) may be required to move the collected heat.
E.
A public or private way used or intended to be used for passage or travel by
automotive vehicles and pedestrians and to provide access to abutting properties.
A.
Streets are further defined and classified as follows:
Thoroughfares.
Expressways. Designed for large volumes and high-speed traffic with
access limited to grade-separated intersections.
(a)
Arterial street. Designed for moderate volumes of through traffic with
controlled access to abutting properties.
(b)
Collector street. Designed to carry a moderate to heavy volume of
residential traffic, to carry traffic to and from intercepting primary and
secondary streets to arterial streets, with access to abutting properties
frequently controlled.
(c)
(1)
Local streets.
Primary street. Designed to carry a moderate volume of traffic, to
intercept secondary streets, to provide routes to collector streets and
community facilities, and to provide access to the abutting properties.
(a)
Secondary street. Designed to provide access to the abutting properties
and a route to primary streets.
(b)
Rural streets. Designed to serve farms and homes in the rural areas of the
Township and distribute traffic from these areas to the collector, arterial
and expressway system.
(c)
(2)
B.
120.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 440-202 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-202
440:15
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot. The street line shall
be the same as the legal right-of-way line, provided that the street right-of-way shall not
be less than required in § 440-410 of this chapter; and where a future right-of-way width
for a street has been officially established, the street right-of-way line shall be the side
line of the future right-of-way so established.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on
or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION —
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the Township
Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements for which
Marginal access street. Designed as a street parallel and adjacent to
a collector or higher level street which provides access to abutting
properties and separation from through traffic.
(d)
Alley. A minor way which provides a secondary means of access to lots
and is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side
of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
(e)
Driveway. Generally a private street for the use of vehicles and
pedestrians, providing access between a public street and a parking area
within a lot or property.
(f)
The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into
two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in
existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition
by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for
agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new
street or easement of access or any residential dwellings, shall be exempted.
A.
The term "subdivision" includes condominium conversion and resubdivision; when
appropriate to the context, the aforesaid term shall relate to the process of
subdividing or to the land subdivided.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision or lot line change.
(1)
SUBDIVISION, MINOR—The division of a single lot, tract or parcel of land
into two lots, tracts or parcels of land for the purpose of building development,
providing the proposed lots, tracts or parcels of land thereby created have
frontage on an improved public street or streets, and providing further that
there is not created by the subdivision any new street or streets, the need for
required improvement, or the need for an easement of access.
(2)
LOT LINE CHANGE—Any division of land for the adjustment or relocation
of one existing boundary line between two adjacent lots or the shifting of
boundary line to increase the area of an existing lot; provided, however, that
the lot line change results in the same number or fewer lots as existed prior to
the lot line change, and provided that the area of each of the lots involved does
not increase or decrease by more than 20% of the original lot area.
(3)
B.
§ 440-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-202
440:16
financial security was posted) of those improvements required as a condition of final
plan approval have been completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the
project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
SURVEYOR — A professional land surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
USE — Any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on or intended to be
carried on in a building or other structure or on a tract of land.
UTILITIES — Those services customarily rendered by public utility corporations,
municipalities or municipal authorities in the nature of electricity, gas, telephone, water
and sewerage, including the appurtenances used in connection with the supplying of the
services (buildings, wires, pipes, poles and the like).
WATERCOURSE—Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, canal,
waterway, gully or ravine in which water flows in a definite direction or course, either
continuously or intermittently, and has a defined bed and banks.
WATER SUPPLY — Any waterworks, water supply works, water distribution system
or part thereof designed, intended or constructed to provide or distribute potable water.
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of
groundwater and surface water resources within the Township.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated and saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.
WETLANDS MARGIN — The transitional area extending from the outer limit of the
wetland.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS) —A device which converts wind
energy to mechanical or electrical energy.
WOODLANDS — One-quarter acre or more of wooded land where the largest trees
measure at least six inches in diameter at breast height (dbh) or 4.5 feet from the ground.
The woodland shall be measured from the dripline of the outer trees. Woodlands are also
a grove of trees forming one canopy where 10 or more trees measure at least 10 inches
diameter at breast height (dbh).
YARD — An open space unobstructed from the ground up except for permitted
projections and plantings, on the same lot with a structure, extending along a lot line or
street line and inward to the structure. The size of a required yard shall be measured as
the shortest distance between the structure and a lot line or street line.
ON-LOT WATER SUPPLY — A system for supplying and distributing water to a
single dwelling or building from a source located on the same lot.
A.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY—A single source of water serving more than one user
unit (residence, business, church, etc.).
B.
YARD, FRONT — A yard between a structure and a street line and extending the
entire length of the street line. In the case of a lot that fronts on more than one street,
the yards extending along all streets are front yards.
A.
§ 440-202 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-202
440:17
YARD, REAR — A yard between a structure and a rear lot line and extending the
entire length of the rear lot line.
B.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between a structure and a side lot line, extending from the
front yard to the rear yard. In the case of a lot having no street frontage or a lot of
odd shape, any yard that is not a front yard or a rear yard shall be considered a side
yard.
C.
§ 440-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-202
440:18
ARTICLE III
Procedures
§ 440-301. General. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
The procedures set forth in this article shall be followed by all applicants.
A. The separate stages of approval normally require the submission of preliminary
plans and final plans. These plans differ in their purpose and required level of detail.
The tables below indicate the required plans for the different types of submissions.
Plan
Lot Line
Change
Minor
Subdivision
Major
Subdivision
Land
Development
Sketch Recommended Recommended Recommended Recommended
Preliminary Not required Not required Required Required
Final Required Required Required Required
B. All plans and applications shall be submitted to the Township Manager. Plans and
applications shall not be deemed submitted until they are accepted by the Township
Manager as being in proper form and accompanied by the proper filing fee and any
escrow deposit for the cost of the review. Plans and applications shall not be
deemed complete and acceptable for filing if any item enumerated in this article as
required for such submission is omitted or if the required fee is not submitted with
the application. If the submission is incomplete, the Township Manager shall notify
the applicant within seven days of receipt of the application, indicating the
deficiencies. A fee shall be required for processing and reviewing any preliminary
or final plans. The fee shall be paid by the applicant at the time of filing such plans.
The fee and escrow schedule for all plans submitted under this chapter shall be
adopted by resolution of the Township Board of Supervisors and may be amended
from time to time. Escrow deposits shall be submitted for legal, engineering and
administrative costs as required by § 440-603. The Township shall have the sole
responsibility to forward the plans to other reviewing agencies. Plans are not to be
delivered to any reviewing agency by the owner, developer or his agent.
C. The Township shall render its decision within the ninety-day period established by
the Municipalities Planning Code. The decision shall be communicated to the
applicant not later than 15 days following the decision and within 90 days following
the date of the regular meeting of the Planning Commission following the date the
application is complete and accepted for filing, provided that, should the said next
regular meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing of the application, the
said ninety-day period shall be measured from the 30th day following the day the
application is complete and accepted for filing. Said decision shall be sent to the
applicant by mail at the address provided by the applicant on the application form.
D. When a plan, other than a sketch plan, is rejected, the written communication to the
applicant shall cite the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 500), this
chapter and the statute with which there has been noncompliance.
E. The presentation of a preliminary plan and final plan shall each be a separate
submission. The maximum review period authorized by the Municipalities
§ 440-301 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-301
440:19
§ 440-302. Sketch plan. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13; 12-1-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-16]
Planning Code may be required for the preliminary plan and final plan.
F. The submission of a revised preliminary or final plan shall constitute a new and
separate submission. A revised plan must be accompanied by a complete
application form, all required information and fees. With a revised plan, the
applicant must submit a written withdrawal of the previously submitted plan. In the
absence of a written withdrawal of the previously submitted plan, the previously
submitted plan shall be deemed withdrawn when the revised plan is submitted.
G. The owner of the parcel of land to be subdivided or developed shall submit a written
statement granting the Board of Supervisors, its authorized agents and
representatives, the Planning Commission, and the representatives of the county
and Township departments and agencies having responsibility for review and/or
approval under this chapter the right to enter the parcel of land for the purpose of
inspection and enforcement of the requirements, terms and conditions imposed
herein.
H. Preliminary approval of the site plan must be obtained for the entire proposed
development. Final approval may be obtained section by section, but such
development sections shall be specified on the preliminary plan and must be
numbered in the proposed order that they are to be developed. Such order of
development must be adhered to, and if changes are required, plans must be refiled
and reviewed and approved. Approved plans, however, shall be subject to changes
in the Township ordinances in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.121
I. All subdivisions and land developments (both minor and major) shall be required
to submit the appropriate planning module for land development to Middletown
Township at preliminary plan submission (final plan submission for minor
residential subdivisions) for review. The Township will submit these modules to
the Bucks County Department of Health, Bucks County Planning Commission, and
DEP for review to determine the adequacy of the proposed sewage facilities for
development. Approval of the appropriate sewage-facility-permitting agency
(Bucks County Department of Health and/or DEP) must be received by the
Township prior to preliminary (final for minor residential subdivisions) plan
approval. The applicant is required to follow the policies, procedures and guidelines
promulgated under the Township's official Act 537 sewage facilities plan (latest
revised).
A. General. Although it is not a prerequisite for approval of a final plan, an applicant
may and is encouraged to submit a sketch plan as the basis for informal discussion.
During the sketch plan procedure, the applicant can advantageously make use of the
services of the Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors to help him
analyze the problems of the development and plan more adequately for its sound
coordination with the community. This sketch plan procedure also affords the
Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors the opportunity to give
121.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 440-301 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-302
440:20
informal guidance to the applicant at a stage when potential points of difference can
be more easily resolved. It can also simplify official actions and save unnecessary
expense and delay. A sketch plan is not mandatory and is not an official plan under
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. Time limitations of the Planning
Code shall not apply, and failure to submit recommendations to the applicant within
the time restraints of the Planning Code shall not be considered deemed approval of
the plan.
B. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of the sketch plan is to afford the applicant the opportunity to
consult early and informally with both the Middletown Township and the
Bucks County Planning Commissions and the Township Board of Supervisors
before preparation of the preliminary plan and formal application for approval.
(2) Sketch plan procedure should be more detailed for residential performance
standard subdivisions than for regular subdivisions. This is to enable the
Township to analyze adequately the proposed plan.
C. Procedure.
(1) Applicant prepares sketch plan and application.
(2) Applicant submits nine copies of the sketch plan, any required information and
an application to the Township Manager.
(3) Township Manager shall immediately distribute copies of the sketch plan and
application to:
(a) Township Board of Supervisors: five copies.
(b) Township Planning Commission: two copies.
(c) Bucks County Planning Commission: one copy.
(d) One copy shall be retained for the Township files.
(4) The Township Planning Commission shall initially review the sketch plan
submission and advise the applicant how the proposed subdivision or land
development may conform or fail to conform with the requirements and
objectives of this chapter and other applicable ordinances. The applicant may
attend a meeting of the Planning Commission to discuss the proposal. The
Planning Commission may communicate its comments and recommendations
to the applicant by mail at the address provided on the application by the
applicant. Similarly, the Board of Supervisors may conduct a review and
discuss the plan with the applicant if requested. The review of a sketch plan is
advisory only and the opinions expressed by the members of the Planning
Commission and/or Board of Supervisors during sketch plan review are not
binding.
D. Recommended plan information. The applicant may submit whatever information
is deemed useful; however, to facilitate the fullest possible response from the
Planning Commission, each set of plans shall be folded to a size which can be
§ 440-302 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-302
440:21
§ 440-303. Preliminary plan, major subdivision or land development. [Amended
12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13; 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-16; 3-1-1994 by Ord. No.
94-02; 8-16-2000 by Ord. No. 00-09]
accommodated in a legal eight-and-one-half-inch by fourteen-inch file folder. The
applicant is encouraged to submit the following items:
(1) Name of the subdivision or land development.
(2) Name and address of the owner and the applicant.
(3) Name and address of the engineer, surveyor or architect.
(4) Zoning district requirements, including parking requirements, for land
developments.
(5) Tract boundaries.
(6) North point, date and scale (written and graphic).
(7) Location map.
(8) Streets on and adjacent to the tract.
(9) Significant topographical and physical features.
(10) Proposed general street layout.
(11) Proposed general lot layout or building layout with park lots and open spaces
indicated. A sketch stormwater management plan showing general features
and locations of any proposed stormwater management facilities/techniques.
(12) Contours based on USGS topography or site survey.
(13) Tax parcel number(s) of the tract. Additional material suggested for residential
performance standard subdivisions and apartment projects.
(14) Site plan showing soil conditions, drainageways, vegetative cover and slopes.
(15) Indicate size and placement of buildings, number of units, length and width of
sidewalks and drives.
(16) Detailed plan indicating adjacent properties, types of land use, and natural
features, including forested areas, floodplains, drainage swales, etc.
(17) Method for administration and maintenance of open space area.
A. General. Preliminary plans are required for all major subdivisions or land
developments in accordance with the procedures, plan requirements, and design
standards set forth in this chapter. The preliminary plan and all information and
procedures related thereto shall in all respects be in compliance with the provisions
of these regulations, except where variation therefrom may be specifically
authorized in writing by the Board of Supervisors.
B. Purpose. The purpose of the preliminary plan is to require formal preliminary
§ 440-302 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-303
440:22
approval in order to minimize changes and revisions before final plans are
submitted.
C. Procedure.
(1) Applicant prepares preliminary plan and application.
(2) Applicant submits to the Township Manager the preliminary plan and
application in two forms, as follows: one copy in an electronic medium
acceptable to the Township Engineer and such paper copies as determined by
the Township and pursuant to its then-current schedule for submission of
subdivision and land development plans.
(3) Copies of the preliminary plan and all required supplemental data (including
permits and review letters from all county, state and federal agencies) initially
shall be submitted to the Township Manager, together with the required fees
and escrow deposit established in accordance with the current fee schedule
adopted by resolution by the Board of Supervisors.122 The Township Manager
shall note the date of receipt of the application, fees and escrow deposit. The
application shall not be deemed to be submitted until a complete application,
including a traffic impact study if required, and the required fees and the
required escrow deposit all have been submitted.
(4) Upon submission of a complete application, together with all required fees and
escrow deposits, the Township Manager shall accept the application, plans and
other required materials as filed and shall immediately distribute copies of the
preliminary plan and application to:
(a) Township Board of Supervisors: five copies.
(b) Township Planning Commission: two copies.
(c) Bucks County Planning Commission: two copies.
(d) Township Engineer: one copy.
(e) Municipal Authority: one copy (if needed).
(f) Fire Marshal: one copy.
(g) Police Department: one copy.
(h) Public Works: one copy.
(i) Sewer and Water Department: one copy.
(j) Sewer and Water Engineer: one copy.
(k) Township Solicitor: one copy.
(l) Township files: two copies.
122.Editor's Note: Township fee schedules are on file in the Township Building and available to be viewed on the
Township's website at www.middletownbucks.org.
§ 440-303 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-303
440:23
(m) Township Park and Recreation Board: If recreational improvements or
open space areas are involved, an extra copy shall be required and
submitted.
(n) Pennsylvania Department of Transportation: If state roads are involved,
an extra copy shall be required and submitted.
(o) Historic Preservation Commission: one copy.
(5) Following receipt of the complete submission to the Township Manager, the
Township Engineer:
(a) Reviews the applicant's submission for engineering and zoning
considerations; and
(b) Prepares a report for the Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors.
(6) Following receipt of the complete submission to the Township Manager, the
Middletown Township Planning Commission:
(a) Receives and reviews the applicant's submission and the reports
submitted from all applicable reviewing agencies;
(b) Discusses submission with the applicant, if requested by the applicant;
(c) Evaluates applicant's submission, presentation, discussion with applicant
and reviewing agencies' reports;
(d) Determines whether the preliminary plan meets the objectives and
requirements of this chapter and other ordinances; and
(e) Prepares a written report recommending approval or disapproval of the
preliminary plan for use by the Board of Supervisors.
(7) Guidelines for submission of plans to the Board of Supervisors.
(a) Prior to submitting plans to the Board of Supervisors, the applicant shall
make all revisions to the plan based on the review and discussion of the
Planning Commission. The submission of the revised plan shall constitute
a new and separate submission and will be regulated under the
requirements of § 440-301F. The applicant shall submit all revised plans
to the Planning Commission, and the Planning Commission shall review
all revised plans prior to submission to the Board of Supervisors.
(b) The Planning Commission may submit a report to the Board of
Supervisors which recommends that the application be approved with
conditions. The Planning Commission shall recommend denial of plans
which would not comply with the Township's ordinances.
(c) When an applicant requests a modification by the Board of Supervisors
of a requirement of this chapter, the applicant shall submit such request,
in writing, to the Planning Commission for review and comment. The
applicant shall also indicate the reason or purpose for the request. In the
Planning Commission's report to the Board of Supervisors on the
§ 440-303 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-303
440:24
subdivision or land development plan, the Planning Commission shall
provide a recommendation for approval or denial of each requested
modification and the rationale for each recommendation.
(8) Following receipt of the Township Planning Commission's report and within
90 days following the receipt of the applicant's complete submission, as
indicated in § 440-301C, the Board of Supervisors shall:
(a) Review and evaluate applicant's submission.
(b) Review and evaluate all reports received from applicable reviewing
agencies.
(c) Listen to applicant's presentation, if requested, and discuss the project
with applicant, if requested.
(d) Determine whether the preliminary plan meets the objectives and
requirements of this chapter and other ordinances.
(e) Communicate the decision, in writing, to the applicant no later than 15
days following the decision and within the ninety-day review period
established as indicated in § 440-301C.
(9) Approval of the preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of the final plan
or authorize the sale of lots or construction of buildings.
(10) Whenever the approval of a preliminary plan is subject to conditions, the
written action of the Board as prescribed herein shall:
(a) Specify each condition of approval, citing relevant ordinance provisions
in each case; and
(b) Require the applicant's written agreement to the conditions. Where the
applicant's written concurrency is not received within the time allotted,
the Board shall be deemed to have denied approval.
(11) Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and communicate it to
the applicant within the time and manner required shall be deemed an approval
of the application in terms as presented unless the applicant has agreed in
writing to an extension of time or change in prescribed manner of presentation
of communication of the decision, in which case, failure to meet the extended
time or change will have a like effect.
(12) If disapproved, the Board of Supervisors shall state the reasons for the action,
citing specific sections in the applicable ordinances which the plan failed to
meet. The applicant may file a revised preliminary plan with the Township
Manager.
D. Required plan information. The preliminary plan shall show or be accompanied by
the following information:
(1) Drafting standards.
(a) Plans shall be drawn on sheets no larger than 36 inches by 48 inches. All
§ 440-303 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-303
440:25
sheets comprising a submission shall be on one size. Sheets should be
large enough to clearly show all required features but at a scale not less
than one inch equals 100 feet.
(b) Each set of plans shall be folded to a size which can be accommodated in
a legal (8 1/2 inches by 14 inches) file folder.
(c) The submission shall include a copy of the site plan for the entire property
on a single sheet at an appropriate scale that will fit the maximum sheet
size submitted.
(d) Dimensions shall be in feet and decimal parts thereof and bearings in
degrees, minutes and seconds.
(e) Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the total
number of sheets.
(f) Where any revision is made, or when the plan is a revision of a previously
approved plan, dotted lines shall be used to show features or locations to
be abandoned and solid lines to show the presently proposed features.
(g) The plan shall be so prepared and bear an adequate legend to indicate
clearly which features are existing and which are proposed.
(2) General information.
(a) Name of the subdivision or land development.
(b) Name and address of the record and/or equitable owner.
(c) Name and address of the engineer, surveyor or architect responsible for
the plan.
(d) Present zoning classification with district requirements.
(e) Total acreage of the tract.
(f) Date, North point, and scale (written and graphic).
(g) A location map for the purpose of locating the site to be subdivided or
developed, at a scale of not less than 800 feet to the inch, showing the
relation of the tract to adjoining property and to all streets, roads and
Township boundaries existing within 1,000 feet of any part of the
property proposed to be subdivided or developed.
(h) Tax parcel number(s) of the tract.
(i) Written report, including the following information:
[1] General description of project.
[2] General description of proposed stormwater management controls
and facilities both during and after development.
[3] General description of erosion and sedimentation controls, including
§ 440-303 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-303
440:26
those contained in any required erosion and sedimentation control
plan.
[4] Expected project time schedule, including anticipated start and
completion dates.
(3) Existing features.
(a) Complete outline survey of the property to be subdivided or developed,
showing all courses, distances and areas, and tie-ins to all adjacent street
intersections, with existing monuments indicated.
(b) The names of owners, tax parcel numbers and zoning classification of
land immediately adjacent or across from the subject tract.
(c) Site boundaries with the layout and dimension of lots.
[1] In the case of mobile home parks, the placement, location and
number of mobile home lots and mobile home pads on a layout map
of the parcel.
[2] The arrangement of buildings and parking areas in commercial,
multifamily and mobile home parks developments, with all
necessary dimensions noted on the plan.
(d) All existing highways, streets and roads on or adjacent to any part of the
tract, including name, right-of-way width (existing and future) and
cartway width, are required to be shown on the plan. An aerial
photograph must be submitted showing these features within 200 feet of
the tract. If requested, the Township Engineer may require these features
to be shown on the plan within 200 feet of the tract in addition to the
aerial photograph. [Amended 5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 07-07]
(e) All existing buildings and their uses, bodies of water (including streams,
lakes and ponds), wetlands and marsh areas, sewers, culverts, petroleum
or petroleum product lines, gas lines, electric and telephone lines, fire
hydrants, all other utilities and other significant man-made features on or
immediately adjacent to the tract must be shown on the plan. If requested,
the Township Engineer may require these features to be shown on the
plan within 200 feet of the tract. [Amended 5-29-2007 by Ord. No.
07-07]
(f) Pursuant to Act 287 of 1974, 73 P.S. § 176 et seq., the location, size and
ownership of all underground utilities and any rights-of-way within the
property.
(g) Appropriate contours at two- to five-foot intervals with sufficient details
to show the course, structure and capacity of all drainage facilities and the
method of drainage of the adjacent or contiguous territory. All ground
contours shall be taken from United States Coast and Geodetic Survey
bench marks and run direct to the degree that the actual elevations of the
spot points or contours shall be the exact elevations above United States
Coast and Geodetic Survey datum.
§ 440-303 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-303
440:27
(h) Natural features map which indicates:
[1] Floodplain areas.
[2] Floodplain soil areas.
[3] Slope areas over 8%.
[4] Wooded areas and large trees standing alone.
[5] Streams, wetlands and marshy areas.
[6] Lakes, ponds, lake and pond shorelines, and other natural resources.
(i) The boundaries of the various soil types and identification keys as
indicated in the Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties,
Pennsylvania, with a description of each soil type and limitations of the
soils for on-site sewage disposal, buildings with basements, streets and
parking lots.
(j) Stormwater management district boundaries applicable to the site.
[1] Plans and profiles of proposed stormwater management facilities,
including horizontal and vertical locations, size and type of material.
This information shall be of the quality required for the construction
of all facilities and include all calculations, assumptions and criteria
used in the design of the facilities; a schedule for installation of such
facilities; and a proposed schedule of inspections which will be
performed by the applicant's engineer or designee in company with
the Township Engineer or designee.
[2] The locations of septic tank infiltration areas and wells when
infiltration methods such as cisterns, seepage beds or trenches or
infiltration basins are used. Also, soil percolation tests and
submission of the percolation data and test locations to substantiate
percolation rates used in the drainage calculations to show necessary
soil percolation rates for use of on-site infiltration facilities [(f) =
0.20 inches/hours].
[3] Plans and profiles of all erosion and sedimentation control measures,
temporary as well as permanent, including all calculations,
assumptions and criteria used in designing the controls, and a
schedule for their implementation.
(4) Proposed layout.
(a) The layout of streets, including name and width of cartways and rightsof-
way, alleys and crosswalks and sidewalks.
(b) The layout and approximate dimensions of lots, with lots numbered
consecutively.
(c) The arrangement of buildings and parking areas in commercial, office,
institutional and multifamily developments, with all necessary
§ 440-303 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-303
440:28
dimensions noted on the plan and including the location of:
[1] Lights.
[2] Fire hydrants.
[3] Trash receptacles.
[4] Open space.
[5] Buffer yards.
[6] Recreational facilities.
(d) Zoning requirements, with proposed standards, to include:
[1] Minimum lot size.
[2] Density.
[3] Number of dwelling units, with lot sizes.
[4] Open space and impervious surface ratios.
[5] Building setback lines (based on yard requirements).
[6] Parking spaces.
[7] Buffer yards.
(e) Landscape plan with plant list and proposed contours. The landscape plan
shall be reviewed and approved by the Middletown Township Arbor
Commission.
(f) A reference to any land dedicated for public use or offered for dedication
for parks, recreation areas, schools, widening of streets or other public
uses.
(g) For multifamily developments, the total area, total dwelling units, number
of buildings, proposed density, total parking spaces, building coverage
and the bedroom ratio, and other requirements of the Zoning Ordinance
(Chapter 500).
(h) For subdivision, the total area, number of lots, average and minimum lot
size, and proposed length of new streets.
(i) Location and size of storm drains, sanitary sewers, culverts, watercourses
and all appurtenances thereof, on-site sewage disposal facilities, gas
mains, water mains, fire hydrants, streetlights, planting, special
structures, and other underground conduits or structures.
(j) An indication of any lots in which other than a residential use is intended.
(k) Rights-of-way and/or easements proposed to be created for all drainage
purposes, utilities or other pertinent reasons.
§ 440-303 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-303
440:29
(l) Tentative typical cross sections and center-line profiles for each proposed
street shown on the preliminary plan. These plans may be submitted as
separate sheets.
(m) Where the preliminary plan covers only a part of the owner's entire
holding, a sketch shall be submitted of the perspective street layout for
the remainder.
(n) The words "preliminary plan - not to be recorded" shall be shown on the
plan.
(5) Proposed layout for condominium conversions. In addition to the above
information, the plan shall indicate the location of each unit to be converted to
individual ownership.
(6) Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan and stormwater management plan
for the construction phase of the project.
(7) Transportation impact study.
(a) Applicability.
[1] A transportation impact study shall be submitted as part of the
preliminary plan application for all subdivisions and/or land
developments that meet one or more of the following criteria:
[a] Residential: 50 or more dwelling units.
[b] Nonresidential: developments which will generate 500 or more
trips per day. The number of trips per day shall be determined
through the use of the Institute of Transportation Engineers
Trip Generation Manual (1987, as amended).
[2] The preliminary plan application for those subdivisions and/or land
developments meeting one or more of the aforesaid criteria shall not
be complete until the transportation impact study is submitted to the
Township Manager in accordance with the provisions of this section.
[3] The Middletown Township Planning Commission, at its discretion,
may require that the preliminary plan application for any other
subdivision or land development be accompanied by a transportation
impact study; provided, however, that the Planning Commission
notifies the applicant of such a requirement immediately following
the Planning Commission's first meeting to consider the proposal.
Such a notification shall specify the reason for the requirement,
citing the proposal's particular location or existing problems or type
of use (i.e., generation of heavy truck traffic). The transportation
impact study shall be submitted to the Township Manager within 30
days of the date of said notification.
(b) Definitions. The following words and phrases shall have, for the purpose
of this chapter, the meaning hereinbelow indicated:
LEVEL OF SERVICE — As described in the 1985 Highway Capacity
§ 440-303 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-303
440:30
Manual, indicates how well traffic moves on a particular highway facility
or through a specific intersection. There are six levels of servicing
ranging from A through F. Level of Service A indicates generally free
movement. Level of Service E represents maximum capacity of the
facility. Level F indicates congestion. Level of Service C is considered
the design level of service, representing a stable traffic flow and a
relatively satisfactory travel speed.
MAJOR INTERSECTION — Any intersection where traffic generated
by the proposal will have a significant impact on the operation of the
intersection. Where doubt exists, the transportation engineer shall seek
guidance from the Middletown Township Manager prior to the
submission of the traffic impact study.
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION—Transportation service for the general
public provided by a common carrier of passengers generally on a regular
route basis by the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority or
a private operator offering service to the public.
STUDY AREA — This area will extend approximately 1/2 mile along
the adjacent roadway in both directions from all access points or to
a major intersection along these roadways. Where doubt exists, the
transportation engineer shall seek guidance from Middletown Township
prior to the submission of the traffic impact study.
TRIP GENERATION RATES — The total count of trips to and from a
study site per unit of land use, as measured by parameters like dwelling
units, acres, etc.
VOLUME/CAPACITY ANALYSIS — This procedure compares the
volume of a roadway or intersection approach to its capacity (maximum
number of vehicles that can pass a given point during a given time
period). The procedures described in the 1985 Highway Capacity
Manual, Highway Research Board Special Report 87, as outlined in the
PennDOT Design Manual, Volume 2, shall be followed.
WARRANTS FOR TRAFFIC SIGNAL INSTALLATION — This is a
series of eight warrants which detail the minimum traffic or pedestrian
volumes or other criteria necessary for the installation of a traffic signal.
These warrants are contained in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways, United States Department of
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, 1971.
(c) Conduct of transportation impact study. The transportation impact study
shall be prepared by a qualified traffic engineer and/or planner.
(d) General requirements and standards. A transportation impact study shall
contain the following information:
[1] General site description. The site description shall include the size,
location, proposed land uses, construction staging and completion
date of the proposed land development. If the development is
residential, types of dwelling units and number of bedrooms shall
also be included. A brief description of other major existing and
§ 440-303 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-303
440:31
proposed land developments within the study area shall be provided.
The general site description shall also include probable
socioeconomic characteristics of potential site users to the extent
that they may affect the transportation needs of the site (i.e., number
of senior citizens).
[2] Transportation facilities description. The description shall contain a
full documentation of the proposed internal and existing external
transportation system. This description shall include proposed
internal vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian circulation, all proposed
ingress and egress locations, all internal roadway widths and rightsof-
way, parking conditions, traffic channelizations, and any
intersection within the site. The site design shall be shown to
maximize potential public transportation usage to and from the
development, such as providing adequate turning radius at all access
points to allow a bus to enter the development. Bus shelter and sign
locations shall be designated where appropriate. The report shall
describe the entire external roadway system within the study area.
Major intersections in the study area shall be identified and
sketched. All existing and proposed public transportation services
and facilities within a one-mile radius of the site shall also be
documented. All future highway improvements, including proposed
construction and traffic signalization, shall be noted. This
information shall be obtained from the twelve-year highway capital
program for the Delaware Valley Region and from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation. Any proposed roadway
improvements due to proposed surrounding developments shall be
recorded.
[3] Existing traffic conditions. Existing traffic conditions shall be
measured and documented for all roadways and intersections in the
study area. Existing traffic volumes for average daily traffic, peak
highway hour(s) traffic, and peak development-generated hour(s)
traffic shall be recorded. Manual traffic counts at major intersections
in the study area shall be conducted, encompassing the peak
highway and development-generated hour(s), and documentation
shall be included in the report. A volume/capacity analysis based
upon existing volumes shall be performed during the peak highway
hour(s) and the peak development-generated hour(s) for all
roadways and major intersections in the study area. Levels of service
shall be determined for each location. This analysis will determine
the adequacy of the existing roadway system to serve the current
traffic demand. Roadways and/or intersections experiencing Level
of Service E or F shall be noted as congestion locations.
[4] Transportation impact of the development. Estimation of vehicular
trips to result from the proposal shall be completed for the average
daily peak highway hour(s) and peak development-generated
hour(s). Vehicular trip generation rates to be used for this calculation
shall be obtained from the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip
§ 440-303 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-303
440:32
Generation Manual (1987, as amended). These developmentgenerated
traffic movements, as estimated, and the reference
source(s) and methodology followed shall be documented. All
turning movements shall be calculated. These generated volumes
shall be distributed to the study area and assigned to the existing
roadways and intersections throughout the study area.
Documentation of all assumptions used in the distribution and
assignment phase shall be provided. Traffic volumes shall be
assigned to individual access points. Pedestrian volumes shall be
calculated, if applicable. If school crossings are to be used,
pedestrian volumes shall be assigned to each crossing. Any
characteristics of the site that will cause particular trip generation
problems shall be noted.
[5] Analysis of transportation impact.
[a] The total future traffic demand shall be calculated. This
demand shall consist of the combination of the existing traffic
expanded to the completion year (using an annual traffic rate of
5%), the development-generated traffic, and the traffic
generated by other proposed developments in the study area. A
second volume/capacity analysis shall be conducted using the
total future demand and the future roadway capacity. If staging
of the proposed development is anticipated, calculations for
each stage of completion shall be made. This analysis shall be
performed during the peak highway hour(s) and peak
development-generated hour(s) for all roadways and major
intersections in the study area. Volume/capacity calculations
shall be completed for all major intersections. It is usually at
these locations that capacity is most restricted.
[b] All access points and pedestrian crossings shall be examined as
to the feasibility of installing traffic signals. This evaluation
shall compare the projected traffic and pedestrian volumes to
the warrants for traffic signal installation.
[6] Conclusions and recommended improvements.
[a] Levels of service for all roadways and intersections shall be
listed. All roadways and/or intersections showing a level of
service below "C" shall be considered deficient, and specific
recommendations for the elimination of these problems shall be
listed. This listing of recommended improvements shall
include, but not be limited to, the following elements: internal
circulation design, site access location and design, external
roadway and intersection design and improvements, traffic
signal installation and operation, including signal timing, and
transit design improvements. All physical roadway
improvements shall be shown in sketches.
[b] Existing and/or future public transportation service shall also
§ 440-303 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-303
440:33
§ 440-304. Final plan, major subdivision or land development. [Amended
12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13; 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-16; 3-1-1994 by Ord. No.
94-02; 8-16-2000 by Ord. No. 00-09]
be addressed. A listing of all actions to be undertaken to
increase present public transportation usage and improve
service, if applicable, shall be included. An analysis based
on the guidelines contained in the Bucks County Public
Transportation Study Phase I Report shall be undertaken to
indicate whether or not future public transportation service
should be provided to the development.
[c] The listing of recommended improvements for both roadways
and transit shall include, for each improvement, the party
responsible for the improvement, the cost and funding of the
improvement, and the completion date for the improvement.
(e) Implementation and PennDOT submission.
[1] The Middletown Township Planning Commission, the Bucks
County Planning Commission, the Township Police Department,
and the Board of Supervisors shall review the transportation impact
study to analyze its adequacy in solving any traffic problems that
will occur due to the subdivision or land development. The Board of
Supervisors may decide that certain improvements on or adjacent to
the site are mandatory for plan approval and may attach these
conditions to the approval if the Township concludes that additional
improvements are necessary; the developer shall have the
opportunity to resubmit alternative improvement designs for
approval.
[2] Improvement plans shall not be submitted to PennDOT until the
plans have been reviewed by the Middletown Township Planning
Commission and the Bucks County Planning Commission and
approved by the Board of Supervisors. This submittal to PennDOT
shall be accompanied by the comments of the Township and the
County Planning Commissions.
A. General. A final plan shall be submitted conforming to the changes agreed to during
the preliminary plan procedure. The final plan and all information and procedures
relating thereto shall in all respects be in compliance with this chapter, except where
variation therefrom may be specifically indicated in writing by the Board of
Supervisors.
B. Purpose. The purpose of the final plan is to ensure formal approval by the Board of
Supervisors before plans for all subdivisions and land developments are recorded
as required by this chapter.
C. Procedure.
(1) Applicant submits to the Township Manager the final plan and application in
two forms, as follows: one copy in an electronic medium acceptable to the
§ 440-303 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-304
440:34
Township Engineer and such paper copies as determined by the Township and
pursuant to its then-current schedule for submission of subdivision and land
development plans, along with necessary permits and letters of approval from
the reviewing agencies, within one year from the date of receiving approval or
conditional approval of the preliminary plan.
(2) Copies of the final plan and all required information shall be submitted to the
Township Manager together with any required fees and escrow deposit.
(a) If no preliminary plan has been filed, a deposit and fee as required in
accordance with the current fee schedule adopted by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors shall be paid upon the submission of the complete
final plan to the Township Manager.
(b) If the final plan is submitted more than one year after receiving approval
or conditional approval of the preliminary plan as required, an additional
review fee shall be paid in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by
the Board of Supervisors. An additional escrow deposit is not required,
unless the total deposit with the Township is less than that required in
accordance with the current fee schedule.
(3) Township Manager shall immediately distribute copies of the final plan and
application to:
(a) Township Board of Supervisors: five copies.
(b) Township Planning Commission: two copies.
(c) Bucks County Planning Commission: two copies.
(d) Township Engineer: one copy.
(e) Sewer and Water Engineer: one copy.
(f) Sewer and Water Department: one copy.
(g) Township files: two copies.
(h) Fire Marshal: one copy.
(4) Following receipt of the complete submission to the Township Manager, the
Township Engineer:
(a) Reviews the applicant's submission for engineering considerations; and
(b) Prepares a report for the Planning Commission and the Board of
Supervisors.
(5) Following receipt of the complete submission to the Township Manager, the
Middletown Township Planning Commission:
(a) Receives and reviews the applicant's submission and the reports from all
applicable reviewing agencies;
(b) Discusses submission with the applicant, if requested by the applicant;
§ 440-304 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-304
440:35
(c) Evaluates applicant's submission, presentation, discussion with applicant
and the reviewing agencies' reports;
(d) Determines whether the final plan meets the objectives and requirements
of this chapter and other ordinances; determines if the final plan is
consistent with the approved preliminary plan; and
(e) Prepares a written report on the project for use by the Board of
Supervisors.
(6) Following receipt of the Township Planning Commission's report and within
90 days following the receipt of the applicant's complete submission, as
indicated in § 440-301C, the Board of Supervisors shall:
(a) Review and evaluate the applicant's submission.
(b) Review and evaluate all reports submitted from all applicable reviewing
agencies.
(c) Listen to applicant's presentation and discuss project with the applicant,
if requested.
(d) Determine whether the final plan meets the objectives and requirements
of this chapter and other ordinances or, where preceded by an approved
preliminary plan, determine whether the final plan is in accordance with
its terms and conditions as approved.
(e) Inform the applicant in writing of the decision and the reasons for the
decision not later than 15 days following the decision and within the
ninety-day review period established by the Municipalities Planning
Code. A plan shall not be approved if any changes are required.
(7) If the final plan is approved, the Board of Supervisors shall adopt same by
resolution or motion.
(a) Approval shall not be final until entry into contract and production of
completion guarantees as set forth in § 440-606.
(b) Eight exact copies of the approved final plan shall be submitted to the
Board of Supervisors. Two copies shall be on linen with the signatures of
the required agencies as specified in § 440-301. Six copies of the
complete submission shall be on paper for distribution to the various
reviewing agencies.
(8) Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and communicate it to
the applicant within the time and manner required shall be deemed an approval
of the application in terms as presented, unless the applicant has agreed in
writing to an extension of time or change in prescribed manner of presentation
of communication of the decision, in which case, failure to meet the extended
time or change will have a like effect.
(9) If disapproved, the Board of Supervisors shall state the reasons for this action,
citing specific sections in the applicable ordinances which the plan failed to
§ 440-304 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-304
440:36
meet, and where the final plan is preceded by an approved preliminary plan,
the Board shall specify how it fails to meet the terms of preliminary approval.
The applicant may file a revised final plan with the Township Manager.
D. Required plan information. The final plan shall show or be accompanied by the
following information:
(1) Drafting standards.
(a) Plans shall be drawn on sheets no larger than 36 inches by 48 inches. All
sheets comprising a submission shall be on one size. Sheets should be
large enough to clearly show all required features but at a scale not less
than one inch equals 100 feet. The plan shall be a clear and legible white
paper print.
(b) Each set of plans shall be folded to a size which can be accommodated in
a legal (8 1/2 inches by 14 inches) file folder.
(c) The submission shall include a copy of the site plan for the entire property
on a single sheet at an appropriate scale that will fit the maximum sheet
size submitted.
(d) Dimensions shall be in feet and decimal parts thereof and bearings in
degrees, minutes and seconds.
(e) Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the total
number of sheets.
(f) Where any revision is made, or when the plan is a revision of a previously
approved plan, dotted lines shall be used to show features or locations to
be abandoned and solid lines to show the presently proposed features.
(g) The plan shall be so prepared and bear an adequate legend to indicate
clearly which features are existing and which are proposed.
(2) General information.
(a) Name of the subdivision or land development.
(b) Name and address of the record and/or equitable owner.
(c) Name and address of the engineer, surveyor or architect responsible for
the plan.
(d) Present zoning classification with district requirements.
(e) Total acreage of the tract.
(f) Date, North point, and scale (written and graphic).
(g) A location map for the purpose of locating the site to be subdivided or
developed, at a scale of not less than 800 feet to the inch, showing the
relation of the tract to adjoining property and to all streets, roads and
Township boundaries existing within 1,000 feet of any part of the
property proposed to be subdivided or developed.
§ 440-304 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-304
440:37
(h) Tax parcel number(s) of the tract.
(3) Existing features.
(a) Complete outline survey of the property to be subdivided or developed,
showing all courses, distances and area and tie-ins to all adjacent street
intersections, with existing monuments indicated.
(b) The names of owners, tax parcel members and zoning classification of
land immediately adjacent or across from the subject tract.
(c) Site boundaries with the layout and dimension of lots.
[1] In the case of mobile home parks, the placement, location and
number of mobile home lots and mobile home pads on a layout map
of the parcel.
[2] The arrangement of buildings and parking areas in commercial,
multifamily and mobile home park developments with all necessary
dimensions noted on the plan.
(d) All existing highways, streets and roads on or adjacent to any part of the
tract, including name, right-of-way width (existing and future) and
cartway width, are required to be shown on the plan. An aerial
photograph must be submitted showing these features within 200 feet of
the tract. If requested, the Township Engineer may require these features
to be shown on the plan within 200 feet of the tract in addition to the
aerial photograph. [Amended 5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 07-07]
(e) All existing buildings and their uses, bodies of water (including streams,
lakes and ponds), wetlands and marsh areas, sewers, culverts, petroleum
or petroleum product lines, gas lines, electric and telephone lines, fire
hydrants, all other utilities and other significant man-made features on or
immediately adjacent to the tract must be shown on the plan. If requested,
the Township Engineer may require these features to be shown on the
plan within 200 feet of the tract. [Amended 5-29-2007 by Ord. No.
07-07]
(f) Pursuant to Act 287 of 1974, the location, size and ownership of all
underground utilities, and any rights-of-way within the property.
(g) Appropriate contours at two- to five-foot intervals with sufficient details
to show the course, structure and capacity of all drainage facilities and the
method of drainage of the adjacent or contiguous territory. All ground
contours shall be taken from United States Coast and Geodetic Survey
bench marks and run direct to the degree that the actual elevations of the
spot points or contours shall be the exact elevations above United States
Coast and Geodetic Survey datum.
(h) Natural features map which indicates:
[1] Floodplain areas.
§ 440-304 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-304
440:38
[2] Floodplain soil areas.
[3] Slope areas over 8%.
[4] Wooded areas and large trees standing alone.
[5] Streams, wetlands and marshy areas.
[6] Lakes, ponds, lake and pond shorelines, and other natural resources.
(i) The boundaries of the various soil types and identification key as
indicated in the Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties,
Pennsylvania, with a description of each soil type and limitations of the
soils for on-site sewage disposal, buildings with basements, streets and
parking lots.
(j) Stormwater management district boundaries applicable to the site.
(4) Proposed layout.
(a) The layout of streets, including name and width of cartways and rightsof-
way, alleys and crosswalks and sidewalks.
(b) The layout and dimensions of lots, with lots numbered consecutively.
(c) The arrangement of buildings and parking areas in commercial, office,
institutional and multifamily developments with all necessary dimensions
noted on the plan, and including the location of:
[1] Lights.
[2] Fire hydrants.
[3] Trash receptacles.
[4] Open space areas.
[5] Buffer yards.
[6] Recreational facilities.
(d) Zoning requirements, with proposed standards, to include:
[1] Minimum lot size.
[2] Density.
[3] Number of dwelling units, with lot sizes.
[4] Open space and impervious surface ratios.
[5] Building setback lines (based on yard requirements).
[6] Parking spaces.
[7] Buffer yards.
§ 440-304 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-304
440:39
(e) Landscape plan with plant list and proposed contours.123
(f) For multifamily developments, the total area, total dwelling units, number
of buildings, proposed density, total parking spaces, building coverage
and the bedroom ratio and other requirements of the Zoning Ordinance
(Chapter 500).
(g) For subdivision, the total area, number of lots, average and minimum lot
size, and proposed length of new streets.
(h) Location and size of storm drains, sanitary sewers, culverts, watercourses
and all appurtenances thereof, on-site sewage disposal facilities, gas
mains, water mains, fire hydrants, streetlights, planting, special
structures, and other underground conduits or structures.
(i) An indication of any lots in which other than a residential use is intended.
(j) Rights-of-way and/or easements proposed to be created for all drainage
purposes, utilities or other pertinent reasons.
(k) Final typical cross sections and center-line profiles for each proposed
street shown on the final plan. These plans may be submitted as separate
sheets.
(l) Accurate locations of all monuments, one to be placed at each change in
direction of boundary; two to be placed at each street intersection and one
on one side of each street at angle points and at the beginning and at their
end, and areas to be conveyed for public use shall be fully monumented
at their external boundaries.
(m) If water is to be provided by means other than private wells owned and
maintained by the individual owners of lots within the subdivision or
development, applicants shall present evidence to the Board of
Supervisors that the subdivision is to be supplied by a certified public
utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners, or by a
municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a Certificate of
Public Convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or
an application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a
commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is
appropriate, shall be acceptable.
(n) For any plan for which on-site sewage disposal is proposed, the plan shall
contain a title block as follows, signed by an authorized agent of the
Bucks County Department of Health:
123.Editor's Note: Original subsection (6) of the 2009 Code, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-16.
§ 440-304 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-304
440:40
OBSERVATIONS OF DEEP TEST HOLES AND PERCOLATION
TESTS ON ALL LOTS HAVE BEEN CONDUCTED BY THE
BUCKS COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND IT HAS
BEEN DETERMINED THAT LOTS __________ ARE SUITABLE
FOR __________ TYPE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM(S) UNDER
CURRENT RULES AND REGULATIONS. PERMITS FOR THE
CONSTRUCTION OF EACH INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL
SYSTEM ON EACH LOT MUST BE OBTAINED PRIOR TO THE
COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION OF THE SYSTEM AND/
OR BUILDINGS.
______________
(Date)
(Signature of Bucks County Health Department Agent)
(Title)
(5) Proposed layout for condominium conversions. In addition to the above
information, the plan shall indicate the location of each unit to be converted to
individual ownership.
(6) Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan and stormwater management plan
for the construction phase of the project. This includes a description of the
program, in a recordable form, that clearly sets forth the ownership and
maintenance responsibility for all temporary and permanent stormwater
management facilities, including the following:
(a) Description of the method and extent of any maintenance requirements.
(b) When maintained by a private entity, identification of a responsible
individual, corporation, association or other entity for ownership and
maintenance must be provided as a matter of record. Deed covenants and
restrictions must be submitted to provide for maintenance by this entity.
(c) When maintained by a private entity, a copy of the legally binding
document shall be created which provides that Middletown Township
shall have the right to:
[1] Inspect the facilities at any time.
[2] Require the private entity to take corrective measures and assign the
private entity reasonable time periods for any necessary action.
[3] Authorize maintenance to be done, and lien the cost of the work
against the properties of the private entity responsible for
maintenance.
(d) Where the stormwater management plan proposes that Middletown
Township own or maintain the facilities, a description of the methods,
§ 440-304 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-304
440:41
§ 440-305. Final plan, minor subdivision. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13;
8-16-2000 by Ord. No. 00-09]
procedures and extent to which any facilities will require scheduled
maintenance shall be turned over to the Township.
(e) Prior to approval of the final subdivision and land development plan and
stormwater management plan, the Township shall require financial
security as a performance guarantee for stormwater management control
facilities during the construction period and prior to the transfer of
ownership of the affected property to the Township or other approved
entity in accordance with Article VI, Administration, of this chapter.
(f) When a stormwater management plan is submitted in sections, a
generalized stormwater management plan for the entire project site shall
be submitted in addition to the detailed stormwater management plan for
the proposed section. This generalized plan shall demonstrate how the
stormwater management of the proposed section will relate to the entire
development. If temporary facilities are required for construction of a
section, such facilities shall be included in the submitted stormwater
management plan.
(7) Additional materials required for residential performance standard
subdivisions:
(a) All open spaces shall be so identified, and their proposed use level of
maintenance specified.
(b) A plan for planting is required for open space; this plan shall show the
location for all existing trees greater than twelve-inch caliper. All new
planting shall indicate species and size.
(c) A table showing open space ratio, density and impervious surface ratio.
A. General. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any subdivision which
does not meet the qualifying criteria set forth in the definition of "subdivision" in
§ 440-202.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a simplified procedure by which
minor subdivisions may be submitted and approved.
C. Procedure.
(1) Applicant prepares final plan and application.
(2) Applicant submits to the Township Manager the final plan and application in
two forms: one copy in an electronic medium acceptable to the Township
Engineer and such paper copies as determined by the Township and pursuant
to its then-current schedule for submission of subdivision and land
development plans.
(3) Copies of the final plan and all required supplemental data initially shall be
submitted to the Township Manager, together with the required fees and
§ 440-304 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-305
440:42
escrow deposit established in accordance with the current fee schedule adopted
by resolution by the Board of Supervisors.124 The Township Manager shall
note the date of receipt of the application, fees and escrow deposit. The
application shall not be deemed to be submitted until a complete application
and required fees have been submitted.
(4) Upon submission of a complete application, together with all required fees and
escrow deposits, the Township Manager shall accept the application, plans and
other required materials as filed and shall immediately distribute copies of the
final plan and application to:
(a) Township Board of Supervisors: five copies.
(b) Township Planning Commission: two copies.
(c) Bucks County Planning Commission: two copies.
(d) Township Engineer: one copy.
(e) Water and Sewer Department: one copy.
(f) Township files: two copies.
(g) Historic Preservation Commission: one copy.
(5) Following receipt of the complete submission, the Middletown Township
Planning Commission:
(a) Receives and reviews the applicant's submission and the reports from all
applicable agencies.
(b) Discusses submission with the applicant, if requested by the applicant.
(c) Evaluates the applicant's submission, presentation, discussion with
applicant and reviewing agencies' reports.
(d) Determines whether the final plan meets the objectives and requirements
of this chapter and other ordinances.
(e) Prepares a written report recommending approval or disapproval of the
final plan for use by the Board of Supervisors.
(6) Following receipt of the Township Planning Commission's report and within
90 days following the receipt of the applicant's complete submission, as
indicated in § 440-301C, the Board of Supervisors shall:
(a) Review and evaluate applicant's submission.
(b) Review and evaluate reports from all applicable reviewing agencies.
(c) Listen to the applicant's presentation and discuss the project with the
applicant, if requested.
124.Editor's Note: Township fee schedules are on file in the Township Building and available to be viewed on the
Township's website at www.middletownbucks.org.
§ 440-305 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-305
440:43
(d) Determine whether the final plan meets the objectives and requirements
of this chapter and other ordinances.
(e) Inform the applicant in writing of the decision and the reasons for the
decision not later than 15 days following the decision and within the
ninety-day review period established by the Municipalities Planning
Code.
(7) If the final plan is approved, the Board of Supervisors shall adopt same by
resolution or motion.
(a) No plat which proposes sewage disposal by means of a public sewer
system shall be approved until it has been established through written
documentation that service and capacity are available in the sewerage
system being considered for service.
(b) Five exact copies of the approved final plan shall be submitted to the
Board of Supervisors. Two copies shall be on linen with the signatures of
the required agencies as specified in § 440-311. Three copies of the
complete submission shall be on paper for distribution to the various
reviewing agencies.
(8) If disapproved, the Board of Supervisors shall state the reasons for this action,
citing specific sections in the applicable ordinances which the plan failed to
meet. The applicant may file a revised minor subdivision plan with the
Township Manager.
D. Required plan information. The final plan shall show or be accompanied by the
following information:
(1) Drafting standards.
(a) Plans shall be drawn on sheets no larger than 36 inches by 48 inches. All
sheets comprising a submission shall be on one size. Sheets should be
large enough to clearly show all required features but at a scale not less
than one inch equals 100 feet. The plan shall be a clear and legible white
paper print.
(b) Each set of plans shall be folded to a size which can be accommodated in
a legal (8 1/2 inches by 14 inches) file folder.
(c) The submission shall include a copy of the site plan for the entire property
on a single sheet at an appropriate scale that will fit the maximum sheet
size submitted.
(d) Dimensions shall be in feet and decimal parts thereof and bearings in
degrees, minutes and seconds.
(e) Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the total
number of sheets.
(f) Where any revision is made, or when the plan is a revision of a previously
approved plan, dotted lines shall be used to show features or locations to
§ 440-305 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-305
440:44
be abandoned and solid lines to show the presently proposed features.
(g) The plan shall be so prepared and bear an adequate legend to indicate
clearly which features are existing and which are proposed.
(2) General information.
(a) Name of the subdivision.
(b) Name and address of the record and/or equitable owner.
(c) Name and address of the engineer, surveyor or architect responsible for
the plan.
(d) Present zoning classification with district requirements.
(e) Total acreage of the tract.
(f) Date, North point, and scale (written and graphic).
(g) A location map for the purpose of locating the site to be subdivided, at a
scale of not less than 800 feet to the inch, showing the relation of the tract
to adjoining property and to all streets, roads and Township boundaries
existing within 1,000 feet of any part of the property proposed to be
subdivided.
(h) Tax parcel number(s) of the tract.
(3) Existing features.
(a) Complete outline survey of the property to be subdivided, showing all
courses, distances and area and tie-ins to all adjacent street intersections,
with existing monuments indicated.
(b) The names of owners, tax parcel numbers and zoning classification of
land immediately adjacent or across from the subject tract.
(c) Site boundaries with the layout and dimension of lots.
(d) All existing highways, streets and roads on or adjacent to any part of the
tract, including name, right-of-way width (existing and future) and
cartway width, are required to be shown on the plan. An aerial
photograph must be submitted showing these features within 200 feet of
the tract. If requested, the Township Engineer may require these features
to be shown on the plan within 200 feet of the tract in addition to the
aerial photograph. [Amended 5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 07-07]
(e) All existing buildings and their uses, bodies of water (including streams,
lakes and ponds), wetlands and marsh areas, sewers, culverts, petroleum
or petroleum product lines, gas lines, electric and telephone lines, fire
hydrants, all other utilities and other significant man-made features on or
immediately adjacent to the tract must be shown on the plan. If requested,
the Township Engineer may require these features to be shown on the
plan within 200 feet of the tract. [Amended 5-29-2007 by Ord. No.
§ 440-305 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-305
440:45
07-07]
(f) Pursuant to Act 287 of 1974, 73 P.S. § 176 et seq., the location, size, and
ownership of all underground utilities and any rights-of-way within the
property.
(g) Appropriate contours at two- to five-foot intervals with sufficient details
to show the course, structure and capacity of all drainage facilities and the
method of drainage of the adjacent or contiguous territory. All ground
contours shall be taken from United States Coast and Geodetic Survey
bench marks and run direct to the degree that the actual elevations of the
spot points or contours shall be the exact elevations above United States
Coast and Geodetic Survey datum.
(h) Natural features map which indicates:
[1] Floodplain areas.
[2] Floodplain soil areas.
[3] Slope areas over 8%.
[4] Wooded areas and large trees standing alone.
[5] Streams, wetlands and marshy areas.
[6] Lakes, ponds, lake and pond shorelines, and other natural resources.
(i) The boundaries of the various soil types and identification keys as
indicated in the Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties,
Pennsylvania, with a description of each soil type and limitations of the
soils for on-site sewage disposal, buildings with basements, streets and
parking lots.
(4) Proposed layout.
(a) The layout and dimensions of lots, with lots numbered.
(b) The total area, number of lots, and lot sizes.
(c) Zoning requirements, with standards, to include:
[1] Minimum lot size.
[2] Density.
[3] Building setback lines (based on yard requirements).
(d) A reference to any land dedicated for public use or offered for dedication
for parks, recreation areas, schools, widening of streets or other public
uses.
(e) An indication of any lots in which other than a residential use is intended.
(f) Rights-of-way and/or easements proposed to be created for all drainage
purposes, utilities or other pertinent reasons.
§ 440-305 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-305
440:46
§ 440-306. Lot line changes. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
(g) Accurate locations of all monuments, one to be placed at each change in
direction of boundary, two to be placed at each street intersection and one
on one side of each street at angle points and at the beginning and end of
curves. Utility easements shall be monumented at their beginning and at
their end, and areas to be conveyed for public use shall be fully
monumented at their external boundaries.
(h) For on-lot facilities, the location of water supply and sewage disposal.
(i) If water is to be provided by means other than private wells owned and
maintained by the individual owners of lots within the subdivision or
development, applicants shall present evidence to the Board of
Supervisors that the subdivision is to be supplied by a certified public
utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners, or by a
municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a Certificate of
Public Convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or
an application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a
commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is
appropriate, shall be acceptable.
(j) For any plan for which on-site sewage disposal is proposed, the plan shall
contain a title block as follows, signed by an authorized agent of the
Bucks County Department of Health:
OBSERVATIONS OF DEEP TEST HOLES AND PERCOLATION
TESTS ON ALL LOTS HAVE BEEN CONDUCTED BY THE
BUCKS COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND IT HAS
BEEN DETERMINED THAT LOTS__________ ARE SUITABLE
FOR__________ TYPE SEWAGE DISPOSAL, SYSTEM(S) UNDER
CURRENT RULES AND REGULATIONS. PERMITS FOR THE
CONSTRUCTION OF EACH INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL
SYSTEM ON EACH LOT MUST BE OBTAINED PRIOR TO THE
COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION OF THE SYSTEM AND/
OR BUILDINGS.
_____________
(Date)
(Signature of Bucks County Health Department Agent)
(Title)
A. General. A lot line change shall result in the same number or fewer lots as existed
prior to the lot line change, and the area of each of the lots involved shall not
increase or decrease by more than 20% of the original lot area.
B. Purpose. The purpose of the lot line change is to provide an expeditious means of
§ 440-305 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-306
440:47
subdivision approval of the adjustment or relocation of one existing boundary line
between two adjacent lots or the shifting of boundary lines to increase the area of
an existing lot.
C. Procedure.
(1) Applicant prepares lot line change plan and application.
(2) Applicant submits to the Township Manager the lot line change plan and
application in two forms; one copy in an electronic medium acceptable to the
Township Engineer and such paper copies as determined by the Township and
pursuant to its then-current schedule for submission of subdivision and land
development plans.
(3) Copies of the lot line change plan and all required supplemental data initially
shall be submitted to the Township Manager, together with the required fees
and escrow deposit established in accordance with the current fee schedule
adopted by resolution by the Board of Supervisors.125 The Township Manager
shall note the date of receipt of the application, fees and escrow deposit. The
application shall not be deemed to be submitted until a complete application
and required fees have been submitted.
(4) Upon submission of a complete application together with all required fees and
escrow deposits, the Township Manager shall accept the application, plans and
other required materials as filed and shall immediately distribute copies of the
final plan and application to:
(a) Township Board of Supervisors: five copies.
(b) Township Planning Commission: two copies.
(c) Bucks County Planning Commission: two copies.
(d) Township Engineer: one copy.
(e) Township files: two copies.
(5) Following receipt of the complete submission, the Middletown Township
Planning Commission shall review and forward its recommendation on the
proposed lot line change to the Board of Supervisors.
(6) Following receipt of the Township Planning Commission's report and within
90 days following the receipt of the applicant's complete submission, as
indicated in § 440-301C, the Board of Supervisors shall:
(a) Review and evaluate the applicant's submission and the reports from all
applicable reviewing agencies;
(b) Determine whether the lot line change plan meets the objectives and
requirements of this chapter and other ordinances; and
125.Editor's Note: Township fee schedules are on file in the Township Building and available to be viewed on the
Township's website at www.middletownbucks.org.
§ 440-306 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-306
440:48
(c) Inform the applicant of the decision and the reasons for the decision not
later than 15 days following the decision and within the ninety-day
review period established by the Municipalities Planning Code.
D. Required plan information. The lot line change shall show or be accompanied by
the following:
(1) Drafting standards.
(a) Plans shall be drawn on sheets no larger than 36 inches by 48 inches. All
sheets comprising a submission shall be on one size. Sheets should be
large enough to clearly show all required features but at a scale not less
than one inch equals 100 feet. The plan shall be a clear and legible white
paper print.
(b) Each set of plans shall be folded to a size which can be accommodated in
a legal (8 1/2 inches by 14 inches) file folder.
(c) The submission shall include a copy of the site plan for the entire property
on a single sheet at an appropriate scale that will fit the maximum sheet
size submitted.
(d) Dimensions shall be in feet and decimal parts thereof and bearings in
degrees, minutes and seconds.
(e) Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the total
number of sheets.
(f) Where any revision is made, or when the plan is a revision of a previously
approved plan, dotted lines shall be used to show features or locations to
be abandoned and solid lines to show the presently proposed features.
(g) The plan shall be so prepared and bear an adequate legend to indicate
clearly which features are existing and which are proposed.
(2) General information.
(a) Name of the lot line change.
(b) Name and address of the record and/or equitable owner.
(c) Name and address of the engineer, surveyor or architect responsible for
the plan.
(d) Present zoning classification with district requirements.
(e) Total acreage of the tract.
(f) Date, North point, and scale (written and graphic).
(g) A location map for the purpose of locating the site to be subdivided at a
scale of not less than 800 feet to the inch, showing the relation of the tract
to adjoining property and to all streets, roads and Township boundaries
existing within 1,000 feet of any part of the property proposed to be
subdivided.
§ 440-306 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-306
440:49
§ 440-307. Appeals where Supervisors refuse approval.
In any case where the Board of Supervisors disapproves a final plan, any person
aggrieved thereby may appeal therefrom by petition to the Court of Common Pleas of
Bucks County. Appeals shall be governed by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.
§ 440-308. Recording plats and deeds. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
§ 440-309. Effect of recording. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
(h) Site boundaries.
(i) Property lines, existing and proposed.
(j) Lot sizes, existing and proposed.
(k) All existing buildings (and the uses), driveways, wells, sewer systems,
utility easements, etc.
(l) Monuments, existing and proposed.
(m) Tax parcel number(s) of the tract.
(3) Recording information.
(a) A statement to the effect that the applicant(s) is(are) the owner(s) of the
land and that the lot line change shown on the plan is made with his(their)
free consent and that it is desired to record same.
(b) Signature of the owner(s) of the land.
(c) The impression seal and signature of a notary public or other qualified
officer acknowledging owner's statement of intent.
(d) Signatures of three members of the Board of Supervisors.
A. Upon approval of a final plat, the developer shall, within 90 days of such final
approval, record such plat in the office of the recorder of deeds of the county in
which the Township is located. The Recorder of Deeds shall not accept any plat for
recording unless such plat officially notes the approval of the Board of Supervisors
and review by the county planning agency.
B. The recording of the plat shall not constitute grounds for assessment increases until
such time as lots are sold or improvements are installed on the land included within
the subject plat.
C. The applicant shall notify the Board of Supervisors in writing of the date of such
recording and the plan book and page wherein such subdivision or land
development is recorded.
A. Streets, parks and other public improvements shown on a subdivision or land
development plan to be recorded may be offered for dedication to the Township by
formal notation thereof on the plan, or the owner may note on the plan that such
§ 440-306 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-309
440:50
§ 440-310. Effect of approval.
improvements have not been offered for dedication to the Township.
B. Every street, park or other improvement shown on a subdivision or land
development plan that is recorded, as provided herein, shall be deemed to be a
private street, park or improvement until such time as the same has been offered for
dedication to the Township and accepted by resolution or ordinance and recorded
in the office of the Clerk of the Court of Common Pleas of Bucks County, or until
it has been condemned for use as a public street, park or other improvement.
A. From the time an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary or final, is
duly filed as provided in this chapter, and while such application is pending
approval or disapproval, no change or amendment of the zoning, subdivision or
other governing ordinance or plan shall adversely affect the application.
B. The applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance with the provisions of the
governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application was duly
filed.
C. When a preliminary application has bean duly approved, the applicant shall be
entitled to final approval in accordance with the approved preliminary application.
D. If an application is properly and finally denied, any subsequent application shall be
subject to any and all governing regulations in effect at the time of the new
application.
E. When an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary or final, has been
approved or approved subject to conditions acceptable to the applicant, no
subsequent change or amendment of the zoning, subdivision or other governing
ordinance or plan shall be applied to adversely affect the right of the applicant to
commence and to complete any aspect of the approved development in accordance
with the terms of such approval within five years from such approval. When final
approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the five-year period shall be counted
from the date of the preliminary approval. In the case of any doubt as to the terms
of a preliminary approval, the terms shall be construed in light of the provisions of
the governing ordinances and plans as they stood at the time when the application
for such approval was duly filed.
F. A time extension beyond the five-year limit may be granted by the Board of
Supervisors. Such extension shall be in writing.
G. When the landowner has substantially completed the required improvements as
depicted on the final plat within the time limits, no change in Township ordinance
or plan enacted subsequent to the date of filing of the preliminary plat shall modify
or revoke any aspect of the approved final plat pertaining to zoning classification or
density, lot, building, street or utility location.
H. In the case of a preliminary plat calling for the installation of improvements beyond
the established time period, a schedule shall be filed by the landowner with the
preliminary plat delineating all proposed sections as well as deadlines within which
applications for final plat approval of each section are intended to be filed. Such
§ 440-309 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-310
440:51
§ 440-311. Record plan.
schedule shall be updated annually by the applicant on or before the anniversary of
the preliminary plat approval, until final plat approval of the last section has been
granted. Any modification of the aforesaid schedule shall be subject to approval of
the Board of Supervisors, in its discretion.
I. Each section in a residential subdivision or land development, except for the last
section, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the total number of dwelling units as
depicted on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser percentage is approved by the
Board of Supervisors, in its discretion. Provided that the landowner has not
defaulted with regard to or violated any of the conditions of the preliminary plat
approval, including compliance with the time schedule where applicable, all of the
aforesaid protections afforded by substantially completing the improvements
depicted upon the final plat within five years shall apply, and for any section or
sections beyond the initial section in which the required improvements have not
been substantially completed within the five-year period, the aforesaid protections
shall apply for an additional term or terms of three years from the date of final plat
approval for each section.
J. Failure of the landowner to adhere to an established schedule of submission of final
plats for the various sections shall subject any such section to any and all changes
in zoning, subdivision and other governing ordinances enacted by the Township
subsequent to the date of the initial preliminary plan submission.
A. The record plan shall be a clear and legible blue or black line print and shall be an
exact copy of the approved final plan on a sheet of the size required for final plans.
B. The following information shall appear on the record plan, in addition to the
information required in §§ 440-304, 440-305 and 440-306 for the final plan.
(1) Seals.
(a) The impressed seal of the licensed professional land surveyor who
prepared the plan in accordance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Act 367 of 1979.
(b) The impressed corporation seal, if the applicant is a corporation.
(c) The impressed seal of a notary public or other qualified officer
acknowledging owner's statement of intent.
(2) Acknowledgements.
(a) A statement to the effect that the applicant is the owner of the land
proposed to be subdivided and that the subdivision shown on the final
plan is made with his or their free consent and that it is desired to record
the same.
(b) An acknowledgement of said statement before an officer authorized to
take acknowledgements.
(3) The following signatures shall be placed directly on the plan in ink:
§ 440-310 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-311
440:52
§ 440-312. Effect of plat approval on Official Map. [Added 12-1-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
After a plat has been approved and recorded as provided in this chapter, all streets and
public grounds on such plat shall be and become a part of the Official Map of the
Township of Middletown without public hearing.
§ 440-313. Mediation option. [Added 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
(a) The signatures of the owner or owners of the land. If the owner of the
land is a corporation, the signatures of the president and secretary of the
corporation shall appear.
(b) The signature of the notary public or other qualified officer
acknowledging the owner's statement of intent.
(c) The signature of the licensed surveyor who prepared the plan.
(d) The signature of the Township Engineer.
(e) The signatures of three members of the Board of Supervisors.
C. Linens will not be released to the applicant before improvements are completed in
accordance with the final plan or until improvements are guaranteed in accordance
with the final plan.
A. Parties to proceedings involving the approval of a subdivision or land development
plan may utilize mediation as an aid in completing such proceedings. Nothing in
this section shall be interpreted as expanding or limiting municipal police powers
or as modifying any principles of substantive law.
B. Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary. The appropriateness of
mediation shall be determined by the particulars of each case and the willingness of
the parties to negotiate. The Township shall assure that in each case the mediating
parties, assisted by the mediator as appropriate, develop terms and conditions for:
(1) Funding mediation.
(2) Selecting a mediator who, at a minimum, shall have a working knowledge of
municipal zoning and subdivision procedures and demonstrated skills in
mediation.
(3) Completing mediation, including time limits for such completion.
(4) Suspending time limits otherwise authorized in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, provided there is written consent by the
mediating parties and by an applicant or municipal decisionmaking body if
either is not a party to the mediation.
(5) Identifying all parties and affording them the opportunity to participate.
(6) Subject to legal restraints, determining whether some or all of the mediation
sessions shall be open or closed to the public.
§ 440-311 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-313
440:53
(7) Assuring that mediated solutions are in writing and signed by the parties and
become subject to review and approval by the appropriate decisionmaking
body pursuant to the authorized procedures set forth in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
C. No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding the final written
mediated agreement, shall be admissible as evidence in any subsequent judicial or
administrative proceedings.
§ 440-313 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-313
440:54
ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
[Added 6-24-1986 by Ord. No. 86-10]
§ 440-401. Application.
§ 440-402. General standards.
A. The standards and requirements outlined herein shall be considered minimum
standards and requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare.
B. Where literal compliance with the standards herein specified is clearly impractical,
the Board of Supervisors may modify or adjust the standards to permit reasonable
utilization of property while securing substantial conformance with the objectives
of these regulations.
C. The following principles, standards and requirements shall be applied in evaluating
plans for a proposed subdivision or land development. The standards of the
Middletown Township Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 500) for the particular district
in which the subdivision or land development is taking place shall govern the layout
of lots and/or design of buildings, parking lots and other facilities.
A. All portions of a tract being subdivided or developed shall be taken up in lots,
streets, public lands or other proposed uses, so that remnants and landlocked areas
shall not be created.
B. Reserve strips controlling access to lots, public rights-of-way, public lands or
adjacent private lands are prohibited.
C. In general, lot lines shall follow Township boundary lines rather than cross them.
D. Subdivisions and land developments shall be properly designed in order to prevent
the necessity for excessive cut or fill. Subdivisions and land developments shall be
laid out to come as close as possible to balancing cut and fill operations on site.
E. No land shall be developed or plotted for residential purposes unless all hazards to
life, health or property, including flood, fire and disease, have been eliminated or
unless the plans provide adequate safeguard against such hazards without disturbing
the natural condition of the land.
F. Land subject to flooding, as indicated in the Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia
Counties, Pennsylvania, and land designated as wetlands on the National Wetlands
Inventory prepared by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service shall not be
plotted for residential occupancy.
G. Where trees, groves, waterways, scenic points, historic spots, or other community
assets and landmarks are located within a proposed subdivision or land
development, every possible means to the fullest extent shall be provided to
preserve these features.
H. Unless a permit is obtained from PA DEP, discarded building material shall be
§ 440-401 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-402
440:55
§ 440-403. Blocks. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13; 12-1-1992 by Ord. No.
92-16; 8-16-2000 by Ord. No. 00-09]
§ 440-404. Lots. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
§ 440-405. Easements.
disposed of in a manner consistent with the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management
Act of 1980, 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 6018.101 et seq. Such material shall not be disposed of
on site but shall be taken to a licensed disposal facility.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, a block shall be defined as a unit of land bounded
by streets or by a combination of streets and public land, railroad right-of-way,
waterway or any other barrier to development.
B. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to the
following:
(1) Provisions of adequate sites for the types of buildings proposed.
(2) Zoning requirements for lot sizes, dimensions and minimum lot areas per
dwelling unit.
(3) The limitations and opportunities of the topography.
(4) Utilization of potential solar energy.
(5) Safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation and access.
(6) Special consideration to the requirements of satisfactory fire protection.
C. Blocks in subdivisions shall have a maximum length of 1,600 feet and a minimum
length of 500 feet.
D. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two tiers of lots,
except where reverse frontage lots are used.
A. Lot dimensions and areas shall not be less than specified by the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 500).
B. Building setback lines shall be at and not a distance greater than specified by the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
C. Residential lots must front on and have wholly owned access to either an existing
or proposed street.
D. Double-frontage lots shall be deed-restricted to limit access to the lower order
street.
E. Lot orientation shall promote solar access. This is achieved by building placement
with the long axis in a general east-west direction.
A. Utility easements with a minimum width of 20 feet shall be provided as necessary.
Joint utilization of easements by two or more utilities is encouraged.
§ 440-402 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-405
440:56
§ 440-406. Stormwater management.
B. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered or adjacent to rear or side
lot lines.
C. Nothing shall be permitted to be placed, set or put within the area of a utility
easement except lawns or suitable low ground cover.
D. Access easements shall be provided where there are common driveway or shared
access arrangements.
E. Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by a watercourse, there shall
be provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the
line of such watercourse and of such width as will be adequate to preserve natural
drainage, but not less than 20 feet, or as may be required or directed by the
Township and/or the Department of Environmental Protection. The owner shall
properly grade and seed slopes and fence any open ditches when it is deemed
necessary by the Township.
F. No right-of-way or easement for any purpose whatsoever shall be created, recited
or described in any deed unless the same has been shown on the approved record
plan.
A. Definitions. Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings in the following clauses. These terms pertain to
stormwater management but shall serve as a supplement to those words defined in
Article II, Definitions, of this chapter.
ARTIFICIAL WETLAND — A water drainage area created to exhibit the same
characteristics as a naturally occurring wetland through vegetation and hydrology.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) — Management practices or
methods for controlling stormwater runoff which provide a benefit either
hydrological (i.e., reduction of runoff volumes) or to water quality (i.e., reduction
of pollutants).
CATION EXCHANGE CAPACITY (CEC) — A property of soil whereby
positively charged ions are absorbed and held by soil chemistry. The bonded ions
(cations) are resistant to movement by water but can be exchanged by other cations
entering the soil body.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Bucks County Conservation District.
CULVERT — A pipe, conduit or similar structure, including appurtenant works,
which carries surface water.
DEDICATION—The implied or express grant of property by its owner for general
public use.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude of precipitation from a storm event measured
in probability of occurrence (e.g., fifty-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) and
used in computing stormwater management control systems.
DETENTION BASIN — A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by
§ 440-405 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-406
440:57
temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate.
DEVELOPMENT SITE —The specific tract of land for which a regulated activity
is proposed.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT—A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing
the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DUAL PURPOSE DETENTION — Detention practices for stormwater runoff
which provide two types of control hydrologically addressing peak flow release
rates and extending the detention of the first-flush volume of runoff for water
quality improvements.
EROSION—The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice or other
geological agents.
FIRST FLUSH — Terminology applied to the initial volume of stormwater runoff
that collects during a storm. For the Neshaminy Creek Watershed Stormwater
Management Plan, the first-flush volume of stormwater runoff is defined as 2.7
inches, or that volume of water resulting from the one-year twenty-four-hour design
storm.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff into the
ground (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench).
NRCS — Natural Resources Conservation Service, United States Department of
Agriculture [formerly Soil Conservation Service (SCS)].
PEAK DISCHARGE—The maximum rate of flow of storm runoff at a given point
and time resulting from a specified storm event.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions which impact upon
proper management of stormwater runoff and which are specified in § 440-406C of
this chapter.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of the predevelopment peak rate of runoff
for a development site to which the post-development peak rate of runoff must be
controlled to protect downstream areas.
RETENTION BASIN — A basin designed to retain stormwater runoff so that a
permanent pool is established.
RUNOFF — That part of precipitation which flows over the land.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site or origin by water.
SEDIMENTATION BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin
designed to retain sediment.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar material and into which surface water is directed for
infiltration into the ground.
SEMI-IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface such as stone, rock, concrete or
other material which prevents some percolation of water into the ground.
§ 440-406 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-406
440:58
SOIL-COVER-COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by NRCS, which is based upon relating soil type and land use/cover to a
runoff parameter called a curve number.
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes or other conduits which carries intercepted
surface runoff, street water and other waters, or drainage, but excludes domestic
sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES — Any human-made or natural
drainage structure used to contain or detain stormwater runoff. Stormwater
management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention basins; retention or
wet pond basins; artificial or natural wetlands; infiltration basins, trenches, seepage
pits or cisterns; culverts; swales; or storm (sewer) drains.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing stormwater
runoff adopted by Bucks County for the Neshaminy Creek Watershed as required
by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167), known as the "Storm Water
Management Act."
STREAM — A watercourse.
SUBAREA — The smallest unit of watershed breakdown for hydrologic modeling
purposes for which the runoff control criteria have been established in the
Neshaminy Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
WET POND — A pond or basin facility designed to retain stormwater runoff so
that a permanent pool is established.
B. Applicability.
(1) All improvement activities for all parcels, including improvements to existing
activities or other facilities, including, but not limited to, parking areas, are
subject to the stormwater management regulations specified in this section.
The stormwater management regulations apply to all areas of the Township.
However, specific criteria and requirements are given for those areas of the
Township which are located within the Neshaminy Creek drainage basin and
delineated on Map 8, Volume III, "Stormwater Runoff Peek Rate Districts," in
the Neshaminy Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan for
Middletown Township.
(2) The portion of the Township which is not in the Neshaminy Creek drainage
basin will be regulated by the general stormwater management provisions not
specific to the Neshaminy Basin.
C. Regulated activities.
(1) For any of the regulated activities of this section, prior to the final approval of
subdivision and/or land development plans or the issuance of any permit or the
commencement of any land disturbance activity, the owner, subdivider,
developer or his agent shall submit a stormwater management plan for
approval by the Board of Supervisors. In addition to the requirements of this
section, the plan shall meet the requirements of Title 25, Rules and
§ 440-406 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-406
440:59
Regulations of the DEP: Chapter 102, Erosion Control; Chapter 105, Dam
Safety and Waterway Management; and Chapter 106, Floodplain
Management.
(2) The following activities are defined as regulated activities and shall be
regulated by the stormwater management provisions:
(a) Subdivision and/or land development.
(b) Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces (driveways,
parking lots, etc.).
(c) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(d) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
D. Exemptions to regulated activities. All improvements to existing activities or other
facilities, including, but not limited to, parking areas, are subject to the stormwater
management regulations specified in this section. Due to the limited impact on
stormwater runoff, the following activities are exempt from stormwater plan
preparation requirements; however, stormwater associated with any activity must
be managed in a manner consistent with this section. Any regulated activity which
would create less than 2,500 square feet of additional impervious cover is exempt
from the stormwater management plan preparation provisions of this subsection.
This criterion shall apply to the total proposed development, even if the
development is to take place in stages. Any area proposed for gravel or crushed
stone, etc., shall be considered to be impervious for purposes of this subsection. The
Township may require plan preparation and submission of the individual lot
grading plans in connection with zoning permit applications in order to promote the
purposes of the stormwater management provisions.
(1) Agricultural operations exclusion. Any land disturbance associated with
agricultural activities operated in accordance with a conservation plan or
erosion and sedimentation control plan approved by the Bucks County
Conservation District or the United States Department of Agriculture Natural
Resources Conservation Service is exempt from the stormwater management
plan preparation provisions of this section.
(2) Forest management operations exclusion. Any land disturbance associated
with forest management operations which are following the DEP's
management practices contained in its publication "Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Guidelines for Forestry" and is operating under an
adequate erosion and sedimentation control plan approved by an applicable
agency is exempt from the stormwater management plan preparation
provisions of this section.
(3) Mining operations exclusion. Any land disturbance associated with mining
operations approved and operated in accordance with all applicable rules and
regulations of the DEP and which is operating under an erosion and
sedimentation control plan approved by the applicable agency.
(4) Use of land for gardening for home occupation.
§ 440-406 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-406
440:60
E. Stormwater management plan. A stormwater management plan for the proposed
regulated activity shall contain the following information:
(1) Written report, including the following information:
(a) General description of project.
(b) General description of proposed stormwater management controls and
facilities both during and after development.
(c) General description of erosion and sedimentation controls including those
contained in § 440-407, Erosion and sedimentation control.
(d) Expected project time schedule, including anticipated start and
completion dates.
(2) Mapping of the watershed area or areas in which the proposed subdivision or
land development is located; stormwater management district boundaries
applicable to the site in accordance with § 440-406H of this chapter.
(3) An evaluation shall be performed for the specific section of the watershed in
which the regulated activity is located to assess the impact the proposal will
have on downstream conditions. The stormwater management plan shall
address all identified impacts to the satisfaction of the Township.
(4) Computations of the stormwater runoff for all points of runoff concentration
before, during and after development, including all supporting data.
(5) Complete drainage systems for the subdivision or land development. All
existing drainage features which are to be incorporated in the design shall be
so identified with an explanation of the operations of the facilities.
(6) Plans showing all existing and proposed drainage facilities affecting the
subject property.
(7) Plan of the proposed stormwater drainage systems, including storm drain pipes
and inlets, runoff control devices, and drainage channels.
(8) Plan of the proposed grading.
(9) Design computations for the sizing of the outlet device for the stormwater
runoff management facility.
(10) A stage-storage curve for any detention/retention basin(s).
(11) Flood routing and/or storage requirement calculations.
(12) A plan showing the berm embankment and outlet structure. The plan shall also
indicate the top of berm elevation, top width of berm and side slopes,
emergency spillway elevation, elevations of the outlet structure including the
riser, dimensions and spacing of anti-seep collars.
(13) Plans and profiles of proposed stormwater management facilities, including
horizontal and vertical location, size and type of material. This information
shall be of the quality required for the construction of all facilities and include
§ 440-406 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-406
440:61
all calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the design of the facilities; a
schedule for installation of such facilities; and a proposed minimum schedule
of inspections which will be performed by the applicant's engineer or designee
in company with the Township Engineer or designee during construction until
dedication of such facilities.
(14) The locations of septic tank infiltration areas and wells when infiltration
methods such as cisterns, seepage beds or trenches, infiltration basins, or
porous pavement are used. Soil infiltration rates and percolation tests and
submission of the percolation data and test locations to substantiate percolation
rates used in the drainage calculations.
(15) Plans and profiles of all erosion and sedimentation control measures,
temporary as well as permanent, including all calculations, assumptions and
criteria used in designing the controls, and a schedule of their implementation.
(16) An encroachment map which illustrates all natural features and a preliminary
regrading plan which illustrates all disturbance of the identified natural feature
areas; the amount of each natural feature disturbed indicated and illustrated on
the encroachment map.
(17) Rights-of-way and/or easements proposed to be created for all drainage
purposes, utilities or other reasons.
(18) A detailed plan of the trash rack and anti-vortex device.
(19) An overall plan of the basin area, at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet
minimum, showing the grading and landscaping.
(20) A detailed plan of all required off-site improvements.
F. General requirements. The standards contained in this section shall apply as
minimum design standards; however, federal and state regulations may impose
additional standards, subject to their jurisdiction.
(1) Retention of existing watercourses and natural drainage features.
(a) Whenever a watercourse, stream or intermittent stream is located within
a development site, it shall remain open in its natural state and location
and shall not be piped, unless piping is required by the Township or a
state agency.
(b) The existing points of natural drainage discharge onto adjacent property
shall not be altered without the written approval of the affected
landowners.
(c) No stormwater runoff or natural drainage shall be so diverted as to
overload existing drainage systems (including existing stormwater
management facilities) or create flooding or the need for additional
drainage on other private properties or public lands.
(d) The Middletown Township Board of Supervisors may require a
developer to provide a permanent easement along any watercourse
§ 440-406 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-406
440:62
located within or along the boundary of any property being subdivided
or developed. The purpose of any such easement shall be for the
maintenance of the channel of any watercourse, and the terms of the
easement shall prohibit excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and
any alterations which may adversely affect the watercourse. The required
width of any such easement shall be determined by the Township
Engineer, United States Army Corps of Engineers, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection or other public agency having
jurisdiction, but in no case shall such easement be less than 20 feet in
width. The developer will retain the easement until such time as one of
the following is accomplished:
[1] The easement is offered for dedication by the developer and
accepted by Middletown Township.
[2] If an easement acceptable to the Township is established, the
maintenance shall then be the responsibility of the individual lot
owners over whose property the easement passes. For land
developments, the maintenance shall then be the responsibility of the
owner.
[3] A homeowners' association or other approved legal entity, approved
by Middletown Township, assumes responsibility for the
maintenance of the development, including the retention of the
watercourse easement.
(2) The developer shall construct and/or install stormwater management facilities
and drainage structures, on and off site, as necessary, to:
(a) Prevent erosion damage and to satisfactorily carry off, detain or retain
and control the rate of release of stormwater.
(b) Manage the anticipated peak discharge from the property being
subdivided or developed and existing runoff being contributed from all
land at a higher elevation in the same watershed.
(c) Convey stormwater along or through the property to a natural outfall. If a
developer concentrates dispersed stormwater flow or redirects
stormwater flow to exit at another location on the property, the developer
is responsible for constructing an adequate channel on the adjacent
property and on all downstream properties until a natural outfall is
reached. A natural outfall shall have sufficient capacity to receive
stormwater without deterioration of the facility and without adversely
affecting property in the watershed. This natural outfall may be a river,
creek or other drainage facility so designated by Middletown Township
for the proposed system.
(d) Encourage all runoff control measures to percolate the stormwaters into
the ground where practical, in the judgment of the Township Engineer, to
aid in the recharge of groundwaters.
(e) Carry surface water to the nearest adequate street drain, storm drain,
§ 440-406 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-406
440:63
detention basin, natural watercourse or drainage facility.
(f) Take surface water from the bottom of vertical grades, to lead water away
from springs, and to avoid excessive use of cross gutters at street
intersections and elsewhere.
(g) Maintain the adequacy of the natural stream channels. Accelerated bank
erosion shall be prevented by controlling the rate and velocity of runoff
discharge to these watercourses so as to avoid increasing occurrence of
stream bank overflow.
(h) Preserve the adequacy of existing culverts and bridges by suppressing the
new flood peaks created by new land development.
(i) If in the course of preparing or reviewing the stormwater management
plan the Township determines that off-site improvements are necessary
to satisfactorily handle the stormwater from the proposed development,
the developer shall be responsible for the payment of such study and/or
construction of off-site improvements.
(3) Where applicable, stormwater management facilities or programs shall comply
with the requirements of Chapter 102, Erosion Control; Chapter 105, Dam
Safety and Waterway Management; and Chapter 106, Floodplain
Management, of Title 25, Rules and Regulations of the DEP.
(4) Stormwater management facilities which involve a state highway shall be
subject to the approval of PennDOT.
(5) Stormwater management facilities located within or affecting the floodplain of
any watercourse shall also be subject to the requirements of any Township
ordinance which regulates construction and development within areas which
are subject to flooding.
(6) Access to facilities shall be provided for maintenance and operation. This
access shall be a cleared access that is at least 20 feet wide. Proximity of
facilities to public rights-of-way shall be encouraged in order to minimize the
length of accessways. Multiple accesses shall be encouraged for major
facilities.
(7) Additional studies and higher levels of control than the minimum provided in
the requirements and criteria of this chapter may be required by the
Middletown Township Board of Supervisors to ensure adequate protection to
life and property.
G. Water quality requirements.
(1) Post-development runoff volume generated from the one-year twenty-fourhour
design storm must be controlled so that it is released over a minimum of
24 hours. This standard applies to all stormwater runoff control facilities or
management techniques within subdivisions or land developments in the
Township.
(2) The water quality requirement applies to all areas of the Township, both inside
§ 440-406 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-406
440:64
and outside of the Neshaminy Creek Watershed. Provisions for the water
quality requirement supersede all other hydrologic peak rate or volume control
criteria and must be made regardless of stormwater runoff peak rate district
criteria.
H. Stormwater runoff peak rate requirements and districts.
(1) Those areas of Middletown Township outside the Neshaminy Creek
Watershed shall be required to control the post-development peak rate of
runoff so that it is discharged at not more than the predevelopment peak rate
of runoff.
(2) Mapping of stormwater runoff peak rate districts.
(a) In order to implement the provisions of the Neshaminy Creek Watershed
Stormwater Management Plan, Middletown Township is hereby divided
into stormwater runoff peak rate districts consistent with the plan. The
boundaries of the districts are shown on Map 8, Stormwater Runoff Peak
Rate Districts, as found in Volume III, Graphic Supplement, of the
Neshaminy Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan.126
(b) The exact location of the stormwater runoff peak rate district boundaries
as they apply to a given development site shall be determined by mapping
the boundaries using the two-foot or five-foot topographic contours
provided as part of the stormwater management plan developed for the
site. The district boundaries, as originally drawn, coincide with
topographic divides or, in certain instances, are drawn from the
intersection of the watercourse and a physical feature such as the
confluence with another watercourse or a potential flow obstruction
(road, culvert, bridge, etc.) to the topographic divide consistent with
topography. The location of the stormwater management district
boundary on a stormwater management plan shall be reviewed and
verified by the Township Engineer.
(3) Description of stormwater runoff peak rate districts.
(a) Release rate districts. These watershed areas require that the postdevelopment
peak rate of stormwater runoff be controlled to the stated
percentage of the predevelopment peak rate of stormwater runoff for the
range of design storms greater than the one-year twenty-four-hour storm
in order to protect downstream watershed areas. The release rate districts
and their respective release rate control design criteria for peak flow are
as follows:
126.Editor's Note: A copy of a map outlining the districts is attached to this chapter.
§ 440-406 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-406
440:65
Subwatershed Release Rate Percentage
Core Creek (by subarea)
11.5, 11.7
11.6
11.61
100%
50%
50%
Lower Main Stem (by subarea)
10.4, 14.6
14.7 (pertaining to drainage areas
wholly within Middletown Township
100%
50%
(b) Provisional direct discharge districts.
[1] This watershed area may discharge post-development peak rate of
runoff for design storms greater than the one-year twenty-four-hour
storm without adversely affecting the total watershed peak flow.
Subwatershed
Core Creek (by subarea)
11.62, 11.63 Direct discharge
[2] In determining if adequate capacity exists in the local stream
network, the developer must assume that the entire drainage area for
the local stream network is developed per current zoning and that all
new development would use the runoff controls specified in this
article.
(c) Provisional lower reaches/one-hundred-percent release rate district.
These watershed areas, defined as the lower reaches or tidal influences
areas of the Neshaminy Creek Watershed, require that the postdevelopment
peak rate of runoff be controlled to the predevelopment
peak rate of runoff for design storms greater than the one-year twentyfour-
hour storm. However, development sites which can discharge
directly to the Neshaminy Creek main channel or indirectly to the main
channel through an existing stormwater drainage system (i.e., storm
sewer) may do so without control of post-development peak rate of runoff
for design storms greater than the one-year twenty-four-hour storm. If the
post-development runoff is intended to be conveyed by an existing
stormwater drainage system to the main channel, assurances must be
provided that such system has adequate capacity to convey the increased
peak flows or will be provided with improvements to furnish the required
capacity. When adequate capacity does not exist and will not be provided
through improvements, the post-development peak rate of runoff must be
controlled to the predevelopment peak rate for the specified design
storms. The areas which are included in this district are as follows:
§ 440-406 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-406
440:66
Subwatershed
Lower reaches of Main Stream (by subarea)
15.1, 15.2, 15.3, 15.4, 15.5
I. Stormwater design standards and criteria.
(1) Any stormwater management controls required by this section and subject to
the water quality requirement (§ 440-406G) and the stormwater runoff peak
rate requirements (§ 440-406H) shall meet the applicable water quality and
peak rate requirements for the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and
one-hundred-year return period runoff events (design storms) consistent with
the calculation methodology specified in § 440-406J. Provisions must also be
made for safely passing the runoff greater than that occurring from the onehundred-
year design storm.
(2) For a proposed development site located within a single release rate district
§ 440-406H, the total runoff from the site shall meet the applicable release rate
criteria. For development sites within a single release rate district with
multiple points of concentrated runoff discharge, individual drainage points
may be designed for up to a one-hundred-percent release rate as long as the
cumulative, total runoff from the site is controlled to the applicable release
rate. All points of concentrated discharge, however, must meet the applicable
water quality requirement § 440-406G for the specific drainage areas of the
site draining to the discharge points.
(3) For a proposed development site located within two or more release rate
districts or within a release rate district and the provisional lower reaches/onehundred-
percent release rate district, the maximum peak rate of runoff that
may be discharged at any point is limited to the predevelopment peak rate of
runoff at that point multiplied by the applicable release rate. All runoff from
the site, however, is subject to the water quality requirement of § 440-406G of
this chapter. Provisions for direct discharge may be made in accordance with
§ 440-406H of this chapter.
(4) For proposed development sites located partially within a release rate district
and partially within a provisional direct discharge district, in no event shall a
significant portion of the site area subject to the release rate control be drained
to a discharge point(s) located in the provisional direct discharge district. All
runoff from the site will be subject to the water quality requirement as stated
in § 440-406G of this chapter.
J. Runoff control measures or best management practices (BMPs).
(1) Increased stormwater runoff which may result from regulated activities listed
in § 440-406C of this chapter shall be controlled by permanent stormwater
runoff control measures that will provide the required standards and criteria of
§ 440-406. The methods of stormwater control or best management practices
(BMPs) which may be used to meet the required standards and criteria
described in the Neshaminy Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan
(Volume II, Section III). Additional design criteria are included in these
§ 440-406 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-406
440:67
descriptions. The choice of BMPs is not limited to the ones appearing in the
watershed plan; however, any selected BMP must meet the required water
quality and runoff peak rate requirements.
(2) As a minimum, first-flush detention must be used to meet the water quality
requirement and dual purpose detention must be used to meet the water quality
requirement and the stormwater runoff peak rate requirements where
appropriate as specified in § 440-29H of this chapter.
(3) Developers are encouraged to use BMPs other than the minimum BMPs
specified (e.g., infiltration techniques and/or wet ponds or artificial wetlands),
if appropriate, to provide for additional water quality improvement and
groundwater recharge. In evaluating potential stormwater BMPs, the order of
preference for the Neshaminy Creek Watershed is as follows:
(a) Infiltration BMPs.
(b) Wet ponds.
(c) Artificial wetlands.
(d) Minimum first-flush detention or dual purpose detention.
(4) Infiltration BMPs shall be designed in accordance with the design criteria and
specifications in the Neshaminy Creek Watershed Stormwater Management
Plan (Volume III, Section III) and shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
(a) Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from impervious surface
associated with residential land use and/or pervious surface runoff
associated with both residential uses and nonresidential uses shall be
constructed on soils which have the following characteristics:127
[1] A minimum depth of 48 inches between the intended bottom of the
facility and the seasonal high-water table and/or bedrock (limiting
zones). The forty-eighty-inch minimum depth to a limiting zone
requirement may be reduced to 24 inches as long as the soil has a
cation exchange capacity (CEC) of greater than 10 and/or does not
have a sandy loam or loamy sand texture.
[2] Infiltration rate and percolation rate of greater than 0.2 inches/hour.
(b) Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from impervious surface
associated with nonresidential uses shall be constructed on soils which
have the following characteristics:
[1] A minimum depth of 48 inches between the intended bottom of the
facility and the seasonal high-water table and/or bedrock (limiting
zones).
[2] Infiltration rate and percolation rate of greater than 0.2 inches/hour.
127.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-406 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-406
440:68
(c) Infiltration BMPs intended to receive only rooftop runoff shall be
constructed on soils that have a minimum depth of 24 inches between the
intended bottom of the facility and the seasonal high-water table and/or
bedrock (limiting zones) and have an infiltration rate or percolation rate
of greater than 0.2 inches/hour.
(d) Where direct discharge is permitted under the requirements of
§ 440-406H of this chapter, infiltration BMPs shall be designed to
provide adequate storage to accommodate the post-development firstflush
design storm volume with outlet and overflow controls to convey
runoff larger than the first-flush design storm volume safely to a natural
outfall.
(e) In areas where runoff release rates are specified under the requirements
of § 440-406H of this chapter, regardless of the specified release rate
percentage, infiltration BMPs shall be designed to, as a minimum:
[1] Provide adequate storage to accommodate the volume of runoff
calculated as the difference between the predevelopment runoff
volume and the post-development runoff volume based on the
largest required design storm;
[2] Control the post-development peak rate of runoff to the
predevelopment peak rate of runoff for design storms greater than
the one-year twenty-four-hour storm; and
[3] Provide an overflow or spillway which safely permits the passing of
runoff greater than that occurring during the largest design storm.
(5) Wet pond and artificial wetland BMPs shall be designed in accordance with
the design criteria and specifications in Volume II, Section III, of the Plan and
shall meet the following minimum requirement:
Wet pond and artificial wetland BMPs shall be constructed on hydric or wet
soils and/or on soils which have an infiltration rate and percolation rate of less
than 0.2 inches/hour.
(6) Large-scale regional or subregional stormwater runoff projects. The initiative
and funding for any regional or subregional runoff control alternatives are the
responsibility of a prospective developer(s). The design of any regional control
facility must incorporate reasonable development of the entire upstream
watershed. The peak outflow of a regional facility would be determined on a
case-by-case basis using the hydrologic model of the watershed consistent
with protection of the downstream watershed areas. "Hydrologic model" refers
to the calibrated Neshaminy Creek model as developed for the stormwater
management plan. Nevertheless, the water quality requirement of § 440-406G
must be met by the regional facility design.
K. Runoff calculation methodology.
(1) To calculate the potential increase in total runoff and peak flow rate resulting
from a proposed site development, the Soil-Cover-Complex Method shall be
§ 440-406 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-406
440:69
used, as outlined in Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, United States
Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service,
Technical Release 55 (NTIS PB87-101580) and following the mathematical
analyses described in Computer Program for Project Formulation - Hydrology
(SCS Technical Release 20, 1983).
(2) Farm field or disturbed earth predevelopment cover conditions (existing
conditions) of a site or portions of a site used for modeling purposes shall be
considered as "meadow" when developing the necessary cover complex
calculations. The Board of Supervisors, upon consultation with the Township
Engineer, may grant a developer the option of applying a one-hundred-percent
release rate to a site which is located in a seventy-five-percent release rate
district. In this case, the developer must prove that, by using meadow as the
actual condition for a site or portions of the site which are farm field or
disturbed earth, the calculated predevelopment release rate peak for the entire
site would be equivalent to or less than the release rate calculated for the entire
site using the appropriate release rate (75%) applied to runoff peak rates for
farm field or disturbed earth portions of the site assessed as their actual cover
conditions.
(3) The Natural Resources Conservation Service Type II twenty-four-hour rainfall
distribution shall be used in the soil-cover-complex calculations. The twentyfour-
hour rainfall depths for the return periods used in the Soil-Cover-
Complex Method shall be:
Return Period
(year)
24-Hour Rainfall Depth
(inches)
1 2.7
2 3.3
5 4.2
10 5.0
25 5.8
50 6.4
100 7.2
(4) The design of any stormwater management facility intended to meet the
requirements of this chapter shall be verified by routing the design storm
hydrographs through the proposed facility.
L. Detention basin design requirements.
(1) Detention basins shall be designed to facilitate regular maintenance, mowing
and periodic desilting and reseeding. Basins shall not be located within
floodplains or floodplain soils. In general, shallow broad basins are preferred
to steep-sided basins.
(2) The maximum slope of the earthen detention basin embankments shall be four
to one. The preferred slope for vegetated detention basin embankments is three
§ 440-406 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-406
440:70
to one. The top or toe of any slope shall be located a minimum of five feet
from any property line. Whenever possible, the side slopes and basin shape
shall conform to the natural topography.
(3) The minimum top width of the detention basin berm shall be 10 feet.
(4) In order to ensure proper drainage on the basin bottom, a minimum grade of
2% shall be maintained for areas of sheet flow. For channel flow a minimum
grade of 1% shall be maintained.
(5) An overflow system shall be provided to carry runoff to the detention basin
when the capacity of the storm drain pipe system is exceeded. The overflow
system shall have sufficient capacity to carry the runoff difference between the
one-hundred-year storm peak flow rate and the capacity of the storm drainpipe
system. The one-hundred-year storm peak shall be calculated by the Soil-
Cover-Complex Method.
(6) Whenever possible, the emergency spillway for detention basins shall be
constructed on undisturbed ground. Emergency spillways shall be constructed
of reinforced concrete. All emergency spillways shall be constructed so that
the detention basin berm is protected against erosion. The minimum capacity
of all emergency spillways shall be the peak flow rate for the one-hundredyear
design storm after development. The construction material of the
emergency spillway shall extend along the upstream and downstream berm
embankments slopes. The upstream edge of the emergency spillway shall be a
minimum of three feet below the spillway crest elevation. The downstream
slope of the spillway shall at a minimum extend to the toe of the berm
embankment. The emergency spillway shall not discharge over earthen fill
and/or easily erodible material.
(7) The minimum freeboard shall be two feet. Freeboard is the difference between
the design flow elevations in the emergency spillway and the top of the settled
detention basin embankment.
(8) Anti-seep collars shall be installed around the outlet device within the normal
saturation zone of the detention basin berms. The anti-seep collars and their
connections to the outlet device shall be watertight. The anti-seep collars shall
extend a minimum of two feet beyond the outside of the principal outlet
device. The maximum spacing between collars shall be 14 times the minimum
projection of the collar measured perpendicular to the outlet. A minimum of
two anti-seep collars shall be installed on each outlet pipe.
(9) All outlet pipes through the basin berm shall be reinforced concrete pipe with
watertight joints.
(10) Energy-dissipating devices (riprap, end sills, etc.) shall be placed at all basin
outlets.
(11) A perforated riser shall be provided at each outlet of all detention basins during
construction for sediment control. The riser shall be constructed of metal or
concrete. The riser shall extend to a maximum elevation of two feet below the
crest elevation of the emergency spillway. The perforated riser shall be
§ 440-406 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-406
440:71
designed so that the rate of outflow is controlled by the pipe barrel through
the basin berm when the depth of water within the basin exceeds the height
of the riser. Circular perforations with a maximum diameter of one inch shall
be spaced eight inches vertically and 12 inches horizontally. The perforations
shall be cleanly cut and shall not be susceptible to enlargement. All metal
risers shall be suitably coated to prevent corrosion. A trash rack or similar
appurtenance shall be provided to prevent debris from entering the riser. All
risers shall have a concrete base attached with a watertight connection. The
base shall be of sufficient weight to prevent flotation of the riser. An antivortex
device, consisting of a thin vertical plate normal to the basin berm, shall
be provided on the top of the riser.
(12) All drainage channels shall be designed to prevent erosion of the bed and
banks. The maximum permissible flow velocity shall not exceed those
outlined in Table 1 of § 440-408B of this chapter. Suitable stabilization shall
be provided where required to prevent erosion of the drainage channels.
(13) Any vegetated drainage channel requiring mowing of the vegetation shall have
a maximum grade of three horizontal to one vertical on those areas to be
mowed.
(14) Because of the critical nature of vegetated drainage channels, the design of all
vegetated channels shall, as a minimum, conform to the design procedures
outlined in the Bucks County Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook.
(15) Detention basins shall be landscaped in accordance with the recommendations
of "A Landscape Strategy for Detention Basins," Morris Arboretum,
September 1980. Also see the Appendix from Volume II of the Neshaminy
Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan.
M. Requirements for drainage structures and/or pipes.
(1) Drainage easement. Drainage easements shall be provided to accommodate all
storm drainage requirements and shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width.
(2) Storm drainage pipe. The minimum diameter of all storm drainage pipe shall
be 15 inches or an equivalent thereto, with the exception of stormwater
management facilities where smaller pipe may be necessary to provide the
required first-flush detention. The minimum grade of piping shall be 0.5%.
Structures shall conform to Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
specifications and to the Middletown Township Specifications and Design
Standards for Streets and Roads.
(3) Stormwater management facilities.
(a) Hydrologic design of stormwater management facilities shall be based
upon criteria set forth in the latest edition of Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, Technical Release 55 and Engineering Field Manual
published by the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service. At the discretion of the Township
Engineer, the Rational Method may be used for watersheds or drainage
areas of less than 10 acres.
§ 440-406 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-406
440:72
§ 440-407. Erosion and sedimentation control. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13; 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-16]
(b) Stormwater management facilities areas shall be designed so that the rate
of runoff from the site, when developed, will not exceed the runoff from
the site that existed before development, except for those areas of the
Township within the Neshaminy Creek watershed which are subject to
the specific stormwater management plan districts criteria.
(c) Discharge piping from stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to control the rate of runoff for a two-year through one-hundredyear
frequency twenty-four-hour storm.
(d) Discharge piping from stormwater management facilities intended to
control the one-year twenty-four-hour first-flush design storm to meet the
water quality requirements of § 440-406G shall be designed to release the
volume of runoff resulting from this storm over a minimum of twentyfour-
hour period.
(e) If retention, wet ponds or artificial wetlands are used, the developer shall
demonstrate that such ponds are designed to protect the public health and
safety.
(f) Prior to the granting of final approval of any subdivision or land
development plan, the Township must be satisfied through contractual
arrangements that all stormwater facilities will be properly maintained. If
all or a portion of the facilities are on property which will be conveyed to
an individual, homeowners' association or any other eventual owner, the
guarantees must be in such a form that they will carry through to the new
owners.
(g) When first-flush, dual-purpose or other detention basins are provided,
they shall be designed to utilize the natural contours of the land whenever
possible. When such design is impracticable, the construction of the basin
shall utilize slopes as flat as possible to blend the structure into the terrain.
All basins shall have slopes no more than three horizontal to one vertical.
(h) Retention or wet ponds shall be designed so that they return to normal
permanent pool conditions within approximately 12 hours after the
termination of the storm, unless the Township Engineer finds that
downstream conditions may warrant other design criteria for stormwater
release.
(i) Infiltration facilities shall be designed so that they are completely drained
within 72 hours following termination of the storm in order to allow
aerobic conditions to be maintained in the facility.
(j) Emergency overflow facilities shall be provided for all stormwater
management facilities to handle runoff in excess of design flows.
(k) All stormwater management facilities are further subject to the design
criteria in § 440-406 of this chapter.
§ 440-406 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-407
440:73
A. General provisions and compliance where earthmoving activities are involved:
(1) No subdivision or land development plan shall be approved unless there has
been a plan approved by the Planning Commission and the Bucks County
Conservation District that provides for minimizing erosion and sedimentation
consistent with this section, and an improvement bond or other acceptable
security in accordance with § 440-606 is deposited with the Township in the
form of an escrow guarantee which will ensure installation and completion of
the required improvements, or there has been a determination by the Planning
Commission and the Bucks County Conservation District that a plan for
minimizing erosion and sedimentation is not necessary for approval under this
chapter.
(2) The developer shall construct and/or install such drainage systems as are
determined necessary by the Township Engineer(s) to prevent erosion damage
and to satisfactorily manage surface waters.
(3) Measures used to control erosion and reduce sedimentation shall, at a
minimum, meet the standards and specifications of the Bucks County
Conservation District and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection Erosion and Sediment Control Manual. In cases where the Bucks
County Conservation District does not have standards and specifications for
erosion and sedimentation control, other known and commonly accepted
standards and specifications may be used as approved by the Township
Engineer(s).
B. The following measures to minimize erosion and sedimentation shall be included
where applicable in the control plan:
(1) Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be done in a way
that will minimize erosion.
(2) Development plans shall preserve salient natural features, keep cut and fill
operations to a minimum, and ensure conformity with topography so as to
create the least erosion potential and adequately handle the volume and
velocity of surface water runoff.
(3) All disturbed areas and stockpiles of topsoil or fill which are to be exposed for
greater than 20 days shall be temporarily seeded with annual rye grass or other
suitable ground cover within seven days of disturbance or stockpiling.
(4) Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practical, but shall not exceed
90 days.
(5) The permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control and drainage
shall be installed as soon as practical in the development, at the discretion and
direction of the Township Engineer.
(6) Provisions shall be made to accommodate effectively the increased runoff
caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development
within the site. Where necessary, the rate of surface water runoff will be
mechanically retarded.
§ 440-407 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-407
440:74
(7) Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the disturbed area is
stabilized by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar
measures.
C. Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and criteria shall be
applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed. These standards include the
following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from sedimentation
and compaction during the construction phase as to maintain their maximum
infiltration capacity.
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until the entire
contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has received final
stabilization. Exceptions to this requirement are infiltration basins designed to
accept construction phase sediment. Design criteria for such basins are found
in Neshaminy Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan (Section III of
Volume III).
(3) Sediment traps per design criteria presented in the Pennsylvania Bureau of Soil
and Water Conservation's Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program
Manual are recommended to be used in lieu of sediment basins to prevent
premature sedimentation of the infiltration facility.
(4) Detailed construction schedules shall be included in all erosion and
sedimentation plans and stormwater management plans reviewed by the Bucks
County Conservation District and Township.
D. Site grading. In order to provide more suitable sites for building and other uses,
improve surface drainage, and control erosion, the following requirements shall be
met:
(1) All lots, tracts or parcels shall be graded to provide proper drainage away from
buildings and dispose of it without uncontrolled ponding, and all land within a
subdivision or development shall be graded to drain and manage surface water
without uncontrolled ponding, except where ponding (detention basins, etc.) is
part of the stormwater management plan for the site.
(2) Concentration of surface water runoff shall be permitted only in swales,
watercourses or detention basins. Subject to the approval of the Township
Engineer, swales shall be sodded, utilize jute matting, or other similar
measures to ensure proper growth of the ground cover.
(3) Grading shall in no case be done in such a way as to divert water onto an
adjacent property.
(4) During grading operations, necessary measures for dust control must be
exercised.
(5) Grading equipment will not be allowed to cross live streams. Where
applicable, provisions shall be made for the installation of temporary culverts
or bridges with approval from Pennsylvania DEP.
§ 440-407 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-407
440:75
(6) Tire cleaning areas shall be provided at each point of access to the
development site.
(7) At the time a building permit is applied for, the owner shall provide the
Township with individual lot grading plans to be reviewed by the Township
Engineer(s).
E. Excavations and fills.
(1) No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper than three horizontal to
one vertical, except under the following condition: a concrete, masonry or
other approved retaining wall constructed in accordance with approved
standards is provided to support the face of the excavation. All retaining walls
shall be designed to incorporate protection devices for the safety of residents
or users.
(2) No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface steeper in slope than
three horizontal to one vertical except when the plan for subdivision or land
development is accompanied by a written statement prepared by a civil
engineer licensed in the commonwealth, certifying that he has inspected the
site and that the proposed deviation from the slope specified above will not
endanger any property or result in any property damage. The plan and
statement must be approved by the Township Engineer(s).
(3) Fill shall be placed in order to minimize sliding or erosion of the soil. All fill
shall have a compaction rate of 95%, which shall be verified by the Township
Engineer.
(4) Fills shall not encroach on natural watercourses, constructed channels, or
wetlands.
(5) Fills placed adjacent to natural watercourses or constructed channels shall
have suitable protection against erosion during periods of flooding.
(6) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from damaging
the cut face of excavations and the sloping surfaces of fills.
(7) Cut and fill shall not endanger adjoining property.
(8) The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be a minimum of five feet from property
or right-of-way lines of streets in order to permit the normal rounding of the
edge without encroaching on the abutting property.
F. Responsibility.
(1) Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping of vegetation, regrading or
other development, it shall be the responsibility of the person, corporation or
other entity causing such sedimentation to remove it from all affected surfaces,
drainage systems and watercourses, on and off site, and to repair any damage
at his expense as quickly as possible.
(2) Maintenance of all drainage facilities and watercourses, both existing and
proposed, within any proposed subdivision or land development shall be the
§ 440-407 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-407
440:76
§ 440-408. Storm and surface drainage. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
responsibility of the developer until such time as one of the following is
accomplished:
(a) An easement for these facilities is offered for dedication by the developer
and is accepted by the Township; it shall then be the responsibility of the
Township.
(b) If an easement acceptable to the Township is established, the
maintenance shall then be the responsibility of the individual lot owners
over whose property the easement passes. For land developments, the
maintenance shall then be the responsibility of the owner.
(c) A homeowners' association or other approved legal entity, approved by
the Township, assumes the responsibility for the maintenance of the
development, including the maintenance of the watercourses and/or
drainage facilities.
(3) It is the responsibility of any person, corporation or other entity doing any
work on or across a stream, watercourse or swale, or upon the floodplain or
right-of-way during the period of the work to return it to its original or equal
condition after such activity is completed.
(4) No person, corporation or other entity shall block, impede the flow of, alter,
construct any structure or deposit any material or thing or perform any work
which will affect normal or flood flow in any communal stream, watercourse
or wetland without having obtained prior approval from the Township and/or
Department of Environmental Protection, whichever is applicable.
(5) Each person, corporation or other entity which makes any surface changes
shall be required to:
(a) Collect on-site surface runoff and control it to a point of discharge into
the natural watercourse of the drainage area.
(b) Handle existing off-site runoff through his development by designing it
to adequately handle all upstream runoff.
(c) Provide and install, at his expense, in accordance with Township
requirements, all drainage and erosion control improvements (temporary
and permanent) as required by the approved erosion and sediment control
plan.
A. General.
(1) All subdivision and land development plans shall include designed methods to
withhold and release, at a controlled rate, any runoff onto adjacent property.
(2) Lots shall be laid out and graded to provide positive drainage away from
buildings.
(3) Storm sewers, culverts and related installations shall be provided:
§ 440-407 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-408
440:77
(a) To permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses in such a manner as to
protect the natural character of the watercourses and to provide regulated
discharge.
(b) To ensure adequate drainage of all low points along the line of streets.
(c) To intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals reasonably
related to the extent and grade of the area drained and to prevent
substantial flow of water across intersections.
(4) Storm sewers, as required, shall be placed in the right-of-way, parallel to the
roadway, and shall be designed as a combination storm sewer and underdrain
in areas where poor soils and high-water table conditions exist. When located
in undedicated land, they shall be placed within an easement not less than 20
feet wide, as approved by the Township Engineer(s).
(5) Stormwater roof drains shall not discharge water directly onto a sidewalk or a
street and shall be constructed to retain all discharge wholly on the property,
except where such discharge can be conveyed to a storm sewer system.
(6) Drainage structures, which drain watershed areas in excess of 1/2 square mile
(320 acres) or which have a span of eight feet or more, shall be designed for a
maximum expected runoff as calculated using the Natural Resources
Conservation Service Technical Release 55, "Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds (less than 2,000 acres)." The design storm shall be a minimum
fifty-year storm. A one-hundred-year storm shall be used if the structure will
significantly affect the existing one-hundred-year floodplain. A water
obstruction permit shall be obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection for the waterway opening before final design is
undertaken.
B. Storm drainage systems shall be constructed in accordance with the Middletown
Township Specifications and Design Standards for Roads and Streets.
Table 1
Allowable Water Velocities
Material
Allowable Velocity
(feet per second)
1. Well-established grass on good soil:
Short pliant-bladed grass 5 to 6
Bunch grass, soil exposed 2 to 4
Stiff-stemmed grass 2 to 3
2. Earth without vegetation:
Fine sand or silt 1 to 2
Ordinary firm loam 2 to 3
Stiff clay 3 to 5
Clay and gravel 4 to 5
§ 440-408 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-408
440:78
§ 440-409. Street requirements for subdivision, land development and mobile
home parks. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
Table 1
Allowable Water Velocities
Material
Allowable Velocity
(feet per second)
Course gravel 4 to 5
Soft shale 5 to 6
3. Shoulders:
Earth See 2, Earth without vegetation,
above
Stabilized 6
Paved 10 to 15
A. At the time any application, petition or request is filed by any person, partnership,
association or corporation for the approval of the construction, opening or
dedication of any proposed road or street, the Township shall be assured that said
proposed street or road shall be satisfactorily completed and said assurance shall be
governed by the provisions of Section 509 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.128
B. Any person, partnership, association or corporation making any application or
request for the approval of the construction, opening or dedication of any proposed
road shall bear all costs of inspection of such roads and any drainage facilities
connected therewith, all engineering costs, all costs of survey, and all other
expenses and costs incidental to construction, approval and dedication of such street
or road for public use, including legal fees.
C. Proposed streets shall conform to such Township street and state highway plans as
have been prepared, adopted and filed as prescribed by law.
D. If lots resulting from the original subdivision are large enough to permit
resubdivision, or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided, adequate street right-ofway
to permit further subdivision shall be provided.
E. Streets that are extensions of existing streets shall bear the names of the existing
streets. Street names shall not be repeated within the Township, and all street names
shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
F. Dead-end streets, cul-de-sac streets and eyebrows are prohibited except at the
discretion of the Board of Supervisors.
G. Private streets are prohibited. They will be approved only if they are designed to
meet public street standards.
128.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509.
§ 440-408 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-409
440:79
§ 440-410. Existing streets.
H. New half or partial streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to reasonable
subdivision or land development of a tract in conformance with the other
requirements and standards of these regulations and where, in addition, satisfactory
assurance for completion and dedication of the remaining part of the street is
secured by escrow funds or surety bonds.
I. Wherever a tract to be subdivided or developed borders on an existing half or partial
street, the other part of the street shall be platted within such tract.
J. Any applicant whose property encroaches within the legal right-of-way of a
highway is required to obtain a highway occupancy permit from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation or Middletown Township.
K. Streets shall be logically related to topography so as to produce reasonable grades,
satisfactory drainage and suitable building sites. Streets shall be so arranged as to
be generally parallel to, rather than cross contour lines, as well as to prevent the
necessity for excessive cut and fill. Streets shall be laid out to avoid hazardous areas
such as floodplains, steep slopes and other hazardous natural features.
L. Residential streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be
discouraged.
M. Where possible, streets shall be oriented in a general east-west direction to provide
the opportunity for solar utilization and to maximize south-facing slopes.
A. Classification. Existing streets are classified on the Comprehensive Plan Map and
in the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 500). Where a conflict exists, the more restrictive
regulations shall apply. Unclassified streets shall be classified according to their
function, at the request of the applicant during plan review.
B. Standards.
(1) The following chart is a guide to the dimensional standards for the various
classifications of existing streets.
Minimum Requirements
Street
Classification
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Cartway
(feet) Curb Sidewalk
Arterial street 100 48* * *
Collector street 80 40* * *
Primary street 60 36 * *
Secondary street 50 26 * *
Rural roads 50 20 * *
Marginal access
street
50 26 * *
§ 440-409 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-410
440:80
§ 440-411. Residential streets. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
NOTE:
* As determined by the Pennsylvania Department of Highways where state
roads are involved or by the Board of Supervisors with the advice of the
Township Engineer for all other roads.
(2) The cartway and right-of-way widths in this article are minimum
requirements. If it is determined by the Township during the course of review
that, in order to prevent an increase in traffic congestion or to provide safety
from fire and unsafe turning movements, additional widths of right-of-way
and/or cartway may be required along the frontage of the proposed subdivision
or land development.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to establish appropriate standards for
the design of streets in residential subdivisions that will:
(1) Promote the safety and convenience of vehicular traffic;
(2) Protect the safety of residents;
(3) Minimize the long-term costs for the maintenance and repair of streets;
(4) Minimize crime in residential areas;
(5) Protect the residential qualities of neighborhoods by limiting traffic volume,
traffic speed, noise and fumes;
(6) Encourage the efficient use of land;
(7) Minimize the cost of street construction; and
(8) Minimize the construction of impervious surfaces.
B. Street hierarchy. The intent of this section is to create an integrated residential street
system by setting varying street standards within which the designer may design a
residential subdivision or land development. The street hierarchy is related to
average daily traffic (ADT) levels, lot frontage and the need for on-street parking.
The following hierarchy is hereby established:
(1) Existing street.
(2) Residential collector.
(3) Residential subcollector.
(4) Residential access.
C. Classification. New residential streets will be classified according to the expected
ADT level of the street (see § 440-411E). If subdivision lots are large enough for
further subdivision, the Board of Supervisors may require that the street be
constructed to the standards of a higher classification, unless deed-restricted against
further development.
§ 440-410 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-411
440:81
D. Design options.
(1) All new residential streets shall be designed to meet the standard in Table 2,
Street Design Options, and § 440-411G, H and I for individual street types.129
(2) No new residential street may tie into an existing residential street if the
expected ADT from the new development will exceed the allowable ADT
level for the existing street classification.
E. Trip generation rates. The following chart shall be used to determine the ADT
levels of proposed residential developments and streets.
Housing Type
Average Weekday Trip Generation
Rates
(trips/D.U.)
Single-family detached 10.0
Duplex (twin), multiplex, townhouse,
etc.
5.2
Garden apartment, 1 or 2 floors 6.6
Mid- and high-rise apartment, 3 or
more floors
4.0
Mobile home 4.8
Retirement village 3.3
F. Spillover parking.
(1) Spillover parking spaces are parking spaces that are needed to accommodate
the vehicles of infrequent visitors such as guests or repairmen. These spaces
are required in addition to the number needed to accommodate the residents.
Spillover parking may be provided on the individual lots, in separate parking
areas, in the common parking areas or on street and shall be provided in close
proximity to the units it is intended to serve.
(2) When off-street spillover parking is required by Table 2, Street Design
Options, it shall be provided at the following rates in addition to the minimum
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 500):
Housing Type Spaces per D.U.
Single-family detached 1.5
Attached units 1.0
Apartments 0.5
(3) When spillover parking is provided on the individual lots, the following
criteria must be met:
(a) Each space shall be 10 feet by 20 feet;
129.Editor's Note: Table 2, Street Design Options, is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 440-411 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-411
440:82
(b) The spaces may be provided in the driveway or in a turnaround; and
(c) The spillover spaces shall be clearly shown and noted on the subdivision
or land development plan.
G. Residential access streets.
(1) Residential access streets. This is the lowest order street in the hierarchy. It is
intended to carry the least amount of traffic at the lowest speed. It will provide
the safest and most desirable environment for a residential neighborhood.
Developments should be designed so that the maximum number possible of
the homes will front on this class of street.
(2) Service restrictions. Each residential access street shall be designed so that no
section of the street conveys a traffic volume greater than 200 ADT.
(3) Street access. A residential access street may intersect or take access from any
existing street type. Both ends of a loop street, however, must intersect the
same collecting street and be laid out to discourage the passage of through
traffic on it.
(4) Street width and curbing. See Table 2.130
(5) Shoulders. When curbing is not required, two-foot-wide stabilized shoulders
shall be provided on both sides of the cartway.
(6) Culs-de-sac and stub streets. A street intersecting a through street at one end
and terminating at the other in a vehicular turnaround.
(a) Dead-end streets, cul-de-sac streets and eyebrows are prohibited except
at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors.
(b) Stub streets will be permitted only within subsections of a phased
development as a temporary cul-de-sac.
(c) A cul-de-sac or stub street shall not be in excess of 800 feet long and shall
have a minimum length of 250 feet.
(d) A cul-de-sac shall not furnish access to more than 20 single-family units.
(e) A paved area with a minimum outside turning radius of 40 feet shall be
provided at the terminus of every permanent cul-de-sac. Turnarounds
shall be privately owned and shall not be square in shape.
(f) The maximum length is measured from the right-of-way line of the
intersecting through street to the center of the turnaround.
(g) Drainage of culs-de-sac shall, when possible, be towards the open end.
(h) A temporary cul-de-sac shall be designed so that the cartway is widened
to a fifty-foot width for a distance of 75 feet at the turnaround. It shall be
the developer's responsibility to remove the temporary paving and treat it
130.Editor's Note: Table 2, Street Design Options, is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 440-411 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-411
440:83
as determined by the Township.
(7) Single-access street. A street with only one point of intersection with a through
street but where the street continues around and intersects with itself. Lots or
dwelling units may be located in the island created by this street configuration.
(a) The maximum ADT at the intersection with the through street shall be
200.
(b) The distance from the right-of-way line of the through street to the point
where the single-access street intersects itself shall not exceed 400 feet.
(8) Engineering criteria. All features of the geometric design of residential access
streets that are not specified below shall be designed for a design speed of 25
miles per hour.
(a) Minimum grade: 1%.
(b) Maximum grade: 10%.
(c) Horizontal curvature: minimum center-line radius of 100 feet.
(d) Minimum tangent length between reverse curves: 50 feet.
(e) Stopping sight distances: 175 feet minimum.
(f) Maximum grade within 50 feet of intersection: 4%.
H. Residential subcollector.
(1) Residential subcollector street. This is the middle order street in the hierarchy.
It will carry more traffic than the residential access street. It should provide an
acceptable if not an optimum environment for a residential neighborhood.
(2) Service restrictions.
(a) No subcollector street shall be designed so that any section of it conveys
a traffic volume greater than 500 ADT.
(b) Subcollector streets shall be designed to exclude all external through
traffic which has neither origin nor destination on the subcollector or its
tributary residential access streets.
(3) Street access. Every subcollector must be provided with no fewer than two
access intersections to a street of higher classification in the streets hierarchy,
namely existing or proposed collector roads or arterial highways, if the total
traffic volume exceeds 500 ADT on the street. For subcollector streets
designed not to exceed 500 ADT, a subcollector with one access intersection
to a street of higher order is allowed. In no case shall a subcollector end in a
cul-de-sac.
(4) Street width and curbing. Refer to Table 2.131
131.Editor's Note: Table 2, Street Design Options, is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 440-411 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-411
440:84
(5) Shoulders. When curbing is not required, two-foot-wide stabilized shoulders
shall be provided on both sides of the cartway.
(6) Moving lanes. All subcollector streets shall be provided with two continuous
moving lanes, within which no parking is permitted.
(7) Engineering criteria. All features of the geometric design of subcollector
streets that are not specified below shall be designed for a design speed of 30
miles per hour:
(a) Minimum grade: 1%.
(b) Maximum grade: 7%.
(c) Horizontal curvature: minimum center-line radius of 140 feet.
(d) Minimum tangent length between reverse curves: 100 feet.
(e) Stopping sight distance: 200 feet minimum.
(f) Maximum grade within 50 feet of intersection: 4%.
I. Residential collector.
(1) Residential collector street. This is the highest order street that could be
classed as residential. It will carry the largest volume of traffic at higher
speeds. In large residential developments, this class of street may be necessary
to carry traffic from one neighborhood to another or from the neighborhood to
streets connecting to other areas in the community. This level of street is
unsuitable for providing direct access to homes, and such access to homes
should be avoided.
(2) Service restrictions.
(a) Provision of a residential collector street system is mandated whenever
any proposed development is of sufficient magnitude to render it
impossible to meet the maximum anticipated service volume (ADT)
standards established for local access and subcollector streets. Generally,
a nonfrontage collector may be necessary whenever a development
exceeds 150 dwelling units, or when it carries external through traffic in
addition to traffic generated by the development.
(b) Residential collectors shall be laid out to discourage excessive external
through traffic, except where linkage between bordering streets may be
determined to be desirable as indicated in the Township Comprehensive
Plan or by the Township during plan review. The Township may impose
additional standards on the design of the street, if additional external
through traffic shall so warrant.
(c) Whenever possible, residential collector streets should be designed to
have no residential lots directly fronting on them. When this is not
possible, the amount of residential frontage per length of collector street
length shall not exceed the limits set forth in the accompanying chart. In
addition, only lots having frontages of 100 feet or greater may front on
§ 440-411 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-411
440:85
§ 440-412. Special purpose streets.
residential collector streets.
Collector ADT Level
Percent of Allowable Frontage Taking
Access from Collectors Over Entire
Length of Collector Street
1,000 to 1,199 20%
1,200 to 1,599 10%
1,600 to 1,999 5%
2,000+ None
(3) Street access. Every residential collector must be provided with no fewer than
two access intersections to streets of equal or higher classification in the street
hierarchy.
(4) Street width and curbing. Curbs should not be provided along residential
collector streets except as they are found to be essential for stormwater
management. (Refer to Table 2.132)
(5) Shoulders. Four-foot-wide stabilized shoulders are required along both sides
of the residential collector street cartway.
(6) Moving lanes. All industrial/commercial streets shall be provided with a
minimum of two moving lanes.
(7) On-street parking shall be prohibited on residential collector streets.
(8) Engineering criteria. All features of the geometric design of residential
collectors that are not specified below shall be designed for a design speed of
40 miles per hour.
(a) Minimum grade: 1%.
(b) Maximum grade: 7%.
(c) Horizontal curvature: minimum center-line radius of 350 feet.
(d) Minimum tangent length between reverse curves: 150 feet.
(e) Super-elevation: 0.08 foot/foot.
(f) Stopping sight distance: 275 feet.
(g) Maximum grade within 50 feet of intersection: 3%.
A. Industrial/commercial streets.
(1) Street access. Special purpose streets may only intersect existing streets.
(2) Cartway width, right-of-way, and curbing. A minimum paved cartway width
132.Editor's Note: Table 2, Street Design Options, is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 440-411 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-412
440:86
§ 440-413. Marginal access streets.
§ 440-414. Alleys.
Alleys are prohibited in the Township.
§ 440-415. Driveways.
of 26 feet with curbing and a sixty-foot right-of-way is required if on-street
parking is prohibited. A minimum paved cartway width of 44 feet with curbing
and a seventy-foot right-of-way is required if on-street parking is allowed.
(3) Moving lanes. All industrial/commercial streets shall be provided with a
minimum of two continuous moving lanes in which no parking is permitted.
(4) Engineering criteria. All features of the geometric design of an industrial/
commercial street specified below shall be designed for a design speed of 30
miles per hour to be able to accommodate truck traffic.
(a) Minimum grade: 1%.
(b) Maximum grade: 5%.
(5) Dedication. The Township reserves the right to refuse dedication of a special
purpose street. An appropriate legal mechanism for ownership and
maintenance will be required where the streets are not accepted for dedication.
A. Classification and design. Marginal access streets are required, unless specifically
waived by the Township, as an alternative to stripping off lots along existing or
proposed arterial or collector streets. Marginal access roads shall be classified and
designed to conform with the design standards and service restrictions of either
residential access, subcollector or collector streets.
B. Intersection spacing. The minimum distance between intersections of the marginal
access street with residential collectors shall be 300 feet and with primary streets
shall be 370 feet.
C. Distance between cartways. A minimum distance of 30 feet shall be provided
between the marginal access street cartway and the higher order street cartway. This
area shall be used to provide a visual screen between the roadways by landscaping
or by use of a berm. The design and layout of berms and of plantings shall not
interfere with the clear sight triangle.
A. Driveways to single-family lots and to attached housing units:
(1) Driveways shall be located no less than 40 feet from any street intersection.
Driveways to corner lots shall gain access from the street of lower
classification when a corner lot is bounded by streets of two different
classifications as described herein.
(2) For collector and higher order streets, there shall be adequate driveway
turnaround space on each lot so that no car need back out onto a street in order
to leave the lot.
§ 440-412 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-415
440:87
§ 440-416. Intersections.
(3) Driveways shall be so located, designed and constructed as to provide a
reasonable sight distance at intersections with a stopping space, not to exceed
a four-percent grade, 20 feet behind the right-of-way line.
(4) All driveways shall be at least 12 feet from any side or rear lot line for singlefamily
lots and five feet from any side or rear lot line for attached housing
units. Common use of driveways by adjacent landowners is encouraged, and
in the case of a common driveway this requirement does not apply.
(5) All driveways shall be designed to accommodate two automobiles on lot in a
side-by-side manner.
(6) For properties abutting curbed and uncurbed streets, the following standards
shall apply to the driveway apron at the street line:
(a) Minimum curb cut or driveway width at the street line: 10 feet.
(b) Maximum curb cut or driveway width at the street line: 20 feet.
(7) Each single-family lot or attached housing unit shall have only one curb cut
along its street frontage.
B. Access to parking areas.
(1) All entrance drives serving four or less dwelling units shall, at a minimum, be
designed to single-family driveway standards above.
(2) All entrance drives which may be expected to convey less than 200 ADT
volume and serving five or more dwelling units shall be laid out to conform to
the design, service and access standards established in this chapter for local
access streets and shall be considered a local access street for purposes of
establishing the street hierarchy.
(3) All entrance drives which may be expected to convey greater than 200 ADT
but less than 1,000 ADT volume shall be laid out to conform to the minimum
design, service and access standards specified in this chapter for residential
subcollector streets and shall be considered a residential subcollector street.
(4) All entrance drives which may be expected to convey greater than 1,000 ADT
volume shall be laid out to conform to the minimum design, service and access
standards specified in this chapter for residential collector streets.
(5) In addition to the above standards, all entrance drives shall be located in
accordance with the recommendations of "Access Management for Streets and
Highways," United States Department of Transportation, June 1982.
A. Corner sight distance (clear sight triangle).
(1) Whenever a proposed street intersects an existing or proposed street of higher
order in the street hierarchy, the street of lower order shall be made a stop
street. The street of lower order shall also be designed to provide a minimum
corner sight distance as specified in the accompanying chart:
§ 440-415 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-416
440:88
Y = Corner sight distance, measured from point "a" to point "c"
and point "c" to point "d"
a and d = A point 3.5 feet above the center line of the major roadway
b = Eye level from a car stopped at the intersection on the minor
road; for this chapter, "b" is situated 3.5 feet above the
roadway 20 feet from the edge of paving of the major road
c = Approximate center of intersection of 2 streets
Shaded area represents clear sight triangle
Minimum Corner Sight Distance "Y"
Major Road Type/Design Speed
Y
(feet)
Existing street/50 mph 500
Existing street/40 mph 400
Residential collector/35 mph 350
Residential subcollector/30 mph 300
Residential access/25 mph 250
(2) The entire area of the clear sight triangle, described by points "a," "b" and "c"
above, shall be designed to provide an unobstructed view across it from point
"b" to all points 3.5 feet above the cartway along the center line from point "a"
to points "c" and "d."
B. Curb radius. Minimum curb or edge of pavement radius shall be determined
according to the specifications for the street of higher classification in the street
system hierarchy, as specified below.
§ 440-416 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-416
440:89
§ 440-417. Street trees. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13; 3-1-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-02]
(1) Residential subcollector: 20 feet.
(2) Residential collector: 30 feet.
(3) Existing street: 40 feet.
C. Intersection spacing. Proposed streets which intersect opposite sides of another
street (either existing or proposed) shall be laid out to intersect directly opposite
each other or at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, with a minimum offset
or spacing measured from center line to center line as specified below.
Major Road Type
Spacing
(in feet)
Existing 1,600
Residential collector 300
Residential subcollector 125
Residential access NA
D. Intersection angle. Intersecting streets shall intersect at a 90° angle for a minimum
of 50 feet beyond the intersection of the right-of-way lines.
E. Turning lanes. Deceleration or turning lanes may be required by the Township
along existing and proposed collector and/or arterial roads whenever these intersect
other collector or primary roads.
(1) Deceleration or turning or merging lanes may be required by the Township
along existing and proposed streets as determined by a traffic impact study
required by § 440-303D(7).
(2) Deceleration lanes shall be designed to the following standards:
(a) The lane width shall be the same as the required width of the roadway
moving lanes.
(b) The lane shall provide the full required lane width for its full length. It
shall not be tapered.
(c) The minimum lane length shall be as follows:
Design Speed of Road
(mph)
Minimum Deceleration Lane Length
(feet)
30 165
40 230
50 310
A. Street trees shall be planted along all streets where suitable street trees do not exist
§ 440-416 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-417
440:90
and where existing conditions warrant the planting of street trees.
B. Large trees shall be planted at intervals of not more than 40 feet, and small trees
shall be planted at intervals of not more than 25 feet.
C. Street trees shall be planted five feet behind and parallel to the future right-of-way
line. A ten-foot-wide landscaping easement shall be incorporated into the plan to
accommodate the planting of the trees. The easement shall be measured from the
future right-of-way line.
D. At intersections, street trees shall be located no closer than 30 feet from the
intersection of the street right-of-way lines.
E. Street trees shall be staggered on opposite sides of the street.
F. The minimum trunk diameter, measured at a height of six inches above the finished
grade level, shall be 2.5 inches for large and small trees.
G. Street trees shall be of nursery stock. They shall be of symmetrical growth, free of
insects, pests and disease. All plant material shall conform to the applicable
standards of the American Association of Nurserymen. These standards include, but
are not limited to, caliper, height, spread and root ball size.
H. In particular, approved trees include the following:
Small Trees
Acer campestre — Hedge maple
Acer ginnala — Amur maple*
Crataegus x lavallei — Lavelle hawthorn*
Crataegus phaenopyrum — Washington hawthorn*
Crataegus viridis "winter king" — "Winter king" hawthorn*
Koelreuteria paniculata — Golden raintree
Malus baccata f. columnaris — Upright siberian crabapple*
Malus floribunda — Japanese crabapple*
Malus baccata "snowdrift" — "Snowdrift" crabapple*
Prunus serrulata "kwanzan" — "Kwanzan"
Flowering cherry
Large Trees
Acer platanoides — Norway maple
Acer rubrum — Red maple
Fraxinus americana — White ash
Fraxinus pennsylvanica lanceolata — Green ash
Ginko biloba — Ginko (male only)
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis — Thornless honeylocust
Liquidambar styraciflua — Sweet gum
§ 440-417 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-417
440:91
§ 440-418. Street signs. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
§ 440-419. Sidewalks. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
Large Trees
Phellodendron amurense — Amur cork tree
Pyrus calleryana bradford — Bradford callery pear
Quercus alba — White oak
Quercus borealis — Red oak
Quercus coccinea — Scarlet oak
Sophora japonica — Japanese pagoda tree
Tilia — Linden (all species hardy to the area)
Zelkova serrata — Japanese zelkova
NOTE:
* Must be of the nursery stock trained for street tree use, i.e., single trunk with
branching height six feet or greater.
(1) Upon approval of the Planning Commission, other species may be utilized.
I. Where planted median strips are incorporated into a subdivision or land
development plan, only low-maintenance plant material shall be used.
J. The location and type of street trees and the location of streetlights shall be
indicated on a plot plan for individual properties prior to agreement of sale of a lot.
These elements shall also be described in the deed for individual lots.
A. Street signs shall be of an approved vandalproof design and shall be consistent in
design and specification with those in general use by the Township.
B. The signs shall be located in a manner making them visible at all times with a
minimum of effort by both pedestrian and vehicular traffic and as close to the side
of the cartway or curb as practical, but no part of the nameplate shall be permitted
to overhang any part of the cartway or curb.
C. Street nameplates, standards, installations and locations shall be subject to the
approval and inspection of the Township Engineer(s).
D. The installation of all traffic control signs, equipment or devices required within the
subdivision or land development and along the frontage shall be shown on the plan,
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Middletown
Township, where required, and installed at the cost of the developer.
A. Sidewalks shall be provided where required by the Township.
B. The minimum width of all sidewalks shall be four feet. There shall be a minimum
seven-foot-wide planting strip between the curb and the sidewalk along streets. The
minimum width of a combination sidewalk and curb shall be six feet.
§ 440-417 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-419
440:92
§ 440-420. Curbs. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
All curbs shall be constructed in accordance with Middletown Township Specifications
and Design Standards for Streets and Roads.
§ 440-421. Automobile parking facilities. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13;
2-11-1997 by Ord. No. 97-02]
C. The grades and paving of the sidewalk shall be continuous across driveways except
in nonresidential and high-density residential developments and in certain other
cases where heavy traffic volume dictates special treatment.
D. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the Middletown Township
Specifications and Design Standards for Streets and Roads.
E. Sidewalk and accessible route cross slopes shall be in accordance with current ADA
requirements. [Amended 6-6-2006 by Ord. No. 06-10]
F. At corners and pedestrian street crossing points, sidewalks shall be extended to the
curbline with an adequate apron area for anticipated pedestrian traffic.
G. The grades of sidewalks and accessible routes shall be in accordance with current
ADA requirements. Where steps or a combination of steps and ramps are utilized
to maintain maximum permitted grades, they must be constructed in accordance
with current ADA standards as well. [Amended 6-6-2006 by Ord. No. 06-10]
H. In addition to the preceding requirements, all sidewalks shall provide ramps for
adequate and reasonable access for the safe and convenient movement of physically
handicapped persons, including those in wheelchairs, across curbs at all pedestrian
crosswalks. These facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the chapter
titled "Pedestrian Facilities" of the PennDOT Manual, Part 2, or any amendments
thereto.
A. A parking space is a paved stall or berth covered or uncovered for parking motor
vehicles, excluding space(s) within a public cartway. Parking facilities shall be
provided off street in accordance with the requirements of the Middletown
Township Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 500) and this chapter. Use of any parking
space for any other purpose is prohibited.
B. Parking areas shall be designed to permit each motor vehicle to proceed to and from
the parking space provided for it without requiring the moving of any other motor
vehicle(s).
C. At no time shall angle or perpendicular parking be provided along public or private
streets. All parking lots and bays permitting parking other than parallel shall be
physically separated from the street and confined by curbing or other suitable
separating device.
D. Vehicles shall not be permitted to exit parking spaces by backing into a public
street. Access areas shall be designed so as to allow vehicles to enter a public street
in a forward direction.
E. The design standards specified below shall be required for all off-street parking
§ 440-419 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-421
440:93
facilities with a capacity of three or more vehicles. Refer to Figure 2 below.
(1) No one row of off-street parking spaces shall exceed 12 spaces. Raised
planting beds shall be at intervals not to exceed 12 spaces with beds offset on
alternating sides of parking rows. Planting islands shall be located at each end
of a parking row.
(2) Raised planting beds shall be planted with one shade tree (from the approved
street tree list) per bed.
(3) Where necessary for vehicular channelization and where determined necessary
by the Board of Supervisors for pedestrian safety, a double-loaded row of
parking spaces shall include a ten-foot-wide raised planting strip. The planting
strip shall have raised planting beds only at each end of the parking row. The
planting strip shall include a sidewalk, light standards and trees. The location
of light standards and trees shall not interfere with each other.
(4) The edge of any parking area shall not be closer than 15 feet to the outside wall
of the nearest building. This area shall be used for sidewalks to entryways and
foundation plantings.
(5) Design standards for parking stalls shall not apply where the primary purpose
is that of vehicle storage related to sales, service or other use. Unless otherwise
§ 440-421 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-421
440:94
specified, parking areas shall conform to the following minimum dimensional
standards, based upon their intended function. [Amended 6-6-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-10]
Aisle Width
Type
One-Way
(feet)
Two-Way
(feet)
Stall Width
(feet)
Stall Depth**
(feet)
Conventional 20 24 9*** 18***
Handicapped 20 24 In accordance with current
ADA requirements
Oversized* (As determined by the
Township)
NOTES:
* Including, but not limited to, recreational vehicles, tandem trailers,
trucks and buses.
** Stall depth shall be measured from the curb or the tire stop
*** Or as prescribed in the Middletown Township Zoning Ordinance
(Chapter 500).
(6) The number of parking spaces for handicapped or physically disabled persons
shall be provided for in accordance with current ADA requirements.
(a) In order to provide for flexibility in parking lot design and layout, angle
parking may be appropriate in certain instances. Where angle parking is
utilized, the width of stalls for various types of parking uses shall remain
consistent with the minimum dimensions established for each, while the
depth of stall and width of aisles may vary as follows:
Aisle Width Variation
(in feet)
Angle of Parking One-Way Two-Way
Stall Depth
Variation
(feet)
90° 0 0 0
60° -2 -3 +1
45° -5 -4 0
30° -8 -4 -2
(7) All dead-end parking areas shall be designed to provide sufficient area for
backing and turning movements from the end stalls of the parking area.
(8) No less than a five-foot radius of curvature shall be permitted for all curblines
in all parking areas.
§ 440-421 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-421
440:95
(9) Except at entrance and exit drives, all parking areas shall be set back from the
future right-of-way line and all property lines at least 15 feet or as required by
the Middletown Township Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 500) (the greater
provisions shall prevail). The distance between this required setback and the
cartway shall be maintained as a planting strip.
(10) All automobile parking areas shall be paved and constructed in accordance
with the Middletown Township Specifications and Design Standards for
Streets and Roads, except single-family residential dwellings.
(11) The depth and width of parking areas reserved or laid out for commercial and
industrial uses shall be appropriate to those uses.
(12) The layout of every parking area shall be such as to permit safe and efficient
internal circulation, in accordance with accepted traffic engineering principles
and standards, including truck traffic where applicable.
(13) Entrances and exits to and from off-street parking areas shall be located so as
to avoid interference with street traffic.
(14) Every off-street parking area shall include sufficient stacking space to
accommodate entering and exiting vehicles without overflowing into adjacent
streets or service roadways.
(15) Wherever possible, the layout of parking aisles and rows shall be
perpendicular to building facades to facilitate channelization of pedestrian
movements.
(16) For the purpose of servicing any property held under single and separate
ownership, entrance and exit accessways crossing the street line shall be
limited to one accessway along the frontage of any single street. Unless and
only if one accessway is impracticable in the judgment of the Board of
Supervisors, two accessways shall be permitted along the frontage of any
single street, and the center lines of the two accessways shall be spaced at least
80 apart. On all corner properties, there shall be a minimum of 60 feet,
measured at the curbline, between the center line of any entrance or exit
accessway and the street line of the street parallel to said accessway.
(17) Access drives shall be at least 12 feet from any side property line, except for
the additional requirements in buffer yards. If a shared access or agreement or
common driveway situation exists, this requirement shall not apply.
(18) Where necessary in the judgment of the Board of Supervisors, concrete tire
bumpers shall be installed so as to prevent vehicle overhang on the sidewalk
area.
(19) Parking and display areas along arterial and collector roads shall be set back at
least 30 feet from the future right-of-way of said road in order to accommodate
acceleration and deceleration lanes and marginal access roads. Where
automobile sales is the primary use of a parcel, parking and display areas shall
be set back at least 15 feet from the future right-of-way.
F. Lighting. Parking areas for all nonresidential uses and multifamily residential
§ 440-421 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-421
440:96
§ 440-422. Mobile home parks.
developments shall be lighted. All artificial lighting used to illuminate any parking
area shall be so designed that no direct rays shall fall upon any neighboring property
or street. A minimum level of one footcandle of light shall be maintained. Lighting
standards shall be located not less than two feet from the paving of parking spaces,
drives or streets.
G. Parking lots with less than 20 spaces shall not have a grade exceeding 5%. Parking
lots with 20 or more spaces shall not have a grade exceeding 3%. Any grade, cut,
fill or height exceeding four feet shall be subject to approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
H. All parking areas shall have at least one tree of 1 1/2 inch caliper minimum for
every six parking spaces in single rows and one tree of 1 1/2 inch caliper minimum
for every 12 parking spaces in double-loaded rows of parking spaces. Trees shall be
planted in such a manner as to afford maximum protection from the sun for parked
vehicles. The requirements of § 440-421E above may be used to fulfill this
requirement.
I. All parking spaces shall be marked with a four-inch-wide painted line so that
individual spaces are identifiable.
J. Curbs or tire stops shall be designed for the protection of planting strips and to
prevent overhanging of pedestrian walks. Curbs shall be designed to accommodate
handicapped persons.
A. In addition to the requirements of this article, all proposed mobile home parks shall
comply with the following articles of this chapter: Articles III, V and VI.
B. The development plan for a mobile home park shall comply with the Middletown
Township Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 500).
C. Pedestrian walks.
(1) General requirements. All parks shall provide safe, convenient, all-season
pedestrian walkways of adequate width for intended use, durable and
convenient to maintain, between the park streets and all community facilities
provided for park residents. Sudden changes in vertical alignment or gradient
shall be prohibited.
(2) Common walk system. Where pedestrian traffic is concentrated, a common
walk system shall be provided, such common walks shall have a minimum
width of 3 1/2 feet.
(3) Individual walks. All mobile home sites shall be connected to common walks
and to streets or to driveways or parking spaces connecting to a paved street.
Such individual walks shall have a minimum width of 2 1/2 feet.
D. Skirting and hitching.
(1) An enclosure of compatible design and material shall be erected around the
entire base of each mobile home. Such enclosure shall provide sufficient
§ 440-421 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-422
440:97
§ 440-423. Open space in subdivisions, residential developments and mobile home
parks. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
ventilation to inhibit decay and deterioration of the structure.
(2) The hitch which is employed for the normal movement of the unit shall be
removed.
E. Refuse collection.
(1) Outdoor collection stations shall be provided for garbage and trash removal
when individual collection is not made and indoor storage is not provided.
(2) Collection stations shall be located so as to be separated adequately from
habitable units to avoid being offensive but at the same time be convenient for
both collectors and residents, and shall be screened and landscaped adequately.
A. All subdivisions, multifamily residential land developments and mobile home parks
shall meet the open space requirements of this chapter and of the Middletown
Township Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 500). A performance bond or other security
in accordance with this chapter may be required to cover the costs of installation of
designated planting and recreation facilities.
B. The applicant shall provide monuments to physically delineate private lots from
open space areas.
C. All land held for open space shall be so designated on the plans. The plans shall
contain the following statement for lands in Subsection C(1), (2) or (3) below:
"Open space land may not be separately sold, nor shall such land be further
developed or subdivided." All plans shall further designate the use of open space,
the type of maintenance to be provided, and a planting plan or schedule. In
designating use and maintenance, the following classes may be used:
(1) Lawn. A grass area with or without trees which may be used by the residents
for a variety of purposes and which shall be mowed regularly to ensure a neat
and tidy appearance.
(2) Natural area. An area of natural vegetation undisturbed during construction or
replanted. Such areas may contain pathways. Meadows shall be maintained as
such and not left to become weed-infested. Maintenance may be minimal but
shall prevent the proliferation of weeds and undesirable plants such as
honeysuckle and poison ivy. Litter, dead trees and brush shall be removed, and
streams shall be kept in free-flowing condition.
(3) Recreation area. An area designated for a specific recreation use, including but
not limited to tennis, swimming, shuffleboard, playfield and tot-lot. Such areas
shall be maintained so as to avoid creating a hazard or nuisance and shall
perpetuate the proposed use.
(4) Stormwater management. Stormwater detention or retention basins shall not
be included as areas designated for open space.
D. Any of the following methods may be used to preserve, own or maintain open
§ 440-422 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-423
440:98
§ 440-424. Recreation areas and community facilities. [Amended 12-17-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-35]
space: condominium, homeowners' association, dedication in fee simple, or transfer
to a private conservation organization. The following specific requirements are
associated with each of the various methods:
(1) Condominium. The open space may be controlled through the use of
condominium agreements. Such agreements shall be in conformance with the
Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act.133 All open space land shall be held
as common element. Such land shall not be eligible for sale to another party,
except for transfer to another method of ownership permitted under this
section, and then only where there is no change in the open space ratio.
(2) Homeowners' association. The open space may be held in common ownership
by a homeowners' association. This method shall be subject to all of the
provisions for homeowners' associations set forth in Article VII of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. A homeowners' association shall
not be disbanded without the consent of the Township.
(3) Fee simple dedication. The Township may, but shall not be required to, accept
any portion or portions of the open space, provided that: a) such land shall be
freely accessible to the public; b) there shall be no cost to the Township
involved; c) the Township agrees to and has access to maintain such lands; and
d) the open space shall be in an acceptable condition to the Township at the
time of transfer with regard to size, shape, location, improvements, and
environmental integrity.
(4) Transfer to a private conservation organization. With permission of the
Township, an owner may transfer either the fee simple title, with appropriate
deed restrictions running in favor of the Township, or easements to a private,
nonprofit organization, among whose purposes is to conserve open space land
and/or natural resources, provided that: a) the organization is acceptable to the
Township and is a bona fide conservation organization with perpetual
existence; b) the conveyance contains appropriate provision for proper reverter
or retransfer in the event that the organization becomes unwilling or unable to
continue carrying out its functions; and c) a maintenance agreement acceptable
to the Township is entered into by the developer and the organization.
A. Where deemed essential by the Board of Supervisors, upon consideration of the
particular type of development proposed, the Board of Supervisors may require the
dedication or reservation of such other areas or sites of a character, extent and
location suitable to the needs created by such development for schools, parks, other
neighborhood purposes and recreation areas.
B. The following standards shall apply to the provisions of recreation space and
community facilities. [Amended 5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 07-07]
(1) All residential development, including multifamily and cluster developments,
133.Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 440-423 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-424
440:99
shall provide a minimum of 1,500 square feet per residential dwelling unit.
This open space requirement is in addition to any open space required under
the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 500).
C. Any residential subdivision or land development plan, whether for single-family or
multifamily, that contains less than 30 dwelling units may be exempted at the option
of the Board of Supervisors from the provision of the offer of dedication as
provided for in this chapter.
D. The recreational activities and/or facilities for which the area is intended must be
specified on the development plans.
E. Recreation areas shall be readily accessible to all development residents or, in the
case of recreation areas dedicated to the Township, shall be easily and safely
accessible to the general public. At least one side of the recreation area shall abut a
street for a minimum distance of 50 feet for access of emergency and maintenance
vehicles. Measures must be taken to ensure that unsafe conditions will be avoided
when recreation areas are adjacent to streets or parking lots.
F. The configuration of the recreation area must be able to accommodate recreation
activities proposed by the development plans. The required minimum area shall not
include narrow or irregular pieces of land which are remnants from plotting and/or
street and parking areas. Recreational areas shall have an appropriate area for access
and a minimum area of 45,000 square feet.
G. Recreation areas shall not be traversed by utility easements unless said utilities are
placed underground and no part of them or their supportive equipment protrudes
above ground level.
H. The following may not be located in recreation areas: storm drainage facilities,
sewage treatment or disposal facilities of any type, water storage tank, well pump
house, and any similar use or other use which is not related to or associated with
recreation.
I. Active recreation areas shall be located in such a location that the use of the facility
will not be a nuisance to the residents of nearby dwelling units.
J. Dedication to the Township.
(1) In a case where the developer does not wish to retain the required recreation
area or open space, or it is not accepted by an approved conservation
organization, such area may be dedicated to the Township for public use.
(2) Before approving any site to be dedicated to the Township for recreational
areas and open space, the Board of Supervisors shall seek the advice of the
Township Park and Recreation Board and the Township Planning
Commission.
(3) Such area dedicated to the Township for public use shall be suitable for
recreational purposes or open space by reasons of size, shape, location,
topography and access.
(4) If the Board of Supervisors deems it to be in the public interest to accept in
§ 440-424 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-424
440:100
§ 440-425. Multifamily residential developments.
In addition to all other applicable provisions of this chapter, multifamily residential
developments are subject to the following requirements:
dedication land for recreational purposes and open space purposes, such
acceptance shall be by adoption of a resolution or ordinance of the Board of
Supervisors and acceptance of a deed of dedication from the developer, and
in addition thereto, the developer shall contribute to the Township a sum of
money to be determined by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. Said sum
shall be deposited in a special maintenance account by the Township and shall
be used only for the purpose of developing and maintaining dedicated land
within the Township. In addition, where the Board of Supervisors has deemed
it to be in the public interest to accept in dedication land for recreational
purposes and open space purposes, the developer shall contribute to the
Township a sum of money to be determined by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors. Said sum shall be deposited in a special capital reserve account
by the Township and shall be used only for the purpose of acquisition of land
or capital improvements for park and recreation purposes.
(5) If the Board of Supervisors deems it to be in the public interest to accept in
dedication land for drainage detention or retention purposes, such acceptance
shall be by adoption of a resolution or ordinance of the Board of Supervisors
and acceptance of a deed of dedication from the developer, and in addition
thereto, the developer shall contribute to the Township a sum of money to be
determined by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. Said sum shall be
deposited in a special maintenance account by the Township and shall be used
only for the purpose of maintaining dedicated land within the Township.
K. Fee in lieu of open space or recreation areas.
(1) Where the Board of Supervisors agrees that, because of the size, shape,
location, access, topography or other physical features of the land or any other
need of the Township, it is impractical to dedicate land to the Township or set
aside a recreation area or open space area as required by this chapter, the
Supervisors shall require a payment of a fee in lieu of dedication of such land
from the developer, which shall be payable to the Township prior to approval
of each final section of the overall plan by the Board. Such fee shall be
calculated by multiplying the number of dwelling units in each section by the
fee per dwelling unit.
(2) The amount of the fee shall be determined by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors, which may be equivalent to the fair market value of this land.
(3) All moneys paid to the Township pursuant to this chapter shall be kept in a
capital reserve fund. Moneys in such fund shall be used only for the acquisition
of land or capital improvements for park and recreation purposes.
A. Preliminary approval of the site plan must be obtained for the entire proposed
multifamily development. Final approval may be obtained section by section, but
such development sections shall be specified on the preliminary plan and must be
§ 440-424 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-425
440:101
numbered in the proposed order that they are to be developed. Such order of
development must be adhered to, and if changes are required, plans must be refiled
and reviewed and approved.
B. Arrangement of buildings and facilities.
(1) All of the elements of the site plan should be organized harmoniously and
efficiently in relation to topography, the size and shape of the plot, the
character of the adjoining property, and the type and size of the buildings, in
order to produce a usable and efficient land use pattern.
(2) Arrangements of buildings should be in favorable relation to the natural
topography, existing desirable planting, bodies of water, views within and
beyond the site, and exposure to the sun and other buildings on the site.
C. Access and circulation.
(1) Access to the dwellings and circulation between buildings and other important
project facilities for vehicular and pedestrian traffic shall be comfortable and
convenient for the occupants.
(2) Access and circulation for firefighting and other emergency equipment,
moving vans, fuel trucks, garbage collection, deliveries and snow removal
shall be planned for efficient operation and convenience.
(3) Walking distance from the main entrance of a building to a street, driveway or
parking area shall usually be less than 100 feet; any exception to this standard
should be reasonably justified by compensating advantages, such as desirable
views and site preservation through adaptation to topography. In no case shall
the distance exceed 200 feet.
D. Yards. Yards shall assure adequate privacy, desirable outlook, adequate natural
light and ventilation, convenient access to and around the dwellings, and other
essential uses.
E. Grading.
(1) Grading shall be designed for buildings, lawns, paved streets and other
facilities to assure adequate surface drainage, safe and convenient access to
and around the buildings and for the screening of parking and other service
areas and the conservation of desirable existing vegetation and natural
contours of the land.
(2) Grading around buildings shall be designed to be in harmony with natural
topography and to minimize earthwork.
F. Streets.
(1) Streets shall be provided on the site where necessary to furnish principal
trafficways for convenient access to the living units and other important
facilities on the property.
(2) Streets shall conform to the design requirements and specifications of this
chapter.
§ 440-425 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-425
440:102
§ 440-426. Nonresidential developments.
G. Driveways.
(1) Driveways shall be provided on the site where necessary for convenient access
to the living units, garage compounds, parking areas, service entrances of
buildings, collection of refuse, and all other necessary services. Driveways
shall enter public streets at safe locations.
(2) Driveways shall be planned for convenient circulation suitable for traffic needs
and safety.
(3) All driveways shall be constructed and paved in a manner acceptable to the
Township.
H. Parking areas.
(1) Paved parking areas shall be provided to meet the needs of the residents and
their guests without interference with normal street traffic.
(2) Parking areas shall conform to the standards and requirements of this chapter
and those of the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 500).
I. Sidewalks.
(1) Street sidewalks and on-site walks shall be provided for convenience and safe
access to all living units from streets, driveways, parking areas or garages and
for convenient circulation and access to all facilities.
(2) Width, alignment and gradient of walks shall provide safety and convenience
for pedestrian traffic. Small jogs in the alignment shall be avoided.
(3) The alignment and gradient of walks shall be coordinated with the grading
plan to prevent the passage of concentrated surface water on or across the walk
and to prevent the pocketing of surface water by walks.
(4) Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
J. Refuse collection stations.
(1) Outdoor collection stations shall be provided for garbage and trash removal
when individual collection is not made and indoor storage is not provided.
(2) Collection stations shall be located so as to be separated adequately from
habitable buildings to avoid being offensive, but at the same time be
convenient for both collectors and residents, and shall be screened and
landscaped.
K. Planting. The appeal and character of the site shall be preserved and enhanced by
retaining and protecting existing trees and other site features, and additional new
plant material shall be added for privacy, shade, beauty of buildings and grounds
and to screen out objectionable features. The requirements of the Middletown
Township Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 500) shall be met.
§ 440-425 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-426
440:103
A. Additional width of streets adjacent to areas proposed for nonresidential use may
be required as deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors to assure the free flow
of through traffic unimpeded by vehicles entering or leaving parking areas.
B. The access requirements of § 440-415B of this chapter shall be met.
C. For commercial uses, the developer may be required to provide separate access for
service vehicles and loading areas from the vehicular accessways and parking areas
intended for patron use. This may be accomplished by using a separate access point
for service vehicles to move from the road to the loading area. The applicant may
also be required to screen the loading area when deemed necessary by the
Township.
D. Dead-end streets, cul-de-sac streets and eyebrows are prohibited, except at the
discretion of the Board of Supervisors. If they are permitted, they shall be
terminated with a paved turnaround consistent with this chapter.
E. Adjacent residential areas shall be protected from potential nuisance of the
proposed nonresidential developments. Buffer yards shall be provided as prescribed
in the Middletown Township Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 500).
F. Streets carrying nonresidential traffic shall not be extended to the boundaries of the
adjacent existing or potential residential areas, nor connected to streets intended for
predominantly residential traffic.
G. Parking areas shall be located or designed in such a manner that they are visibly
secluded from eye level in any surrounding residential area. Grading to depress the
parking area, raised berms, landscaping or fencing are satisfactory methods to
create such seclusion.
H. All area, design and parking requirements shall conform to the Middletown
Township Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 500) and this chapter.
I. Refuse collection for nonresidential developments.
(1) Outdoor collection stations shall be provided for garbage and trash removal
when indoor collection is not provided.
(2) Collection stations shall be located to avoid being offensive and shall be
screened from view and landscaped.
(3) Collection stations shall not be located in buffer yards.
J. Off-street loading facilities. Off-street loading facilities shall be designed to
conform to the following specifications:
(1) Each required space shall be no less than 14 feet wide, 55 feet long, and 14
feet six inches high, exclusive of drives and maneuvering space, and located
entirely on the lot being served.
(2) There shall be appropriate means of access to a street as well as adequate
maneuvering space.
(3) The maximum width of driveways and sidewalk openings measured at the
§ 440-426 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-426
440:104
§ 440-427. Bikeways.
street lot line shall be 35 feet; the minimum width shall be 20 feet.
(4) All accessory driveways and entranceways shall be graded, surfaced and
drained to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer, to the extent necessary
to prevent nuisances of dust, erosion or excessive water flow across public
ways.
(5) Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner as to at no time
constitute a nuisance, a hazard or an unreasonable impediment to traffic.
A. Bikeway definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BICYCLE LANES — Bikeways located on the paved surface of a roadway, street
or highway or on the shoulder of a roadway, street or highway and delineated by
signs or markings.
BICYCLE PATHS — Bikeways laid out on private property, public right-of-way,
or open space and recreational areas.
BICYCLE ROUTES — Bikeways located in the area of a public roadway, street
or highway which is specifically designated and marked by appropriate directional
and informational signs.
B. If requested by the Board of Supervisors upon advice of the Township Planning
Commission and consultants, subdivision and land development plans shall include
bike paths, bike lanes and bike routes. [Amended 5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 07-07]
C. Construction standards. All bike paths, bike lanes and bike routes shall be
constructed or installed in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Bike paths.
(a) The near edge of the path shall not be less than five feet from the face of
the curb along any street. Where this setback cannot be accomplished, a
suitable physical barrier shall be provided.
(b) The width of the path shall be five feet. The Board of Supervisors may
from time to time permit variations in this width and may permit the
installation of bicycle paths in lieu of sidewalks.
(c) Bicycle paths shall, as near as possible, follow the contour lines of the
particular area where the paths are to be installed.
(d) Curb ramps the same width as the bike path shall be installed to permit
the crossing of intersecting streets. Curb ramps shall have a maximum
slope of six to one with sides having a maximum slope of two to one.
(e) The vertical clearance from the bicycle path surface to overhead
obstruction shall be not less than 10 feet.
(f) The bicycle path shall be constructed of four-inch aggregate base of either
gravel, crushed stone or slag with two-inch asphalt surface course.
§ 440-426 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-427
440:105
§ 440-428. Transportation impact fee. [Amended 12-17-1991 by Ord. No. 91-35;
5-26-1998 by Ord. No. 98-07]
(g) All bike paths shall be constructed in such a manner to ensure adequate
and proper drainage and to prevent the bike path from being inundated by
surface drainage.
(h) The entire design and construction of the bike paths shall be in
accordance with good engineering practice and shall be subject to the
approval of the Township Engineer.
(2) Bike lanes.
(a) A bike lane shall not be installed on roads, streets or highways which
have a posted speed in excess of 45 miles per hour.
(b) The minimum width of the bike lane where no curb is present shall be
four feet for one-way bike traffic. When the bike lane is adjacent to a
curb, the minimum width shall be five feet.
(c) Bicycle lanes shall be marked with bright paint stripes at least four feet
from the outer edge of the pavement and approximately six inches wide.
(d) Bicycle lanes on state roads shall conform to regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Highways.
(e) Where a roadway, street or highway is widened to include a bicycle lane,
the added pavement area shall be installed in accordance with the street
construction requirements of the Township of Middletown.
(3) Bicycle routes.
(a) A bicycle route shall not be installed on roads, streets or highways where
the posted speed limit is in excess of 25 miles per hour.
(b) Where a bicycle route is designated by the Board of Supervisors, the
roadway, street or highway shall be painted with symbols or posted with
signs designating the bicycle route.
D. Establishing bike lanes and bike routes. The Board of Supervisors may from time
to time designate bike lanes and bike routes in accordance with this chapter.
E. Signs and markings. All signs and markings required pursuant to the terms of this
chapter shall conform to the standards set forth in the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, United States Government Printing Office (1971), or subsequent
amendments.
A. Title. This section shall be referred to as the "Middletown Township Transportation
Impact Fee."
B. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish an impact fee program to ensure
that the transportation system is available and adequate to support new growth and
development. To advance this objective, there is hereby created an impact fee
payable to the Township at the time of building permit issuance.
§ 440-427 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-428
440:106
C. General findings and conditions. The Board of Supervisors hereby finds and
declares that:
(1) The conditions and standards for the determination and imposition of the
impact fee set forth herein are those set forth in Act 209 of 1990,134 and any
and all amendments thereto (hereinafter the "Act"), and consist of:
(a) The recitals set forth above.
(b) The analysis, advice and recommendations of the Impact Fee Advisory
Committee.
(c) The Land Use Assumptions, as adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
(d) The Roadway Sufficiency Analysis, as adopted by the Board of
Supervisors.
(e) The Transportation Capital Improvements Plan, as adopted by the Board
of Supervisors.
(f) Such other conditions and standards as the Board of Supervisors may by
resolution identify from time to time as being relevant and material to the
imposition of an impact fee and consistent with the provisions of the Act
and any amendments thereto.
(2) The collection, disbursement and accounting of impact fees shall be
administered by the office of the Township Manager or Secretary-Treasurer,
subject to review, oversight and control by the Board of Supervisors.
(3) The time, method and procedure for payment of impact fees shall be as set
forth in Subsection P hereof.
(4) The procedure for credits against or refunds of impact fees shall be as set forth
in Subsections Q and R hereof.
(5) Such exemptions as the Board of Supervisors shall choose to enact shall be set
forth in Subsection K hereof.
D. Definitions. The terms and definitions set forth in Section 502-A of the Act are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
E. Imposition. There is hereby enacted an impact fee to be imposed upon new
development for the purpose of off-site public transportation capital improvements
authorized by the Act and as described in the program adopted by the Board of
Supervisors. Said impact fee shall apply to all new developments or subdivisions
within each of the transportation service areas identified herein and shall be a
condition precedent to final approval of a development or a subdivision plan or
issuance of a building permit.
F. Uses. Impact fees collected pursuant to this section shall be expended for costs
incurred for improvements attributable to new development and designated in the
Transportation Capital Improvements Plan adopted by the Board of Supervisors in
134.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501-A et seq.
§ 440-428 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-428
440:107
Resolution No. 91-37R for improvements within each of the transportation service
areas in which the new development will be located. Additionally, such fees may be
used for the acquisition of land and rights-of-way, engineering, legal and planning
costs, and all other costs, including debt service related to road improvements
within the designated service area, and including such proportionate amount of the
Roadway Sufficiency Analysis as is allowed under the provisions of this Act.
G. Documents adopted by the Board of Supervisors. The following documents,
previously adopted by the Board of Supervisors, are hereby incorporated by
reference in this section:
(1) Recommendations of the Impact Fee Advisory Committee, identified as
follows:
(a) Land Use Assumptions, as adopted by Township resolution.
(b) Roadway Sufficiency Analysis, as adopted by Township resolution.
(c) The Transportation Capital Improvements Plan, as adopted by Township
resolution.
(d) The Impact Fee Schedule, as established by Township resolution.
(e) Designation of transportation districts as set forth on the Transportation
Service Area Map identified as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by
reference.135
H. Special traffic studies.
(1) Where intended to assist in determining the appropriate amount of traffic
impact fees, the Township may require the preparation of special
transportation studies to determine the traffic-generation or circulation
patterns in new nonresidential developments only; provided, however, that no
studies may be required where the proposed development will not require a
deviation from the land use assumptions used to create the program.
(2) Any such studies required by the Township shall be submitted prior to the
imposition of the impact fee and shall be considered in the determination of
the fee.
I. Applicability of impact fee. Impact fees shall be uniformly applied to all
development that occurs within a designated development subarea.
J. Imposition of impact fee.
(1) No building permit shall be issued for a development in a designated
transportation district subarea, as herein defined, unless the applicant therefor
has paid the impact fee imposed by and calculated pursuant to this section.
(2) In lieu of payment of the impact fee imposed in Subsection J(1) above, the
Board of Supervisors may elect to have a person, association or corporation
pay the nonresidential unit tax pursuant to Chapter 448, Article V,
135.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 440-428 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-428
440:108
Nonresidential Unit Tax, of the Code of the Township of Middletown.
K. Exemptions. It is hereby specifically provided that any residential minor
subdivision, as defined in this chapter, shall be exempt from the transportation
impact fees imposed by this section.
L. Calculation of impact fees.
(1) The impact fee for transportation capital improvements shall be based upon
the total costs of the road improvements included in the adopted
Transportation Capital Improvements Plan within a given transportation
service area attributable to and necessitated by new development within the
service area as defined, divided by the number of anticipated peak-hour trips
generated by all new development consistent with the adopted Land Use
Assumptions and calculated in accordance with the Trip Generation Manual
published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, 4th or subsequent
editions, which is hereby adopted by the Township, to equal a per-trip cost for
transportation improvements within the service area.
(2) The specific impact fee for a specific new development or subdivision within
the service area for road improvements shall be determined as of the date of
preliminary land development or subdivision approval by multiplying the pertrip
cost established for the service area as determined in Subsection G(1)(d)
hereof by the estimated number of trips to be generated by the new
development or subdivision using generally accepted traffic engineering
standards.
(3) The Board of Supervisors may authorize or require the preparation of a special
transportation study in order to determine traffic generation or circulation for
a new nonresidential development to assist in the determination of the amount
of the transportation fee for such development or subdivision.
M. Establishment of transportation service areas.
(1) Transportation service areas are established as shown on the Transportation
Service Area Map (attached hereto at the end of this section as Exhibit A and
incorporated herein by reference).136
(2) Additional transportation district subareas or combinations of transportation
district subareas may be designated by the Board of Supervisors from time to
time consistent with the procedure set forth in this section and in consideration
of the following factors:
(a) The Comprehensive Plan.
(b) Any standards for adequate public facilities incorporated in the program.
(c) The projected build-out and timing of development areas.
(d) The need for and cost of unprogrammed transportation improvements
necessary to support projected development.
136.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 440-428 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-428
440:109
(e) Such other factors as the Board of Supervisors may deem relevant.
(3) Fees collected from development in each of the transportation district subareas
will be used exclusively to fund transportation improvement projects
scheduled for that district.
N. Nonbinding impact fee estimate. Prior to making an application for a building
permit, an applicant may request a nonbinding impact fee estimate from the
Township, which shall be based upon the maximum development potential of the
site pursuant to existing zoning regulations (Chapter 500), unless the applicant
specifies a lesser use of development.
O. Administration of impact fee.
(1) Collection of impact fee. Impact fees due pursuant to this section shall be
collected by the Township in the manner or manners prescribed herein prior to
the issuance of a building permit.
(2) Establishment of fund. Upon receipt of impact fees, the Township Manager or
Secretary-Treasurer shall be responsible for the separate and proper
accounting of such fees. All such fees shall be deposited in interest-bearing
accounts in a bank authorized to receive deposits of the Township funds.
Interest earned by each account shall be credited to that account and shall be
used solely for the purpose specified for funds of such account.
(3) Establishment and maintenance of accounts. The Township Manager or
Secretary-Treasurer shall establish appropriate trust fund accounts and shall
maintain records whereby impact fees collected can be segregated for each
transportation district subarea.
(4) Maintenance of records. The Township Manager or Secretary-Treasurer shall
maintain and keep adequate financial records for each such account, which
shall show the source and disbursement of all revenues, which shall account
for all monies received, and which shall ensure that the disbursement of funds
from each account shall be used solely and exclusively for the provision of
projects specified in the program for the particular transportation district
subarea.137
P. Method of payment. Payment of the transportation capital improvements impact fee
shall be made by the traffic generator prior to the issuance of a building permit by
the Township to the traffic generator for development on the applicable site.
Q. Credit. Any applicant who shall perform, at his own expense and with the consent
and agreement of the Board of Supervisors, off-site improvements, as herein
defined, shall be eligible for a credit from the impact fee otherwise due in the
amount of the actual cost of such off-site improvements as approved by the
Township Engineer. Such credit shall not exceed the amount of the impact fee.
(1) If the applicant makes such improvements, he must enter into an agreement
with the Board of Supervisors prior to the issuance of any building permit. The
137.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-428 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-428
440:110
agreement must establish the estimated cost of the improvement, the schedule
for initiation and completion of the improvement, a requirement that the
improvement be completed to Township and Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation standards and design criteria and such other terms and
conditions as deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors. The Board
of Supervisors shall review the improvement plan, verify costs and time
schedules, determine if the improvement is an eligible improvement, and
determine the amount of the applicable credit for such improvement to be
applied to the otherwise applicable impact fee prior to issuance of any building
permit. In no event shall the Board of Supervisors provide a credit which is
greater than the applicable impact fee. If, however, the amount of the credit is
calculated to be greater than the amount of the impact fee due, the applicant
may use such excess credit toward the impact fees imposed on other building
permits for development on the same site and in the same ownership, provided
that any such applicant shall be required to supply financial security sufficient,
in the judgment of the Township, to cover the cost of any such improvement
installed by the applicant for which credit is sought.
(2) An applicant shall be entitled as a credit against impact fees an amount equal
to the fair market value of land dedicated by the applicant and accepted by the
Township for future right-of-way, realignment or widening of existing
roadways.
(3) An applicant shall be entitled as a credit against impact fees to an amount equal
to the value of any road improvement construction which is contained in the
Transportation Capital Improvements Plan and which was performed at the
applicant's expense.
R. Refunds. Impact fees collected pursuant to this section shall be refunded, together
with interest earned thereon, to the payer of the fees under the following
circumstances:
(1) In the event the Township completes or terminates the capital improvements
plan and there remain undisbursed funds, the respective payers shall be
entitled to a share of the fund balance in the same proportion as the payer's
impact fee payment plus interest earned bears to the total impact fees collected
plus interest.
(2) In the event any specific road improvement project is completed at a cost to
the Township less than 95% of the budgeted cost of the road project, the
Township shall refund an amount equal to the excess budgeted cost over actual
cost to the payers, pro rata plus accumulated interest.
(3) In the event the Township fails to commence construction within three years
of the scheduled construction date of the project as set forth in the
Transportation Capital Improvements Plan, the Township shall refund the
portion of the fee paid by any payer making written request therefor which is
attributable to said project, with accumulated interest, provided no refund shall
be paid with respect to any project actually begun prior to the receipt of such
refund request.
(4) In the event the development for which impact fees were paid has not
§ 440-428 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-428
440:111
commenced prior to the expiration of the building permit issued therefor, the
impact fees paid, with accumulated interest, shall be refunded to the payer.
Further, if a building permit, after issuance, is altered in such a way as to
reduce the indicated impact fee, the difference between the amount indicated
and the amount actually paid shall be refunded. The payer, at his option, may
roll over the impact fees attributable to an expired building permit to cover
fees incurred by a renewal of said expired permit. With respect to refunds
arising out of Subsection R(1) or (2) hereof, any funds unclaimed within one
year after notice as required by law may be transferred to the general account
of the Township, and the payer's entitlement to said refund shall lapse. It is the
responsibility of the payer to provide the Township with the current address of
his place of business.
S. Effect of impact fee on zoning and subdivision and land development regulations.
This section shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density
of development, previously adopted design and improvement standards and
requirements or any other aspect of the development of land or provisions of public
improvements which remain subject to applicable zoning and subdivision and land
development regulations of the Township, which shall be operative and remain in
full force and effect without limitation with respect to all such development.
T. Impact fee as additional and supplemental requirement. The impact fee is additional
and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by
the Township on the development of land or the issuance of building permits.
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to alter or affect the Township's existing
ordinances and regulations regarding on-site improvements. In no event shall a
property owner be obligated to pay an impact fee for transportation capital
improvements in an amount in excess of the amount calculated pursuant to this
section; provided, however, that a property owner may be required to pay, pursuant
to Township ordinances, regulations or policies, for other public facilities in
addition to the impact fee for transportation improvements as provided herein.
U. Retroactive application. Notwithstanding the effective date of this section, the
impact fees imposed by this section shall have retroactive application to the extent
permissible by law.
V. Liberal construction. The provisions of this section shall be liberally construed to
effectively carry out its purposes, which are hereby found and declared to be in
furtherance of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience.
§ 440-428 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-428
440:112
ARTICLE V
Required Improvements
[Added 6-24-1986 by Ord. No. 86-10]
§ 440-501. Purpose.
§ 440-502. Application.
The improvements included in this article are minimum requirements. However, the
Board of Supervisors reserves the right in any case to increase said requirements if
conditions so warrant.
§ 440-503. Revision of plans.
When changes from the accepted drawings and specifications become necessary during
construction, written acceptance by the Board of Supervisors with the advice of the
Township Engineer(s) shall be secured before the execution of such changes.
§ 440-504. Maintenance.
Adequate provisions for the satisfactory maintenance of all streets shall be made by
dedication to and acceptance for maintenance by the Township or by other acceptable
means. During the course of development and prior to dedication, maintenance of streets
shall be the responsibility of the developer.
§ 440-505. Streets.
A. The purpose of this article is to establish and define the public improvements which
will be required to be constructed by the applicant as conditions for final plan
approval.
B. All improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the specific conditions
of the commitment and the accepted drawings and specifications, and in the manner
acceptable to the Township Board of Supervisors.
C. If it is determined during the course of the review that off-site improvements are
necessary to satisfactorily accomplish the objectives and requirements of this
chapter, the applicant shall be also responsible for the installation of the off-site
improvements or cost thereof.
A. The construction of streets, roads, lanes and driveways, as shown upon final plans
and as contained in contract agreements, shall in every respect conform to such
requirements as the Board of Supervisors may by resolution require for the
construction of streets in the Township.
B. The minimum requirements shall be those contained in the Middletown Township
Specifications and Design Standards for Streets and Roads, as last revised, in effect
at the time of the approval of the applicant's final plan.
C. All streets shall be graded to the grades shown on the street profiles and crosssection
plan submitted and approved with the final plan.
§ 440-501 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-505
440:113
§ 440-506. Street signs.
§ 440-507. Streetlights. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
§ 440-508. Monuments.
D. Along the existing street on which a subdivision or land development abuts,
improvements shall be made to the street as required by the Board of Supervisors.
The improvements to the existing street shall be determined by the width of the
required cartway and built to the specifications established by the Township. At the
discretion of the Board of Supervisors, an escrow account may be established to be
used by the Township for the improvement of the cartway to the required standards.
A. The developer shall erect at every street intersection a street sign or street signs
having thereon the names of the intersecting streets. At intersections where streets
cross, there shall be at least two such street signs, and at the intersections where one
street ends or joins with another street, there shall be at least one such street sign.
B. Street signs are to be erected before the first dwelling on the street is occupied.
Temporary street signs may be erected on the approval of the Board of Supervisors
but shall be made permanent before final offer for the dedication of roads is made.
C. All street signs shall conform to those standards of § 440-418.
A. The developer shall install or cause to be installed, at the developer's expense,
streetlights acceptable to the Township and serviced by underground conduit in
accordance with a plan to be prepared by the owner's engineer and approved by the
Township Streetlight Engineer and approved by the Board of Supervisors.
Provision shall be made for energizing said lighting after 50% or more of the
section within the phase in a given subdivision or land development has been
occupied. The developer shall be responsible for all costs involved in lighting the
streets until such time that the streets are accepted or condemned as public streets
by resolution or ordinance assessing all costs of the lighting to the property owners
along the street. The developer shall continue to pay for the cost of streetlight
maintenance until December 31 of the year of dedication.
B. Where sidewalks are provided, streetlights shall be located on the same side of the
street.
A. Monuments shall be placed at each change in direction of boundary, two to be
placed at each street intersection and one on one side of each street at angle points
and at the beginning and end of curves. Utility easements shall be monumented at
their beginning and at their end; areas to be conveyed for public use shall be fully
monumented at their external boundaries; and areas for open space shall be fully
monumented at each change in direction of a boundary.
B. Monuments shall be placed in the ground after final grading is completed, at a time
specified by the Township Engineer(s). The monument shall be concrete, the size
and length as may be approved by the Township Engineer(s). Monumentation of
the external boundaries of the subdivision must be completed prior to final plan
approval.
§ 440-505 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-508
440:114
§ 440-509. Sidewalks.
§ 440-510. Curbs.
§ 440-511. Storm sewerage system.
The developer shall construct stormwater drainage facilities, including retention and
detention basins, curbs, catch basins and inlets, storm sewers, road ditches and open
channels in order to prevent erosion, flooding and other hazards to life and property,
including off-site facilities that are necessary to meet the objectives and requirements
of this chapter. All such facilities are to be of adequate size and grade to hydraulically
accommodate maximum potential volumes of flow, and size, type and installation of all
stormwater drains and sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the approved plans
and standard specifications of the Middletown Township Specifications and Design
Standards for Streets and Roads.
C. All monuments shall be checked for accuracy by the Township Engineer(s) or their
accuracy certified by the developer's engineer. Accuracy of monuments shall be
within 3/100 of a foot.
A. Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of all proposed or existing streets
within the subdivision or land development, unless in the opinion of the Board of
Supervisors, with the advice of the Planning Commission, they are unnecessary for
public safety and convenience. If the Board of Supervisors deems it to be in the
public interest to waive the requirement for sidewalks, the developer shall
contribute a sum comparable to the cost if the sidewalks had been installed.
B. Within multifamily residential developments, it is required to install on-site walks
for convenience and access to all living units from streets, driveways, parking areas
or garages, and for convenient circulation and access to all project facilities.
C. Width, alignment and gradient of walks shall provide safety and convenience for
pedestrian traffic. Small jogs in the alignment shall be avoided.
D. The alignment and gradient of walks shall be coordinated with the grading plan to
prevent the passage of concentrated surface water on or across the walk and to
prevent the pocketing of surface water by walks.
A. Curbs shall be provided along both sides of all proposed or existing streets, unless
in the opinion of the Board of Supervisors, with the advice of the Township
Engineer(s), they are unnecessary.
B. Along the existing street on which a subdivision or land development abuts
(hereinafter called "boundary streets"), curbs shall be constructed and the existing
paved cartway shall be widened to the curb. The location of curbing along a
boundary street shall be determined by the width of the existing or future right-ofway
of the road as established by the Board of Supervisors and in accordance with
the specifications in § 440-410 of this chapter.
C. All curbs shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards and
specification of the Middletown Township Specifications and Design Standards for
Streets and Roads or the specifications of the Township Engineer(s).
§ 440-508 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-512
440:115
§ 440-512. Public water supply and distribution systems.
§ 440-513. Private water supply.
§ 440-514. Public sanitary sewers.
§ 440-515. Private sewage disposal system.
A. The developer shall construct water mains in such a manner as to make adequate
water service available to each lot within the subdivision or land development. The
entire system shall be designed in accordance with the requirements and standards
of the Middletown Township Construction Specifications for Water and Sewer
Systems and shall be subject to Township approval. Wherever possible, the layout
shall be a loop system rather than dead ends.
B. The system shall also be designed with adequate capacity and appropriately spaced
fire hydrants for firefighting purposes. Review by the Fire Marshal shall be required
in order to ensure that adequate fire protection is provided.
C. All on-site wells and all components of the distribution system shall be shown on
all plans.
A. Private water supply systems shall be prohibited, unless approved by the Township.
B. Where no public water is accessible, water shall be furnished by the developer on
an individual lot basis. If wells are installed on each lot, the well shall be of the
drilled type, cased and grout-sealed into the bedrock. All standards of the Bucks
County Department of Health shall be followed.
A. The developer shall construct sanitary sewers in such a manner as to make adequate
sanitary sewage service available to each lot within the subdivision or land
development.
B. All public sanitary sewers shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
Sewerage Manual issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and the Middletown Township Construction Specifications for Water
and Sewer Systems.
C. No public sanitary sewer shall be constructed until plans and specifications have
been submitted to the Department of Environmental Protection and to the Township
Board of Supervisors and approved in accordance with existing laws.
A. Private sewage disposal systems shall be prohibited, unless approved by the
Township.
B. Where public sewer facilities are not available, the developer shall provide for
sewage disposal on an individual lot basis according to the rules, regulations, terms,
definitions and conditions of the individual sewage disposal system application and
certification procedure for Bucks County, Pennsylvania, adopted by the Bucks
County Board of Commissioners on March 24, 1971, and any amendments made
thereto.
C. No plat for which on-site sewage disposal is proposed shall be finally approved
§ 440-512 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-515
440:116
§ 440-516. Electric, telephone and communications facilities.
§ 440-517. Grading.
Grading shall conform in all respect to the approved final plan and the Middletown
Township Specifications and Design Standards for Streets and Roads.
§ 440-518. Planting. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13; 3-1-1994 by Ord. No.
94-02]
§ 440-519. Special drainage problems; floodplain soil area.
§ 440-520. Community facilities.
until there appears upon it a signed statement by an authorized agent of the Bucks
County Department of Health indicating that all such lots are capable of providing
on-site treatment.
A. All electric, telephone and communications service facilities, both main and service
lines, shall be provided by underground cables, installed in accordance with the
prevailing standards and practices of the utility and other companies providing such
services.
B. Where practicable, all utilities shall be located within the street right-of-way but
outside the cartway. Otherwise, easements or rights-of-way of sufficient width for
installation and maintenance shall be provided.
C. Preliminary and final plans shall show locations of all utilities and shall be
coordinated with required street tree plantings.
A. Street trees and other required plantings shall be in accordance with § 440-417 of
this chapter.
B. Street trees and other required plant material shall not be planted until finished
grading of the subdivision or land development has been completed.
C. Plans of proposed street tree planting or buffer yard plantings shall be reviewed and
approved by the Middletown Township Planning Commission.
A. The Board of Supervisors may, when it deems necessary for the health, comfort,
safety or welfare of the present and future population of the area, and necessary to
the conservation of water, drainage and sanitary facilities, prohibit subdivision of
any portion of the property which lies within areas containing floodplain soils.
B. These areas shall be preserved from any and all destruction or damage by clearing,
grading or dumping of earth, waste material, stumps or other material of any kind.
C. When there is any proposed alteration of a stream, the applicant shall show
evidence that all required approvals by state agencies have been obtained.
A. Additional community facilities may be required to serve the proposed lots or
dwellings in a subdivision or land development. Where a proposed park,
§ 440-515 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-520
440:117
§ 440-521. Inspection of streets and improvements. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-13; 3-1-1994 by Ord. No. 94-02]
playground or other public facility is shown in the Comprehensive Plan or
Community Facilities Plan and is located in whole or in part in a subdivision or
land development, the dedication or reservation of such area may be required by
the Board of Supervisors in those cases in which it deems such requirement to be
reasonable.
B. The Middletown Township Park and Recreation Board shall review all plans where
public recreation facilities are proposed.
A. Preliminary inspection.
(1) The applicant shall notify the Township Manager in writing when all required
improvements desired to be accepted by the Township have been constructed
and installed in accordance with the Township specifications. The Township
Engineer(s) may require the applicant to supply spot elevations and finished
floor elevations to verify compliance with the approved grading plan.
(2) The Township Manager shall notify the Township Engineer(s) of the
completion of the required improvements.
(3) The Township Engineer(s) shall:
(a) Inspect the completed required improvements; and
(b) Submit in writing a report to the Board of Supervisors and the applicant
specifying those items of construction, material and workmanship which
do not comply with the Township specifications or the approved final
plans.
(4) The applicant upon notification from the Township Engineer(s) shall:
(a) Proceed, at his own cost, to make such corrections as shall be required to
comply with the Township specifications and approved final plans; and
(b) Notify the Township Engineer(s) and the Board of Supervisors upon
completion, requesting final inspection.
B. Final inspection.
(1) The Board of Supervisors and Township Engineer(s) shall make a final
inspection with the applicant of all required improvements.
(2) The Township Engineer(s) shall:
(a) Run the finished center-line profile of the completed streets;
(b) Submit a report to the Board of Supervisors indicating the final
elevations; and
(c) Affix to the final profile plan such elevations.
C. Acceptance.
§ 440-520 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-521
440:118
(1) The Board of Supervisors shall notify the applicant of acceptance of the
required improvements if satisfied that the applicant has complied with all
specifications and ordinances of the Township.
(2) The applicant shall:
(a) Furnish the Township with three linens and paper prints of the completed
required improvements, including drainage profiles and off-site/on-site
utilities.
(b) Pay all costs for the Clerk of the Court of Common Pleas of Bucks
County on the petition and resolution or ordinance of the Board of
Supervisors to the said Court for its approval of the acceptance of the
required improvements.
(c) Pay all legal and engineering costs in connection with the dedication
process.
§ 440-521 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-521
440:119

ARTICLE VI
Administration
§ 440-601. Fees.138
The applicant shall reimburse the Township for all reasonable administrative and
professional expenses, including but not limited to engineering, legal and consultant
fees, for review, modification or supplementing the feasibility studies required under
Article III or V pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Prior to the filing of a
preliminary plan and prior to the filing of a final plan, the applicant shall pay to the
Township Manager the appropriate nonrefundable filing fee and an escrow deposit to
defray the professional expenses incurred by the Township in accordance with the fee
schedule adopted by the Township Board of Supervisors. Thereafter, as the escrow
deposit for expenses is expended, the applicant shall make further deposits upon notice
from the Township Manager until approval of the plan. Upon approval of the final
plan, the Township Manager shall forthwith refund to the applicant any uncommitted
portion of the deposit remaining after all expenses incurred by the Township have been
paid in full by the applicant. To the engineering and legal fees required to be paid to
the Township by this article there shall be added the sum of 5%, which the owner
shall pay to the Township as reimbursement to the Township of the costs incurred by
the Township for the collection of such fees and the disbursement of the same to the
Township Engineer and Township Solicitor.
§ 440-602. Modifications. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
§ 440-603. Review fees. [Added 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
A. The Board of Supervisors may grant a modification of the requirements of one or
more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will exact undue hardship
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided that such
modification will not be contrary to the public interest and that the purpose and
intent of this chapter is observed.
B. All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany and be a
part of the application for development. The request shall state in full the grounds
and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based, the
provision or provisions of this chapter involved and the minimum modification
necessary.
C. The request for modification shall be referred to the Planning Commission for
advisory comments.
D. The Board of Supervisors shall keep a written record of all action on all requests
for modifications.
A. Review fees shall include the reasonable and necessary charges by the Township's
professional consultants or Engineer for review and report to the Township and
shall be set by resolution. Such review fees shall be reasonable and in accordance
138.Editor's Note: Township fee schedules are on file in the Township Building and available to be viewed on the
Township's website at www.middletownbucks.org.
§ 440-601 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-603
440:121
§ 440-604. Preventive remedies. [Added 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
§ 440-605. Enforcement remedies. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
with the ordinary and customary charges by the Township Engineer or consultant
for similar service in the community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate
or cost charged by the Engineer or consultant to the Township when fees are not
reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
B. In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review fees, the applicant
shall, within 10 days of the billing date, notify the Township that such fees are
disputed, in which case the Township shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or
land development application due to the applicant's request over disputed fees.
C. In the event that the Township and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of
review fees which are reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and the
Township shall follow the procedure for dispute resolution set forth in § 440-607G
of this chapter.
A. In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute and maintain appropriate
actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate violations, to prevent
unlawful construction, to recover damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a
building, structure or premises. The description by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or
transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
B. The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to
further improve or develop any real property which has been developed or which
has resulted from a subdivision of real property in violation of this chapter. This
authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any of the following
applicants:
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such violation,
without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the time
of violation, without regard as to whether such current owner had actual or
constructive knowledge of the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation, without regard as to whether such vendee
or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
C. As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an approval to
any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the development of any such
real property, the Township may require compliance with the conditions that would
have been applicable to the property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in
such real property.
§ 440-603 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-605
440:122
§ 440-606. Completion of improvements or guarantee thereof prerequisite to final
plat approval. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Township
as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable
until the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge.
If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the Magisterial
District Judge determining that there has been a violation further determines that
there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this
chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall
be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the
date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge, and
thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause
shown, tolling the per-diem judgment pending a final adjudication of the violation
and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any
person or entity other than the Township the right to commence any action for
enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings brought
under this section.
A. No plat shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such plat have been
improved to a mudfree or otherwise permanently passable condition, or improved
as may be otherwise required by this chapter, and any walkways, curbs, gutters,
streetlights, fire hydrants, shade trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers
and other improvements as may be required by this chapter have been installed in
accordance with this chapter. In lieu of the completion of any improvements
required as a condition for the final approval of a plat, including improvements or
fees otherwise required by this chapter, the developer may deposit with the
Township financial security in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of such
improvements or common amenities, including, but not limited to, roads,
stormwater detention and/or retention basins and other related drainage facilities,
recreational facilities, open space improvements, or buffer or screen plantings
which may be required.
(1) If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or
facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction and pursuant
to the rules and regulations of a public utility, a municipal authority or the
Township Water and Sewer Department, financial security to assure proper
completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with the
regulations of the controlling public utility, municipal authority or the
Township Water and Sewer Department and shall not be included within the
§ 440-605 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-606
440:123
financial security as otherwise required by this section.
(2) To indemnify the Township in accordance with Township ordinances, its other
policies and regulations and to furnish to the Board of Supervisors a certificate
of insurance indicating that the developer carries adequate liability insurance
in an amount not less than $1,000,000 and, in addition, that said liability
insurance, in a form satisfactory to the Township, has been provided covering
any liability of the Township, directly or indirectly, resulting from the
developer's action or inaction related to said tract. The certificate provided
must list the Township as an additional insured and must be for a period of not
less than one year. If at any time such a current, unexpired certificate of
insurance is not in the possession of the Township, any and all building
permits and certificates of occupancy may be suspended by the Township until
the receipt of a current certificate of insurance.
(3) To obtain the easements and releases required by this chapter and the record
plan.
(4) To reimburse the Township promptly for reasonable administrative, attorneys'
and engineers' inspection fees and fees for other professionals employed by the
Township for implementation of this chapter.
B. When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate financing, the Board of
Supervisors shall furnish the developer with a signed copy of a resolution indicating
approval of the final plat contingent upon the developer obtaining a satisfactory
financial security. The final plat or record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until
the financial improvements agreements are executed. The resolution or letter of
contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the financial
security agreements is not executed within 90 days, unless a written extension is
granted by the Board of Supervisors; such extension shall not be unreasonably
withheld and shall be placed in writing at the request of the developer.
C. Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the Township may
approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, federal- or
commonwealth-chartered lending institution irrevocable letters of credit and
restrictive or escrow accounts in such lending institutions shall be deemed
acceptable financial security for the purposes of this section.
D. Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or federal- or
commonwealth-chartered lending institution chosen by the party posting the
financial security, provided said bonding company or lending institution is
authorized to conduct such business within the commonwealth.
E. Such bond or other security shall provide for and secure to the public the
completion of any improvements which may be required on or before the date fixed
in the formal action of approval or accompanying agreement for completion of the
improvements.
F. The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the required
improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion estimated as of 90
days following the date scheduled for completion by the developer. Annually, the
Township may adjust the amount of the financial security by comparing the actual
§ 440-606 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-606
440:124
cost of the improvements which have been completed and the estimated cost
for the completion of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of the
90th day after either the original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled
date of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the Township may require the
developer to post additional security in order to assure that the financial security
equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be posted by the developer in
accordance with this subsection.
G. The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an estimate of the
cost of completion of the required improvements submitted by the applicant or
developer and prepared by a professional engineer licensed as such in this
commonwealth and certified by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate
of such cost. The Township, upon the recommendation of the Township Engineer,
may refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant or
developer and the Township are unable to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate
shall be recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer licensed as
such in this commonwealth and chosen mutually by the Township and the applicant
or developer. The estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and
reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so
chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid equally by the Township
and the applicant or developer.
H. If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year from the date
of posting of the financial security to complete the required improvements, the
amount of financial security may be increased by an additional 10% for each oneyear
period beyond the first anniversary date from posting of financial security or
to an amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the preceding one-year
period by using the above bidding procedure.
I. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the Board of
Supervisors may authorize submission of final plats by sections or stages of
development, subject to such requirements or guarantees as to improvements in
future sections or stages of development as it finds essential for the protection of
any finally approved section of the development.
J. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the party posting the
financial security may request the Board of Supervisors to release or authorize the
release, from time to time, of such portions of the financial security necessary for
payment to the contractor or contractors performing the work. Any such requests
shall be in writing addressed to the Board of Supervisors, and the Board of
Supervisors shall have 45 days from receipt of such request within which to allow
the Township Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Board of Supervisors that such
portion of the work upon the improvements has been completed in accordance with
the approved plat. Upon such certification, the Board of Supervisors shall authorize
release by the bonding company or lending institution of an amount as estimated by
the Township Engineer fairly representing the value of the improvements
completed or, if the Board of Supervisors fails to act within said forty-five-day
period, the Board of Supervisors shall be deemed to have approved the release of
funds as requested. The Board of Supervisors may, prior to final release at the time
of completion and certification by its Engineer, require retention of 10% of the
§ 440-606 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-606
440:125
§ 440-607. Release from improvement bond. [Added 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements.
K. Where the Board of Supervisors accepts dedication of all or some of the required
improvements following completion, the Board of Supervisors may require the
posting of financial security to secure structural integrity of said improvements as
well as the functioning of said improvements in accordance with the design and
specifications as depicted on the final plat for a term not to exceed 18 months from
the date of acceptance of dedication. Said financial security shall be of the same
type as otherwise required in this section with regard to installation of such
improvements, and the amount of the financial security shall not exceed 15% of the
actual cost of installation of said improvements.
L. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or facilities
related thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules
and regulations of a public utility or municipal authority separate and distinct from
the Township, financial security to assure proper completion and maintenance
thereof shall be posted in accordance with the regulations of the controlling public
utility or municipal authority and shall not be included within the financial security
as otherwise required by this section.
M. If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of improvements
required as a condition for the final approval of a plat as set forth in this section, the
Township shall not condition the issuance of building, grading or other permits
relating to the erection or placement of improvements, including buildings, upon
the lots or land as depicted upon the final plat upon actual completion of the
improvements depicted upon the approved final plat. Moreover, if said financial
security has been provided, occupancy permits for any building or buildings to be
erected shall not be withheld following the improvement of the streets providing
access to and from existing public roads to such building or buildings to a mudfree
or otherwise permanently passable condition, as well as the completion of all other
improvements as depicted upon the approved plat, either upon the lot or lots or
beyond the lot or lots in question if such improvements are necessary for the
reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or buildings.
A. When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate
improvements, the developer shall notify the Board of Supervisors, in writing, by
certified or registered mail, of the completion of the aforesaid improvements and
shall send a copy thereof to the Township Engineer. The Board of Supervisors shall,
within 10 days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the Township
Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The Township Engineer
shall, thereupon, file a report in writing with the Board of Supervisors and shall
promptly mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or registered mail.
The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the Township
Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Board of Supervisors; said report
shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said improvements,
either in whole or in part, and if said improvements or any portion thereof shall not
be approved or shall be rejected by the Township Engineer, said report shall contain
a statement of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
§ 440-606 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-607
440:126
B. The Board of Supervisors shall notify the developer within 15 days of receipt of the
Engineer's report, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the action of said
Board of Supervisors with relation thereto.
C. If the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer fails to comply with the time
limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements will be deemed to have
been approved and the developer shall be released from all liability pursuant to its
performance guaranty bond or other security agreement.
D. If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall be rejected
by the Board of Supervisors, the developer shall proceed to complete the same and,
upon completion, the same procedure of notification as outlined herein shall be
followed.
E. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the developer's right to
contest or question, by legal proceedings or otherwise, any determination of the
Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer.
F. Where herein reference is made to the Township Engineer, he shall be as a
consultant thereto.
G. The applicant or developer shall reimburse the Township for the reasonable and
necessary expense incurred for the inspection of improvements according to a
schedule of fees adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors and as from time
to time amended.139 Such expense shall be reasonable and in accordance with the
ordinary and customary fees charged by the Township Engineer or consultant for
work performed for similar services in the community, but in no event shall the fees
exceed the rate or cost charged by the Engineer or consultant to the Township when
fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
(1) In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such expense in
connection with the inspection of improvements, the applicant shall, within 10
working days of the date of billing, notify the Township that such expenses are
disputed as unreasonable or unnecessary, in which case the Township shall not
delay or disapprove a subdivision or land development application or any
approval or permit related to development due to the applicant's request over
disputed engineer expenses.
(2) If within 20 days from the date of billing the Township and the applicant
cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are reasonable and necessary,
then the applicant and the Township shall jointly, by mutual agreement,
appoint another professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania to review the said expenses and make a determination as to
the amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
(3) The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence and review
such documentation as the professional engineer in his or her sole opinion
deems necessary and render a decision within 50 days of the billing date. The
applicant shall be required to pay the entire amount determined in the decision
139.Editor's Note: Township fee schedules are on file in the Township Building and available to be viewed on the
Township's website at www.middletownbucks.org.
§ 440-607 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-607
440:127
§ 440-608. Remedies to effect completion of improvements. [Added 12-1-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-13]
In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been installed
as provided in this chapter or in accord with the approved final plat, the Board of
Supervisors is hereby granted the power to enforce any corporate bond or other security
by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If the proceeds of such bond or other
security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections
to all the improvements covered by said security, the Board of Supervisors may, at
its option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land
development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the
moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the improvements. All of the proceeds,
whether resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable action brought against
the developer, or both, shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements
covered by such security, and not for any other Township purpose.
§ 440-609. Records.
§ 440-610. Inspection by Township Engineer. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
immediately.
(4) In the event that the Township and applicant cannot agree upon the
professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days of the billing date, then,
upon application of either party, the President Judge of the Court of Common
Pleas of the judicial district in which the Township is located (or if at the time
there be no President Judge, then the senior active judge then sitting) shall
appoint such engineer, who, in that case, shall be neither the Township
Engineer nor any professional engineer who has been retained by or performed
services for the Township or the applicant within the preceding five years.
(5) The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the reasonable
and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if the amount of payment
required in the decision is equal to or greater than the original bill. If the
amount of payment required in the decision is less than the original bill by
$1,000 or more, the Township shall pay the fee of the professional engineer,
but otherwise the Township and the applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the fee of
the appointed professional engineer.
A. The Board of Supervisors and Planning Commission shall keep records of their
findings, decisions and recommendations relative to all subdivision plans filed with
them for review or approval.
B. All records shall be public records.
A. Three days prior to the commencement of any operation in the construction or
installation of streets, curbs, sidewalks, drainage facilities, street signs, monuments,
water and sewer improvements, streetlights or capped sewers, the developer shall
notify the Township Engineer(s), who shall inspect the work, materials,
construction and installation to assure that the same are in accordance with
§ 440-607 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-610
440:128
Township requirements.
B. The Township Engineer(s) shall be authorized to have such tests of materials made
as are provided in the Middletown Township Specifications and Design Standards
for Roads and Streets and in the Middletown Township Construction Specifications
for Water and Sewer Systems in order to have proper control of materials. The
developer shall pay to the Township the cost of such tests plus an administrative fee
to reimburse the Township for the collection of such fees and disbursement of same
to the Township Engineer(s).
§ 440-610 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-610
440:129

ARTICLE VII
Amendments
§ 440-701. Power of amendment.
The Board of Supervisors may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify or
repeal this chapter. When doing so, the Board of Supervisors shall proceed in the manner
prescribed in this article.
§ 440-702. Definition.
The words "amend," "amendment," "amendments" or "amended" in this chapter shall
be deemed to include any modification of the text or phraseology of any provision or
amendment thereof or any repeal or elimination of any addition to such provision or part
thereof, or any addition to the chapter or to an amendment thereof.
§ 440-703. Initiation of amendments. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
Proposals for amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal may be initiated
by the Board of Supervisors on its own motion or by the Planning Commission.
§ 440-704. Effect of change in this chapter. [Added 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
Changes in this chapter shall affect plats as follows:
A. Proposals originated by the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall
refer every proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal
originated by the governing body to the Township Planning Commission and Bucks
County Planning Commission. Within 30 days of the submission of said proposal,
the Planning Commission shall submit to the Board of Supervisors a report
containing the Commission's recommendations, including any additions or
modifications to the original proposal.
B. Proposals originated by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may
at any time transmit to the Board of Supervisors any proposal for the amendment,
supplement, change, modification or repeal of this chapter.
A. From the time an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary or final, is
duly filed as provided in this chapter, and while such application is pending
approval or disapproval, no change or amendment of this chapter, zoning or other
governing ordinance or plan shall affect the decision on such application adversely
to the applicant, and the applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance with
the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the
application was duly approved. In addition, when a preliminary application has
been duly approved, the applicant shall be entitled to final approval in accordance
with the terms of the approved preliminary application as hereinafter provided.
However, if an application is properly and finally denied, any subsequent
application shall be subject to the intervening change in governing regulations.
B. When an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary or final, has been
approved without conditions or approved by the applicant's acceptance of
conditions, no subsequent change or amendment in this chapter, zoning or other
§ 440-701 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-704
440:131
§ 440-705. Hearings. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to affect adversely the right of the
applicant to commence and to complete any aspect of the approved development in
accordance with the terms of such approval within five years from such approval.
C. Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the aforesaid five-year
period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary approval. In the case of any
doubt as to the terms of a preliminary approval, the terms shall be construed in the
light of the provisions of this chapter or the governing ordinance or plans as they
stood at the time when the application for such approval was duly filed.
D. Where the landowner has substantially completed the required improvements as
depicted upon the final plat within the aforesaid five-year limit, or any extension
thereof as may be granted by the Board of Supervisors, no change of any ordinance
or plan enacted subsequent to the date of filing of the preliminary plat shall modify
or revoke any aspect of the approved final plat pertaining to zoning classification or
density, lot, building, street or utility location.
E. In the case of a preliminary plat calling for the installation of improvements beyond
the five-year period, a schedule shall be filed by the landowner with the preliminary
plat, delineating all proposed sections as well as deadlines within which
applications for final plat approval of each section are intended to be filed. Such
schedule shall be updated annually by the applicant on or before the anniversary of
the preliminary plat approval until final plat approval of the final section has been
granted, and any modification in the aforesaid schedule shall be subject to approval
of the Board of Supervisors, in its discretion.
F. Each section in any residential subdivision or land development, except for the last
section, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the total number of dwelling units as
depicted on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser percentage is approved by the
Board of Supervisors, in its discretion, provided that the landowner has not
defaulted with regard to or violated any of the conditions of the preliminary plat
approval, including compliance with the landowner's aforesaid schedule of
submission of final plats for the various sections; then the aforesaid protections
afforded by substantially completing the improvements depicted upon the final plat
within five years shall apply, and for any section or sections beyond the initial
section in which the required improvements have not been substantially completed
within said five-year period, the aforesaid protections shall apply for an additional
term or terms of three years from the date of final plat approval for each section.
G. Failure of landowner to adhere to the aforesaid schedule of submission of final plats
for the various sections shall subject any such section to any and all changes in this
chapter, zoning and other governing ordinance enacted by the Township subsequent
to the date of the initial preliminary plan submission.
A. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Board of Supervisors shall
hold a public hearing thereon. No amendment shall become effective until after
such hearing, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to
be heard.
§ 440-704 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 440-705
440:132
B. Proposed subdivision and land development ordinances and amendments shall not
be enacted unless notice of proposed enactment is given in the manner set forth in
this section and shall include the time and place of the meeting at which passage
will be considered and a reference to a place within the Township where copies of
the proposed ordinance or amendment may be examined without charge or obtained
for a charge not greater than the cost thereof. The Board of Supervisors shall
publish the proposed ordinance or amendment once in each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township not more
than 60 days nor less than seven days prior to passage. Publication of the proposed
ordinance or amendment shall include either the full text thereof or the title and a
brief summary, prepared by the Township Solicitor, and setting forth all the
provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
(1) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township at the time the public notice is published.
(2) An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the county law
library or other county office designated by the County Commissioners, who
may impose a fee no greater than that necessary to cover the actual costs of
storing said ordinance.
C. In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed ordinance or
amendment, before voting upon enactment, the Board of Supervisors shall, at least
10 days prior to enactment, readvertise in one newspaper of general circulation in
the Township a brief summary setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail
together with a summary of the amendments.
D. No hearing shall be held before or during the thirty-day-period in which the
Planning Commissions have been directed to review and report their
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors.
E. Within 30 days after adoption, the Board of Supervisors of Middletown Township
shall forward a certified copy of any amendment to the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance to the Bucks County Planning Commission.
§ 440-705 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 440-705
440:133

Chapter 448
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 141.
Peddling, soliciting and transient businesses — See Ch. 345.
Rental property occupancy report — See Ch. 377, Art. I.
§ 440-705 TAXATION § 440-705
448:1

ARTICLE I
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 6-30-1969 by Ord. No. 69-7 (Ch. 24, Part 1, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 448-101. Establishment of tax. [Amended 5-6-1976 by Ord. No. 76-9]
A per capita tax of $5 for general Township purposes is hereby levied and assessed under
the Authority of Act 511 of 1965, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.,140 known as the "Local Tax
Enabling Act of 1965," upon each resident or inhabitant of the Township of Middletown
over the age of 18 years, which tax shall be in addition to all of the taxes levied
and assessed by the said Township pursuant to the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 448-102. Collection of tax.
Such tax shall be collected by the duly elected or appointed Tax Collector of the
Township of Middletown in the same manner and at the same time as other Township
taxes are collected as provided by the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945,141 as amended
and supplemented.
§ 448-103. Bond secured.
The Tax Collector shall give bond secured and conditioned for the collection of any
payment of such taxes as provided by law for other Township taxes.
§ 448-104. Collector's warrant.
The entry of the per capita tax in the tax duplicate and the issuance of such duplicate
to the Tax Collector shall constitute his warrant for the collection of the per capita tax
hereby levied and assessed.
§ 448-105. Tax Collector's compensation.
The expense of collection and compensation of the Tax Collector shall be paid and
allowed as provided in the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945, as amended and
supplemented, which compensation shall be the same as shall be fixed from time to time
for the collection of other Township taxes.
§ 448-106. Notice to taxpayers.
The Tax Collector shall give notice to the taxpayers of the amount of per capita tax under
this article at the time and in the same manner as provided by the Local Tax Collection
Law of 1945, as amended and supplemented.
§ 448-107. Persons not on tax duplicate.
In case the Tax Collector shall at any time find within the Township any resident or
inhabitant above the age of 21 years whose name does not appear upon the tax duplicate,
140.Editor's Note: As amended, see now the Local Tax Enabling Act at 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
141.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 448-101 TAXATION § 448-107
448:3
he shall report the name of such person forthwith to the Assessor, who shall thereupon
certify the same to the Tax Collector reporting such name, whereupon the Tax Collector
shall add such name and the assessment of this per capita tax against such person to the
duplicate of the Township of Middletown and shall proceed to collect the same.
§ 448-108. Authority and duty of Tax Collector. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No.
92-13]
The Tax Collector shall give notice to the taxpayers, shall have the power and authority
to demand and receive said tax from the employer of any person owing any per capita
tax, or whose spouse owes any per capita tax, shall remit such taxes to the Township
Treasurer by separate statement at the same time as other taxes are remitted to the
Township, shall allow discounts and add penalties, shall generally be subject to all the
duties and shall have all the rights and authority conferred upon him by the Local Tax
Collection Law of 1945, as amended and supplemented. It is hereby declared to be
the intent of the Board of Supervisors in enacting this article to confer upon the Tax
Collector in the collection of this per capita tax all the powers together with all the duties
and obligations to the same extent as fully provided for in the Local Tax Collection Law
of 1945, as amended and supplemented.
§ 448-109. Exemption. [Added 5-6-1976 by Ord. No. 76-9; amended 5-25-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-10]
Any resident or inhabitant of the Township of Middletown whose total income from all
sources is less than $5,000 per annum shall be exempted from payment of this tax (per
capita tax). Such exemption shall be claimed upon affidavit without further inquiry as to
the income of the person making such claim for exemption.
§ 448-110. Enforcement and remedies. [Added 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13;
amended 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
A. Enforcement notice.
(1) If it appears to the Township that a violation of this article has occurred, the
Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement
notice as provided in this section.
(2) The enforcement notice shall be sent to the violator and, if applicable, the
owner of record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any
person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices
regarding that parcel, and to any other person requested in writing by the
owner of record.
(3) An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(a) The name of the violator and, if applicable, the owner of record and any
other person against whom the Township intends to take action.
(b) The location of the violation and, if applicable, the property in violation.
(c) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have
not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provision of this
§ 448-107 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 448-110
448:4
article.
(d) The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced and
the date before which the steps must be completed.
(e) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Board of
Supervisors within a period of 10 days.
(f) That the failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Board of Supervisors, constitutes a
violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
B. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted
the violation of the provisions of this article shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay
a judgment of not more than $600 plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney's fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of determination of
a violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation
continues or each section of this article which shall be found to have been
violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to
any person or entity other than the Township the right to commence any action
for enforcement pursuant to this section.
(3) Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings
brought under this section.
§ 448-110 TAXATION § 448-110
448:5

ARTICLE II
Mercantile License Tax
[Adopted 6-5-1975 by Ord. No. 75-16 (Ch. 24, Part 2, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 448-201. Licenses. [Amended 5-20-1980 by Ord. No. 80-8]
Every person engaging in the business of wholesale or retail vendor of, or dealer in,
goods, wares or merchandise, or conducting a restaurant or other place where food, drink
or refreshments are sold, in the Township of Middletown shall procure a mercantile
license for his place of business or, if more than one, for each of his places of business
in the Township of Middletown. Such license shall be procured, upon payment of a fee
of $2 for each place of business, from the person authorized by the Board of Supervisors
of the Township of Middletown to issue such license. The said fee shall be in addition
to and separate from any similar fee imposed by the Neshaminy School District. Such
license shall be conspicuously posted at the place of business or each of the places of
business of every such person at all times.
§ 448-202. Imposition of tax. [Amended 12-4-1975 by Ord. No. 75-36]
Every person engaging in any one of the following occupations or businesses in the
Township of Middletown shall pay a mercantile license tax for the period commencing
the 1st day of July 1976 and ending the 30th day of June 1977, at the rates below set:
§ 448-203. Definitions. [Amended 5-20-1980 by Ord. No. 80-8]
A. Wholesale vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise, at the rate of 1/2 of
one mill or 1/20 of $0.01 on each dollar of the volume of the gross business
transacted by him during the license period.
B. Retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise and all persons engaged
in conducting restaurants or other places where food, drink or refreshments are sold,
at the rate of 3/4 of one mill or 7.5/100 of $0.01 on each dollar of the volume of the
gross business transacted by him during the license period.
C. Wholesale and retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise, at the
rate of 1/2 of one mill or 1/20 of $0.01 on each dollar of the gross wholesale
business transacted by him during the license period and 3/4 of one mill or 7.5/100
of $0.01 on each dollar of the volume of the gross retail business transacted by him
during the license period.
D. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to the dollar volume of business
covering the resale of goods, wares or merchandise taken by a dealer as a trade-in
or as part payment for other goods, wares and merchandise, except to the extent that
the resale price exceeds the trade allowance.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person so designated by the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Middletown.
§ 448-201 TAXATION § 448-203
448:7
§ 448-204. Computation of volume of business estimated. [Amended 12-4-1975 by
Ord. No. 75-36; 5-20-1980 by Ord. No. 80-8]
§ 448-205. Computation of volume of business and final return. [Amended
12-4-1975 by Ord. No. 75-36; 5-20-1980 by Ord. No. 80-8]
DEALER IN OR VENDOR OF, GOODS, WARES AND MERCHANDISE —
Includes any mechanic who keeps a store or warehouse at his place of manufacture
or workshop in which he sells only his manufactures, any person vending or
disposing of articles of his own growth, produce or manufacture, or any hawker or
peddler licensed under any law of the commonwealth.
GROSS VOLUME OF BUSINESS — Includes both cash and credit transactions.
LICENSE PERIOD — The period commencing the first day of July of each year
and ending the 30th day of June of the following year.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association or
corporation.
RETAIL DEALER or RETAIL VENDOR — Any person who is a dealer in, or
vendor of, goods, wares and merchandise, who is not a wholesale dealer or vendor.
WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR—Any person who sells to
dealers in, or vendors of, goods, wares and merchandise and to no other persons.
B. The terms "person," "wholesale dealer," "wholesale vendor," "retail dealer," "retail
vendor and dealer in, or vendor of, goods, wares and merchandise" shall not include
nonprofit corporations or associations organized solely for religious, charitable or
educational purposes.
A. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, except as
hereinafter provided, shall compute his estimated gross volume of business for a
license period upon the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during
the period commencing the first day of July and ending the 30th day of June
immediately prior to the beginning of that license period.
B. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who has
commenced business less than one full year prior to the beginning of a license
period shall compute his estimated gross volume of business for that license period
upon the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during the first month
of his engaging in business, multiplied by the number of months he engaged in
business during that license period.
C. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who engages in a
business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature shall compute his annual
gross volume of business upon the actual gross amount of business transacted by
him during the license period.
A. Prior to the 15th day of August following each license period, every person subject
to the tax hereby imposed except as hereinafter provided shall make a final return
to the Collector for the actual gross volume of business transacted by the taxpayer
during the preceding license period. Such final return shall state the amount of the
§ 448-203 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 448-205
448:8
§ 448-206. Estimated return. [Amended 5-20-1980 by Ord. No. 80-8]
§ 448-207. Payment. [Amended 5-20-1980 by Ord. No. 80-8]
At the time of filing an estimated or a final return as set forth in §§ 448-205 and 448-206
hereof, the person subject to the tax shall pay the amount of tax shown as due thereon to
the Collector.
§ 448-208. Refund. [Amended 5-20-1980 by Ord. No. 80-8]
If the taxpayer shall have paid, at the time of filing his estimated return, tax in excess of
the actual amount of tax due as shown upon his final return, the Collector shall refund
the amount of said excess to the taxpayer.
§ 448-209. Penalties and interest.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 0.5% per month on
the amount of said tax due during which the tax due remains unpaid shall be added to the
tax due and collected together with said tax due. Where suit is brought for the recovery
gross volume of business as reported in the estimated return, the amount of tax paid
thereon, and the amount of tax or refund due, if any, upon the final computation.
B. Every person subject to the tax hereby imposed who engages in a business
temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature, shall within seven days from the day
he completes such business, file a return with the Collector setting forth his name,
his business and business address, and such information as may be necessary in
computing the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during that license
period and the amount of tax due thereon.
A. Every return required by this article shall be made upon a form furnished by the
Collector. Every person making a return shall certify the correctness thereof by
affidavit under the penalties for perjury.
B. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article, except as hereinafter
provided, shall file with the Collector, on or before the 15th day of September
during each license period, an estimated return setting forth his name, his business
and business address, and such other information as may be necessary to compute
the gross amount of business transacted by him during that license period and the
amount of tax estimated to be due.
C. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commences business
during a license period shall file with the Collector, on or before the 40th day after
the date of commencing such business or the 15th day of September during that
license period, whichever date is later, an estimated return setting forth his name,
his business and business address, and such other information as may be necessary
to compute the gross amount of business transacted by him during that license
period and the amount of tax estimated to be due.
D. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who engages in a business,
temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature shall not be required to file an
estimated return.
§ 448-205 TAXATION § 448-209
448:9
of any such tax, the person shall be liable for, in addition to the tax assessed against such
person, the costs of such collection and the interest herein imposed. If any person shall
neglect or refuse to file any return and make payment as herein required, a penalty in the
amount of 10% of the amount of the tax due, in addition to said interest, shall be added
by the Collector and collected.
§ 448-210. Compensation of Collector. [Amended 5-6-1976 by Ord. No. 76-8;
5-20-1980 by Ord. No. 80-8]
The Collector of the mercantile license tax shall be compensated at a rate set by the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Middletown.
§ 448-211. Duty of Collector.
§ 448-212. Disposition of taxes collected. [Amended 5-6-1976 by Ord. No. 76-8;
5-20-1980 by Ord. No. 80-8]
All taxes, interest and penalties collected or received under the provisions of this article
shall be paid into the general fund of the Township of Middletown for the use and benefit
of the Township. The Collector shall remit such amounts on or before the October 15,
December 1 and June 1 next following their collection.
§ 448-213. Limitation on taxation.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the Township of
Middletown to levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person or any business
or any portion of any business not within the taxing power of the Township of
Middletown under the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 448-214. Method of recovery.
All taxes due under this article shall be recoverable by the Township Solicitor as other
A. It shall be the duty of the Collector to collect and receive the fees, taxes, interest,
fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a record
showing the amount received by him from each person paying the tax and the date
of such receipt.
B. If the Collector is not satisfied with the return and payment of tax made by any
taxpayer or supposed taxpayer under the provisions of this article, he is hereby
authorized and empowered to make a determination of the tax due by such person,
based upon the facts contained in the return, or upon any information within his
possession or that shall come into his possession, and for this purpose, the
Collector, his deputy or his authorized agent are authorized to examine the books,
papers and records of any such person to verify the accuracy of any return or
payment made under the provisions thereof or to ascertain whether the taxes
imposed by this article have been paid. The Collector is hereby authorized and
directed to make and keep such records, prepare such forms, and take such other
measures as may be necessary and convenient to carry this article into effect, and
may, in his discretion, require reasonable deposits to be made by licensees who
engage in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature.
§ 448-209 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 448-214
448:10
debts due to the Township of Middletown are now by law recoverable.
§ 448-214 TAXATION § 448-214
448:11

ARTICLE III
Entertainment Tax
[Adopted 2-10-1981 by Res. No. 81-5R (Ch. 24, Part 3, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 448-301. Definitions.
A. The following words or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
AMUSEMENT—All manner and form of entertainment, including, among others,
theatrical or operatic performances, concerts, vaudevilles, circus, carnival and side
shows, all forms of entertainment at fairgrounds and amusement parks, athletic
contests, including wrestling matches, boxing and sparring, swimming, archery,
shooting, riding, dancing, rowing, bowling, billiards, pool and all other forms
of diversions, sport, recreation or pastime, shows, exhibitions, contests, displays
and games and all other methods of obtaining admission charges, donations,
contributions or monetary charges of any character from the general public, or a
limited or selected number thereof, directly or indirectly, in return for other than
tangible property or specific personal or professional services.
AMUSEMENT TAX COLLECTOR — The person as designated by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Middletown.
ASSOCIATION — Any partnership, limited partnership, or other forms of
unincorporated enterprise owned by two or more persons.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Middletown, County of
Bucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
CHARITABLE SOCIETIES OR ORGANIZATIONS—Any group of people who
are organized together for any nonprofit-making venture, the funds or use thereof
which inure to the benefit of a substantial number of the citizens of the community.
Examples of such groups would be public recreational associations, parent-teacher
associations, etc.
ESTABLISHED PRICE — Regular monetary charges of any character whatever,
including donations, contributions and dues or membership fees (periodical or
otherwise), fixed and exacted, or in any manner received by producers, as herein
defined, from the general public, or a limited or selected number thereof, directly or
indirectly, for the privilege to attend, to engage in any entertainment or amusement,
provided that when such entertainment or amusement is conducted at any place
where the charge for admission is wholly or in part included in the price paid
for refreshment, service or merchandise, the amounts paid for admission to such
amusement shall be deemed to be 50% of the amount paid for refreshment, service
and merchandise.
ITINERANT AMUSEMENT — An amusement which moves from place to place,
either within the Township or partially outside the Township.
PERMANENT AMUSEMENT — An amusement conducted at one location for a
period in excess of one month.
PERSON — Every natural person, copartnership, association or corporation.
§ 448-301 TAXATION § 448-301
448:13
§ 448-302. Method of registration.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, or both, the term
"person" as applied to copartnerships or associations shall mean the partners or
members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place, indoors or outdoors, within the
Township where the general public or a limited or selected number thereof may,
upon payment of an established price, attend or engage in any amusement as
herein defined, including, among others, opera houses, theaters, amusement parks,
stadia, arenas, baseball parks, skating rinks, circus or carnival tents or grounds,
fairgrounds, social, sporting, athletic, riding, gun and country clubs, riding
academies, golf courses, golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses, bathing and
swimming places, dance halls, tennis courts, archery, rifle or shotgun ranges,
bowling alleys, pool and billiard parlors, roof gardens, cabarets, nightclubs, and
other restaurants where amusement or entertainment is provided, and other like
places.
PRODUCER — Any person, as herein defined, conducting any place of
amusement, as herein defined, where the general public or a limited or selected
number thereof may, upon the payment of an established price, attend or engage in
any amusement.
SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Middletown, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
TEMPORARY AMUSEMENT — An amusement, other than an itinerant
amusement, which is conducted for a period of less than one month during any
calendar year.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middletown, County of Bucks, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine
and neuter.
A. No amusement shall be conducted within the Township unless and until it has been
registered, a registration certificate has been issued for it, and such certificate
remains in effect and unrevoked.
B. Registrations shall be made on a form prescribed, prepared and furnished by the
amusement tax collector and shall set forth the name under which the amusement
will be conducted, whether it will be a permanent, temporary or itinerant
amusement, its location or itinerary, the established price which will be charged,
and such other pertinent information as the amusement tax collector may require. If
the producer has or intends to have more than one place of amusement within the
Township, he will register each one and shall state the location of each and, in the
case of itinerant amusements, the date and length of time such amusement is to be
conducted at each place. In the case of registration for a temporary or itinerant
amusement, the producer shall state the name and address of the owner, lessee or
custodian of the premises upon which such amusement is to be conducted. If the
producer is an association or corporation, it shall state the names and addresses of
the principal officers thereof and any other information prescribed by the
§ 448-301 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 448-302
448:14
§ 448-303. Amount of tax. [Amended 7-25-1989 by Ord. No. 89-9]
amusement tax collector for purposes of identification. The registration shall be
signed and verified by oath or affirmation by the producer, if a natural person,
and in the case of an association, by a member or partner thereof, and in the
case of a corporation, by an executive officer thereof, or some person specifically
authorized by the corporation to sign the registration, to which shall be attached
written evidence of his authority.
C. Upon the filing of a completed registration form, the amusement tax collector shall
issue to the producer an annual or temporary registration certificate. A producer of
permanent or temporary amusement shall be issued a separate certificate for each
of his places of amusement within the Township. A certificate issued to the
producer of an itinerant amusement shall set forth the itinerary of the producer. A
registration certificate shall be valid only for the person in whose name it is issued
and for the conduct of an amusement at the place or places designated therein. It
shall not be assignable. It shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the place
or places for which issued. All registration certificates for permanent amusements
shall expire on the 10th day of February next succeeding the date upon which they
become effective. Registration certificates for temporary or itinerant amusements
shall expire at the time specified therein. The producer of an itinerant amusement
shall notify the amusement tax collector promptly of any change in the originally
contemplated itinerary, either as to the date or the time of the conduct of the
amusement at each place. Whenever any registration certificate issued under the
provisions of this article is defaced, lost or destroyed, the amusement tax collector
may issue a duplicate certificate to the holder thereof.
D. Each permanent place of amusement shall be registered annually during the month
preceding the 10th day of February, and the registration certificate issued thereon
shall become effective on the 10th day of February.
A. A tax, to provide revenue for general Township purposes, is hereby levied, assessed
and imposed upon the admission fee or privilege to attend or engage in any
amusement with the exception of admissions to ski facilities, golf courses and
bowling alleys and bowling lanes within the Township, at the rate of $0.01 for each
$0.10 of the established price charged the general public or a limited or selected
group thereof by any producer for such privilege, which shall be paid by the person
acquiring such privilege.
B. A tax is hereby levied, assessed and imposed on admissions to ski facilities, golf
courses and bowling alleys and bowling lanes at the rate of $0.01 for each $0.10
using the following tax bases:
(1) Ski facilities. The tax base upon which the tax shall be levied shall be 40% of
the cost of the lift ticket. The lift ticket shall include all costs of admissions to
the ski facility.
(2) Golf courses. The tax base upon which the tax shall be levied shall be 40% of
the green fees. The green fee shall include all costs of admissions to the golf
course.
§ 448-302 TAXATION § 448-303
448:15
§ 448-304. Collection of tax.
(3) Bowling alleys. The tax base upon which the tax shall be levied shall be 40%
of the charge imposed upon a patron for the sale of admission to or the
privilege of admission to a bowling alley or bowling lane to enjoy one or more
games of bowling.
C. In the case of persons (except bona fide employees of a producer or municipal or
state officers on official business) admitted free or at reduced rates to any place of
amusement at a time when and under circumstances where an established price is
charged to other persons, the tax imposed by this article shall be computed on the
established price charged to such other persons of the same class for the same or
similar accommodations to be paid by the persons so admitted or on the tax base
established in Subsection B(1) through (3) above for admissions to ski facilities,
golf courses and bowling alleys.
D. In the case of persons having the permanent use of boxes or seats in any place of
amusement or a lease for the use of such box or seat in such place of amusement,
the tax imposed by this article shall be for each performance or exhibition at which
the box or seat is used or reserved by or for the lessee or holder; such tax to be paid
by the lessee or holder and shall be in accordance with all provisions of this section.
E. In the case of amusements, the established price for which is subject to the federal
admissions tax imposed by Section 4231 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as
amended, if the federal tax on the established price of any given admission is equal
to or greater than 50% of the amusement tax due to the Township on the established
price under Subsection A, a credit of 30% of the Township tax shall be allowed.
A. Producers shall collect the tax imposed by this article and shall be liable to the
Township as agents thereof for the payment of the same to the amusement tax
collector, as hereinafter provided in this article.
B. Where temporary or itinerant forms of amusement are conducted by persons who
are not the owners, lessees or custodians of the place where the amusements are to
be conducted or where a temporary or itinerant form of amusement is permitted
after the effective date of this article by the owner, lessee or custodian of any place
to be conducted without it being registered with the Township as required by this
article, the collection of the tax imposed by this article shall be the responsibility of
the owner, lessee or custodian of such place where any such temporary or itinerant
form of amusement is held or conducted and shall be collected and paid by him
unless collected and paid by the producer conducting the amusement.
C. Where producers may begin to conduct permanent amusements after the effective
date of this article and they are not the owners of the places where the permanent
amusements are to be conducted, or where the owner of any place permits a
producer to begin to conduct a permanent amusement at that place after the
effective date of this article without it being registered with the Township as
required by this article, the collection of the tax imposed by this article shall be the
responsibility of the owner of such place where any such permanent amusement is
to be conducted, and shall be collected and paid by him unless collected and paid
by the producer conducting the permanent amusement.
§ 448-303 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 448-305
448:16
§ 448-305. Payment of tax. [Amended 7-25-1989 by Ord. No. 89-9]
In order that the amount of tax collected and payable by producers to the Township
may be ascertained, every producer shall submit to the amusement tax collector and
the Secretary at the times set forth below a report on a form prescribed, prepared
and furnished by the amusement tax collector. The report shall contain such pertinent
information as the amusement tax collector shall prescribe and shall be verified by oath
or affirmation.
§ 448-306. Time of payment.
§ 448-307. Power and enforcement.
The amusement tax collector and the Secretary, or either of them, for the purpose of
enforcing this article, are hereby authorized and empowered to examine the books,
papers, tickets, ticket stubs and all other pertinent records of any producer or any other
A. Every producer of a permanent amusement shall submit on or before the 10th of
each month a report concerning the tax collected by him during the immediately
preceding calendar month.
B. Every producer of a temporary or itinerant amusement shall submit within 48 hours
a report concerning the tax collected by him on each day during which the
amusement continues. If the persons or the properties involved in the amusement
are intended to leave the Township before the expiration of 48 hours, the report
shall be submitted before either the persons or the properties leave the Township.
C. Before allowance shall be made by the Township for any credit claimed under
§ 448-303D of this article, the producer shall submit to the amusement tax collector
a copy of his federal admissions tax return for the period for which the credit is
claimed.
D. Every producer of a permanent amusement shall submit a certificate from an
accountant or auditor which verifies the sales figures and taxes paid for each
calendar year. Said certificate shall be submitted by January 30 of the following
year.
A. Taxes which have been or should have been collected by a producer during any
given time period shall be due and payable to the Township on the date on which a
report covering that period is required by this article to be filed.
B. If any tax is paid before the due date, a credit of 2% of the amount of the tax shall
be allowed.
C. If the tax on a permanent amusement is not paid on or before the 30th day after the
due date, or if the tax on a temporary or itinerant amusement is not paid on or before
the due date, a penalty of $5 or 10% of the unpaid tax, whichever is greater, shall
be added to the tax.
D. In addition to the penalties provided in Subsection C above, unpaid taxes shall bear
interest at the rate of 1/2% per month or fractional part of a month from 30 days
after the date they are due and payable until paid.
§ 448-305 TAXATION § 448-307
448:17
person who may be liable for the tax herein imposed.
§ 448-308. Estimate of tax.
If any producer shall neglect or refuse to make any report and payment of tax required by
this article or if, as a result of an investigation by the amusement tax collector and/or the
Secretary, a report is found to be incorrect, the amusement tax collector shall estimate
the tax due by such producer and determine the amount due by him for taxes, penalties
and interest thereon.
§ 448-309. Remedies for noncompliance.
If any producer shall neglect or refuse to make any report or payment of tax required by
this article or if the amusement tax collector and/or Secretary has reason to believe that
any report and payment are incorrect, the amusement tax collector and/or Secretary shall
have the following remedies in addition to any other remedies provided by this article or
any other statute or ordinance. In any case, the registration certificate may be declared
revoked and the conduct of the amusement may be ordered to be stopped. In the case
of an itinerant amusement, the removal from the Township of the properties used in the
conduct of the amusement may be prohibited.
§ 448-310. Disposition of receipts.
All taxes, interest and penalties received, collected or recovered under the provisions of
this article shall be paid into the treasury of the Township for the use and benefit of the
Township.
§ 448-311. Rules and regulations.
The amusement tax collector is authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt and
promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this article and the collection of the tax hereby
imposed subject to the approval of the Board.
§ 448-312. Exemptions. [Amended 7-25-1989 by Ord. No. 89-9]
A. The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to or be imposed upon the privilege
to attend any amusement the proceeds of which, after payment of reasonable
expenses, inure:
(1) Exclusively to the benefit of religious, educational and charitable institutions,
societies or organizations, provided that no part of the net earnings of the
institutions, societies or organizations inure to the benefit of any private
shareholder or person.
(2) Exclusively to the benefit of organizations of persons in military or naval
forces of the United States or of national guard organizations, reserve officers
associations, or organizations, posts or organizations of war veterans, or
auxiliary units or societies of such posts or organizations, if such posts,
organizations, units or societies are organized in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and if no part of their net earnings inure to the benefit of any
§ 448-307 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 448-312
448:18
§ 448-313. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13;
6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
private shareholder or person.
(3) Exclusively to the benefit of organizations or associations created and
maintained for the purpose of benefitting employees of any political
subdivision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or their dependents or heirs
or for the purpose of benefitting the members or the dependents of or the heirs
of members of police or paid or volunteer fire departments of any political
subdivision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(4) The entertainment tax shall not grant the authority to levy, assess or collect an
amusement or admissions tax on membership, membership dues, fees or
assessments, donations, contributions or monetary charges of any character
whatsoever paid by the general public, or a limited or selected number thereof,
for such persons to enter into any place, indoors or outdoors, to engage in any
activities, the predominant purpose or nature of which is exercise, fitness,
health maintenance, improvement or rehabilitation, health or nutrition
education, or weight control.
B. In no event shall any exemption be allowed under this section unless the producer
thereof shall comply with the provisions of this article and the rules and regulations
of the Township with respect to the application for and approval of exemptions.
C. With respect to amusements, the net profits of which inure to the benefit of persons
or organizations described in Subsection A above, but part of the gross intake of
which is paid to persons engaged in the business of operating amusements for
profit, the tax imposed by this article shall apply only to that portion of the gross
intake which is paid to such persons engaged in business for profit.
A. Enforcement notice.
(1) If it appears to the Township that a violation of this article has occurred, the
Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement
notice as provided in this section.
(2) The enforcement notice shall be sent to the violator and, if applicable, the
owner of record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any
person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices
regarding that parcel, and to any other person requested in writing by the
owner of record.
(3) An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(a) The name of the violator and, if applicable, the owner of record and any
other person against whom the Township intends to take action.
(b) The location of the violation and, if applicable, the property in violation.
(c) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have
not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provision of this
article.
§ 448-312 TAXATION § 448-313
448:19
(d) The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced and
the date before which the steps must be completed.
(e) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Board of
Supervisors within a period of 10 days.
(f) That the failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Board of Supervisors, constitutes a
violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
B. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted
the violation of the provisions of this article shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay
a judgment of not more than $600 plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney's fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of determination of
a violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation
continues or each section of this article which shall be found to have been
violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to
any person or entity other than the Township the right to commence any action
for enforcement pursuant to this section.
(3) Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings
brought under this section.
C. Such fines imposed by this section shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed
by any other section of this article; provided, however, that if any producer of any
amusement within the provision of this article shall offer evidence or testimony or
submit to examination in any proceeding instituted by the Township for the
recovery of any taxes or interest due or alleged to be due to the Township under this
article, no process, civil or criminal, for the recovery of any fines or penalties
imposed by this article may thereafter issue against the person so testifying or
offering such evidence or testimony on account of any violation of the provisions
of this article which such evidence or testimony may disclose.
§ 448-313 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 448-313
448:20
ARTICLE IV
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 1-5-1987 by Ord. No. 87-1 (Ch. 24, Part 4, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 448-401. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of Middletown
Township."
§ 448-402. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon the transfer of
real estate or interest in real estate situated within Middletown Township regardless of
where the documents making the transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where the
actual settlements on such transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real
Estate Transfer Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 448-403. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons other than a
private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust, or banking
institution which is organized under the laws of this commonwealth, the United States,
or any other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers, demises,
vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to real estate, but does not
include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other instruments of like character given as
security for a debt and deeds of release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby
the legal title does not pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the
contract has been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant, vest
or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include a declaration of
acquisition required to be presented for recording under § 448-408 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its assets
are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each class of stock of
the corporation is continuously owned by members of the same family. The business of
agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing, camping,
skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish, cats, dogs or
pets or animals intended for use in sporting or recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
§ 448-401 TAXATION § 448-403
448:21
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's brothers
and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents and grandparents, the
ancestors and lineal descendents of any of the foregoing, a spouse of any of the
foregoing, and the estate of any of the foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or
legal adoption shall be treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or both, the term "person" as
applied to associations shall include the responsible members or general partners thereof,
and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or more of the
ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons, and which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middletown.
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or presenting for
recording of a document.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Township, including without
limitation buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces
with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees and other improvements,
immovables or interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance of
land, but excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an industrial
plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation, trust or
association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or disposition
of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the value of
its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets which are freely
transferable and actively traded as an established market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the termination of
which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of years, including without
limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate or perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but which, either by
reason of the length of the term or the grant of right to extend the term by renewal
or otherwise, consists of a group of rights approximating those of an estate in fee
simple, life estate or perpetual leasehold interest or possessory interest in real estate
in which the lessee has equity.
B.
§ 448-403 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 448-403
448:22
VALUE —
§ 448-404. Imposition of tax; interest.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for actual monetary
worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor paid or to be paid, including
liens or other encumbrances thereon existing before the transfer and not removed
thereby, whether or not the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents
or a commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances and ground
rents also encumber or are charged against other real estate, provided that, where
such documents shall set forth a nominal consideration, the "value" thereof shall
be determined from the price set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of
sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the foreclosure
of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without consideration or for
consideration less than the actual monetary worth of the real estate, a taxable
lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold or possessory interest, any exchange
of properties, or the real estate of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth
of the real estate determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate
for local real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed by
the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty transfer tax base
calculations as established by the State Tax Equalization Board;142
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of which is not
determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary worth of such interest;
or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory agreement
for the construction of buildings, structures or other permanent improvements to
real estate between the grantor and other persons existing before the transfer and
not removed thereby or between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of
a related corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before or
effective with the transfer.
D.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for recording any
document or in whose behalf any document is made, executed, delivered, accepted
or presented for recording shall be subject to pay for and in respect to the
transaction or any part thereof a tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate
represented by such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time
the document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of such
document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the affixing of an
official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds, whereon the date of the payment
of the tax, the amount of the tax and the signature of the collecting agent shall be
set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed herein on a
142.Editor's Note: Now the Tax Equalization Division of the Department of Community and Economic Development.
§ 448-403 TAXATION § 448-404
448:23
§ 448-405. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth, or any of their instrumentalities, agencies or
political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax imposed by this article.
The exemption of such governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party
to a transaction from liability for the tax.
§ 448-406. Excluded transactions.
person or transfer shall not exceed the limitation prescribed in the Local Tax
Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.,143 so
that, if any other political subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall impose such
tax on the same person or transfer, then the tax levied by the Township under the
authority of that Act shall, during the time such duplication of the tax exists, except
as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and such 1/2 rate shall become
effective without any action on the part of the Township; provided, however, that
the Township and any other political subdivision which impose such tax on the
same person or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to
1/2 of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively different rates, the
total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in effect at the time
the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 448-404 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities, agencies or
political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of condemnation or
deed of confirmation in connection with condemnation proceedings, or a
reconveyance by the condemning body of the property condemned to the
owner of record at the time of condemnation, which reconveyance may
include property line adjustments, provided said reconveyance is made within
one year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Township is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county pursuant
to acquisition by the municipality, township, school district or county of a tax
delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or confirms a
transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend or limit existing
record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration of
property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by cotenants;
however, if any of the parties take shares greater in value than their undivided
interest, tax is due on the excess.
143.Editor's Note: As amended, see now the Local Tax Enabling Act at 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 448-404 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 448-406
448:24
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were previously
husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided the property or
interest therein subject to such transfer was acquired by the husband and wife
or husband or wife prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between
brother or sister or the spouse of a brother or sister, and between a grandparent
and grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent
transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject to the tax as if the
grantor were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property passing by testate
or intestate succession from a personal representative of a decedent to the
decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee or an ordinary
trust where the transfer of the same property would be exempt if the transfer
was made directly from the grantor to all of the possible beneficiaries, whether
or not such beneficiaries are contingent or specifically named. No such
exemption shall be granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a
copy of the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all possible
beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to a successor
trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal and agent
or straw party, or from or to an agent or straw party where, if the agent or straw
party were his principal, no tax would be imposed under this article. Where the
document by which title is acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to
set forth that the property was acquired by the grantee from or for the benefit
of his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is the
property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee claims an
exemption from taxation under this clause.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation of a
corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation, except where the
Department reasonably determines that the primary intent for such merger,
consolidation or division is avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of record in the
name of the corporation or association where the grantee owns stock of the
corporation or interest in the association in the same proportion as his interest
in or ownership of the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the grantee for
more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority to a
grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that agency or authority as
security for a debt of the grantee or a transfer to a nonprofit industrial
development agency or authority.
§ 448-406 TAXATION § 448-406
448:25
§ 448-407. Documents relating to associations or corporations and members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided in § 448-406, documents which make, confirm or evidence
any transfer or demise of title to real estate between associations or corporations and
the members, partners, shareholders or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the
purposes of this article, corporations and associations are entities separate from their
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 448-408. Acquired company.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority to a
grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose of
manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing, publishing,
research and development, transportation, housing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the real estate
transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in default in
lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in which the
successful bidder is the bona fide holder of the mortgage, unless the holder
assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or persons
holding title for a religious organization if such real estate is not being or has
not been used by such transferor for commercial purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status pursuant to
Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, 68A Stat. 3, 26
U.S.C. § 501(c)(3), and which has as its primary purpose preservation of land
for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a family farm
corporation by a member of the same family which directly owns at least 75%
of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership interest in a
real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals and
assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full and
complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of value. A copy of
the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of Value may be submitted for this
purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement of value may
be limited to an explanation of the reason such document is not subject to tax under
this article.
§ 448-406 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 448-408
448:26
§ 448-409. Credits against tax.
§ 448-410. Determinations by Department of Revenue.
Whenever the amount of tax due to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania pursuant to
72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq., upon final determination, redetermination or review by the
Department of Revenue, is more than the amount actually paid to the commonwealth on
account thereof, such amount, including all interest or penalties thereon, shall be deemed
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the ownership
interest in the company, however effected, if the change does not affect the
continuity of the company and of itself or together with prior changes has the effect
of transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or more of the total ownership interest in
the company within a period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family farm
corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or involuntary
dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or when, because of issuance
or transfer of stock or because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to
the business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family
farm corporation under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall present a
declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in which it holds real
estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and recording. Such declaration
shall set forth the value of real estate holdings of the acquired company in such
county. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition
may be submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real estate broker
which property was transferred to him within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of other residential property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid
at the time of the transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax
due upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was transferred
to the builder within the preceding year as consideration for the purchase of new,
previously unoccupied residential property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid
at the time of the transfer to the builder shall be given to the builder toward the
amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a credit for
the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given the grantor toward the
tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was previously sold under
a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the
sale shall be given the grantor toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under this section,
the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater than the amount or tax
due, no refund or carryover credit shall be allowed.
§ 448-408 TAXATION § 448-410
448:27
to be the amount due and payable to the Township pursuant to this article and shall be
collectable by the Recorder of Deeds upon rerecording as hereinafter provided. If the
amount of such tax as finally determined is less than the amount actually paid, then upon
application to the Township together with proof of payment and final determination by
the Department of Revenue, the Township shall refund such portion of the overpayment
that the Township actually received. All applications for refunds must be received by the
Township within two years of the date of payment for which a refund is requested.
§ 448-411. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or option to renew or
extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge to the lessee is fixed or if a method
for calculating the rental charge is established.
§ 448-412. Proceeds of judicial sale.144
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the proceeds of any
judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation, claim, lien, judgment, estate or
costs of the sale and of the writ upon which the sale is made except the state realty
transfer tax, and the sheriff or other officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein
imposed out of the first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of
the sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable
for the remaining tax.
§ 448-413. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L. 40, No.
21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the local realty transfer
tax, including any amount payable to the Township based on a redetermination of
the amount of tax due by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from the Township.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is located in more
than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not accept for recording such a
deed unless it is accompanied by a statement of value showing what taxes are due
each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the Township
all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the county, together with
a report containing the information as is required by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The
two-percent commission shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed or record the
additional realty transfer tax form only when both the state and local amounts and
a rerecording or recording fee has been tendered.
144.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 448-410 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 448-414
448:28
§ 448-414. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for recording shall
set forth therein and as a part of such document the true, full and complete value thereof,
or shall be accompanied by a statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth the true, full
and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to
the tax under this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement
of Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this subsection shall
not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based
on family relationship. Other documents presented for the affixation of stamps shall be
accompanied by a certified copy of the document and statement of value executed by a
responsible person connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting
forth the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such document
is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 448-415. Civil penalties.
§ 448-416. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands, tenements or
hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated, wholly or in part, within the
boundaries of the Township, which lands, tenements, hereditaments, or interest therein,
are described in or conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the
tax imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the
tax under this article is due and payable and continue until discharged by payment or in
accordance with law, and the Solicitor is authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in
the Court of Common Pleas of Bucks County in accordance with the provisions of the
Municipal Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 448-417. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties prescribed herein,
shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are recovered.
§ 448-418. Regulations.
The Township Manager of the Township is charged with enforcement and collection
of the tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable regulations for
enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which have been promulgated by
the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq., to the extent
they are applicable, are incorporated into and made a part of this article.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to fraud, there
shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article on the date
prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is due to reasonable cause,
there shall be added to the tax 5% of the amount of such tax if the failure is for not
more than one month, within an additional 5% for each additional month or fraction
thereof during which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 448-414 TAXATION § 448-418
448:29

ARTICLE V
Nonresidential Unit Tax
[Adopted 7-25-1989 by Ord. No. 89-10 (Ch. 24, Part 5, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 448-501. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Middletown Township
Nonresidential Unit Tax Ordinance."
§ 448-502. Definitions.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ASSOCIATION — Any partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons.
BOARD — The Middletown Township Board of Supervisors.
BUILDING PERMIT — The permit, certificate, document, approval or
authorization required by Middletown Township for a person to make
improvements to real estate within the boundaries of Middletown Township.
CONSTRUCT — Any activity by a person in connection with the building,
erection, assembling, fabrication, placing or affixing an improvement to real estate.
CONVERT — Any activity whereby an improvement to real estate not heretofore
used as a nonresidential unit is changed to a nonresidential unit, or whereby the
number of nonresidential units within are increased in number.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association, organized under the
laws of this commonwealth, the United States, or any other state, territory or foreign
country, or dependency, including, but not limited to, banking institutions.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of all buildings on the lot, measured from the exterior faces of exterior
walls and from the center line of walls separating two buildings. The term shall
include basements, elevator shafts and stairwells at each story, floor space used or
mechanical equipment (with structural headroom of six feet six inches or more),
penthouses, attic space (whether or not a floor has actually been laid, providing
structural headroom of six feet six inches or more), interior balconies, and
mezzanines. It shall not include stair and elevator penthouses or cellars unless said
cellars are utilized for anything other than storage rooms, utility rooms, mechanical
equipment rooms, etc.
MUNICIPALITY — Middletown Township.
NONRESIDENTIAL UNIT — A group of rooms within a structure separate and
independent from other room groups within the same structure, whether or not one
or more facilities are shared by the occupants of other room groups, which is used
for other than a residential dwelling. Nonresidential dwellings may include any
structure, regardless of ownership, use, purpose or intent.[Amended 2-26-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-02]
§ 448-501 TAXATION § 448-502
448:31
§ 448-503. Application and rate. [Amended 5-26-1998 by Ord. No. 98-07]
§ 448-504. Collection and disposition.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, corporation, partnership,
condominium association or cooperative. Whenever used in any clause prescribing
or imposing a penalty, the term "person" as applied to associations or cooperatives
shall mean the partners or members thereof and, as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
TAX — The tax imposed, assessed and levied by this article.
TOWNSHIP — Middletown Township.
TREASURER — The Treasurer of Middletown Township.
B. Throughout this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall
include the feminine and neuter.
A. Every person who applies for a building permit from Middletown Township to
construct a nonresidential unit or to convert an improvement to real estate into a
nonresidential unit within the Township shall pay for and in respect of the privilege
of making such application and of the transaction regarding same a tax at the rate
set forth in Subsection D below. The tax provided for by this subsection shall be
due and payable at the time of issuance of such permit.
B. Where a building permit for the construction of a nonresidential unit or the
conversion of an improvement to real estate into a nonresidential unit was issued
before the effective date of this article, then said nonresidential unit shall not be
subject to this tax.
C. As among the various persons who are involved in the construction or conversion
of improvement to real property subject to the tax imposed by this article, the
obligation to pay the tax shall be upon the legal owner of the real estate upon which
the construction or conversion takes place.
D. There is hereby imposed a tax upon the privileges and transactions specified in
Subsection A above at the rate of $2 for each square foot of gross floor area for each
nonresidential unit to be constructed or to be added by conversion.
E. No building permit shall be issued for any unit to be constructed or to be added by
conversion until such time as the tax imposed by this article has been collected.
F. The tax imposed by Subsection D above shall be payable immediately after the
effective date of this article, at which time, if same is not paid, the provisions of
§§ 448-505 and 448-506 of this article shall be applicable.
G. In lieu of payment of the tax imposed by Subsection D, the Board of Supervisors
may elect to have a person, association or corporation pay a highway improvement
fee pursuant to Chapter 440, Land Development and Subdivision.
A. The Manager of the Township shall be and hereby is appointed the collecting agent
for the collection of the tax.
§ 448-502 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 448-504
448:32
§ 448-505. Interest.
All taxes imposed by this article not paid when due shall bear interest from the due date
at the rate of 1 1/2% per month until paid.
§ 448-506. Penalty.
A penalty of 10% is hereby imposed upon all taxes which are unpaid more than 30 days
after they are due and payable in accordance with the provisions of this article. Any
penalties imposed pursuant to the terms of this section shall be a penalty upon the entire
unpaid balance, which shall include the tax plus any accumulated interest to date.
§ 448-507. Collection.
All taxes imposed by this article together with interest from due date and the penalty
thereon may be recovered as other debts of like character are now by law recoverable.
§ 448-508. Lien.
The tax, interest and penalty imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the real
estate upon which there is a construction or conversion subject to the tax imposed by this
article, the said lien to begin at the time when the tax is due and payable and continue
until the discharge by payment or in accordance with law, and the Solicitor of the
Township is authorized to file a tax claim for said tax in accordance with the provisions
of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of 1923, as amended and supplemented.145
B. The payment of the tax shall be evidenced by a receipt setting forth the date and
amount of payment, the name of the payee, the location of the real property for
which the tax is paid, the number of units, the building permit number, the gross
floor area for the nonresidential units, and the signature of the collecting agent. Said
tax shall be deposited promptly into the proper Township bank accounts.
C. The collecting agent is authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt and
promulgate rules, regulations and forms relating to any matter or thing pertaining to
the administration and enforcement of this article and the collection of the tax,
interest and penalties hereby imposed, and may appoint assistants to collect the tax
and administer this article, subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors. The
Finance Director is hereby approved by the Board of Supervisors as an assistant.
D. The Board of Supervisors may, upon written application, grant a waiver of any tax
imposed under this article, upon a showing that the imposition of the tax will prove
a substantial burden upon the applicant and that the applicant is engaged in the
provision of public service, charity or other benefit to Middletown Township. Any
exemption granted hereunder shall be discretionary, and nothing under this article
shall be deemed to create an entitlement to any exemption from the collection of
the Middletown Township nonresidential unit tax from any entity. [Amended
2-26-2008 by Ord. No. 08-02]
145.Editor's Note: See 53 P. S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 448-504 TAXATION § 448-509
448:33
§ 448-509. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
§ 448-510. Highest standards to govern.
Whenever the requirements of this article are in conflict with other requirements of the
ordinances of Middletown Township, the most restrictive or those imposing the higher
standards shall govern.
A. Obtain any building permit or commence or complete the construction of or
conversion to any nonresidential unit without first having paid the tax imposed by
this article;
B. Obtain a certificate of occupancy without first having paid the tax imposed by this
article; or
C. Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or violate the rules and regulations
prescribed, adopted and promulgated under the provisions of this article.
§ 448-509 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 448-510
448:34
ARTICLE VI
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 6-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-11]
§ 448-601. Definitions. [Amended 12-30-2013 by Ord. No. 13-05]
A. The definitions set forth in Section 501, as amended, of the Local Tax Enabling
Act, 53 P.S. 6924.501, are hereby adopted and included by reference as if set forth
fully herein. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the following words
and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned by two or more persons.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit,
whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
BUSINESS ENTITY — A sole proprietorship, corporation, joint-stock association
or company, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company,
association, business trust, syndicate or other commercial or professional activity
organized under the laws of this commonwealth or any other jurisdiction.
COLLECTOR — The tax officer for the administration and collection of the
income taxes of the Township, appointed and acting pursuant to the various
provisions of the Local Tax Enabling Act and this article.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under the
laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other state,
territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community and Economic Development
of the Commonwealth.
DOMICILE — The place where a person lives and has a permanent home and to
which the person has the intention of returning whenever absent. Actual residence
is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of abode which, in
the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than transitory. Domicile is the
voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person, not for a mere special or limited
purpose, but with the present intention of making a permanent home, until some
event occurs to induce the person to adopt some other permanent home. In the case
of a business, domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and
the place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — The compensation as required to be reported to or as
determined by the Department of Revenue under Section 303 of the Act of March
4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code of 1971," and rules
and regulations promulgated under that section. Employee business expenses as
reported to or determined by the Department of Revenue under Article III of the
Tax Reform Code of 1971 shall constitute allowable deductions in determining
§ 448-601 TAXATION § 448-601
448:35
earned income. The term does not include offsets for business losses. The amount
of any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy shall not be taxable
as earned income. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, and unless
specifically superseded by statute or regulation of the commonwealth, earned
income shall include salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive payments,
fees and tips and other compensation that may accrue or be received by an
individual for services rendered, whether directly or through an agent and whether
in case or in property, but shall not include periodic payments for sick or disability
benefits and those commonly recognized as old-age benefits, retirement pay or
pensions paid to persons retired from service after reaching a specific age or after a
stated period of employment, nor public assistance or unemployment compensation
payments, nor any wages or compensation paid by the United States to any person
for active service in the Army, Navy or Air Force of the United States or the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other state for such service.
EMPLOYER — A person, business entity or other entity employing one or more
persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation. The term includes
the commonwealth, a political subdivision, and an instrumentality or public
authority of either. For purposes of penalties under this article, the term includes a
corporate officer.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Middletown, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business other than a
corporation, as required to be reported to or as determined by the Department of
Revenue under Section 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as
the "Tax Reform Code of 1971," and rules and regulations promulgated under that
section. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, and unless specifically
superseded by statute or regulation of the commonwealth, net profits shall include
the net income from the operation of a business, profession or enterprise, except
corporations, after provisions for all costs and expenses incurred in the conduct
thereof, either paid or accrued in accordance with the accounting system used in
such business, profession or enterprise, but without deduction of taxes based on
income. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, and unless specifically
superseded by statute or regulation of the commonwealth, net profits shall not
include:
NONRESIDENT — A person or business domiciled outside of the Township of
Middletown.
Income, which:
(a) Is not paid for services provided; and
(b) Is in the nature of earnings from an investment.
(1)
Income, which represents:
(a) Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; or
(b)
(c) Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of a farm.
(2)
§ 448-601 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 448-601
448:36
§ 448-602. Imposition of tax.
PERSON — A natural person, partnership, corporation, fiduciary or association.
Whenever used in any section prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term
"person" as applied to associations shall mean the partners or members thereof and,
as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
PRIVATE AGENCY — A business entity or person appointed as the Tax Officer.
RESIDENT — A person or business domiciled in the Township of Middletown.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAX OFFICER — The political subdivision, public employee, tax bureau, county
or private agency which administers and collects income taxes for the Township
pursuant to and in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAXABLE INCOME —Earned income and net profits.
TAXPAYER — A person, whether an individual, partnership, association or any
other entity, required hereunder to file a return of earnings or net profits or to pay a
tax thereon.
B. Word usage. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and neuter.
A. A tax for general revenue purposes of 1% is hereby imposed on the following:
(1) Earned income, as defined by this article, received by residents of the
Township on and after such date as may be fixed by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors;
(2) Earned income, as defined by this article, received by nonresidents of the
Township for work done or services performed or rendered in the Township
on and after such date as may be fixed by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors;
(3) Net profits earned on and after such date as may be fixed by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors of businesses, professions and other activities conducted
by residents of the Township; and
(4) Net profits earned on and after such date as may be fixed by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors of businesses, professions and other activities conducted
in the Township by nonresidents.
B. The tax levied under Subsection A(1) and (2) herein shall relate to and be imposed
upon salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation paid by an employer or
on his behalf to any person who is employed by or renders services to him. The tax
levied under Subsection A(3) and (4) herein shall relate to and be imposed on the
net profits of any business, profession or enterprise carried on by any person as
owner or as proprietor, either individually or in association with some other person
or persons.
C. Any person whose total income from all sources is less than $12,000 per annum
§ 448-601 TAXATION § 448-602
448:37
§ 448-603. Declaration and payment.
shall be exempt from the imposition and levy of the tax set forth in this section.
[Added 12-30-2013 by Ord. No. 13-05]
A. Declaration and payment of net profits tax.
(1) On or before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of the current year, and
January 15 of the succeeding year, every taxpayer who receives net profits or
any earnings shall make and file with the Collector, on a form prescribed by
him, a return or declaration showing his estimated net profits or earnings for
the period commencing January 1 and ending December 31 of the current tax
year.
(2) The declaration or return shall show the amount of tax imposed by this article
on such estimated net profits or earned income received by the taxpayer and
the balance due. The taxpayer making the declaration or return shall, at the
time of filing thereof, pay to the Collector the amount of tax shown as due
thereon.
(3) On or before April 15 of the succeeding year, every taxpayer shall make and
file with the Collector, on a form prescribed by him, a final return or
declaration showing the amount of net profits or earned income received
during the period commencing January 1 of the current year and ending on
December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax due thereon, and the
total amount of tax paid thereon. At the time of filing the final return, the
taxpayer shall pay to the Collector the balance of tax due or shall make demand
for refund or credit in the case of overpayment. Any taxpayer may, in lieu of
paying the fourth quarterly installment of his estimated tax, elect to make and
file with the Collector on or before January 31 of the succeeding year the final
return as hereinabove required.
(4) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of a given tax
year shall, within 15 days after the discontinuance of business, file his final
return as hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
B. Declaration and payment of earned income tax.
(1) Every taxpayer who is employed for a salary, wage, commission or other
compensation and who received any earned income not subject to the
provisions of § 448-604 herein shall, on or before April 30 of the current year,
July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the current year and January 31 of
the succeeding year, make and file with the Collector, on a form prescribed by
him, a return or declaration showing his aggregate amount of income not
subject to withholding by him during the three-month periods ending March
31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year, September 30 of the current
year and December 31 of the current year, respectively, together with such
other information that the Collector may require. Every taxpayer making such
return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the Collector the amount of tax
shown as due thereon.
(2) On or before April 15 of the succeeding year, every taxpayer shall make and
§ 448-602 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 448-603
448:38
§ 448-604. Collection at source.
file with the Collector, on a form prescribed by him, a final return or
declaration showing the amount of earned income received during the period
commencing January 1 of the current year and ending on December 31 of
the current year; the taxpayer shall pay to the Collector the balance of tax
due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth quarterly installment of his
estimated tax, elect to make and file a return as hereinabove required.
(3) Every employee receiving any earnings which are not subject to the provisions
of § 448-604 of this article relating to collection at source, whose liability to
the Township ceases prior to December 31 of a given tax year, shall, within 15
days after such termination, file his final return as hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
A. Every person within the Township who employs one or more persons on a salary,
wage, commission or other compensation basis, other than domestic servants, shall,
on or before April 15 of the subsequent year or within 15 days after becoming an
employer, register with the Collector his name and address and such other
information as the Collector may require.
B. Every person within the Township who employs one or more persons on a salary,
wage, commission or other compensation basis, other than domestic servants, shall
deduct monthly or more often than monthly at the time of payment thereof the tax
imposed by this article on the earned income, as defined by this article, due to his
employee or employees and shall, on or before April 15 of the subsequent year and
on or before the 15th day of each succeeding calendar quarter, file a return of taxes
deducted on a form prescribed by the Collector and pay to the Collector the amount
of tax deducted for the preceding quarter.
C. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every such employer shall file
with the Collector on forms prescribed by him: an annual return showing the total
amount of earned income paid and total amount of tax deducted, and the total
amount of tax paid to the Collector during the period commencing January 1 of the
current tax year and ending December 31 of the current tax year; and a return for
each employee employed during all or any part of the period commencing January
1 of the current tax year and ending December 31 of the current tax year, setting
forth the employee's name, address and social security number, the amount of
earned income paid to the employee during said period, the amount of tax deducted,
the amount of tax paid to the Collector, and such other information as the Collector
may require. Every employer shall furnish a copy of the individual return to the
employee for whom it is filed.
D. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the current tax
year shall, within 15 days after the discontinuance of business, file the returns
hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
E. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions required by this
section shall not relieve any employee from the payment of the tax or from
complying with the requirements of this article relating to the filing of declarations
§ 448-603 TAXATION § 448-604
448:39
§ 448-605. Powers and duties of Collector.
§ 448-606. Suit for collection of tax.
and returns.
A. It shall be the duty of the Collector to collect and receive the taxes, fines and
penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a record showing
the amount received by him from each person paying the tax and the date of such
receipt.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this article and is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate
and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
reexamination and correction of declarations and returns and of payments alleged
or found to be incorrect or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration of this article.
C. The Collector and agents designated by him are hereby authorized to examine the
books, papers and records of any employer or supposed employer or of any
taxpayer or supposed taxpayer in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration or
return or, if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax due. Every
employer or supposed employer and every taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is hereby
directed and required to give to the Collector or to any agent designated by him the
means, facilities and opportunity for such examinations and investigations as are
hereby authorized.
D. Any information gained by the Collector, his agents or by any other official or agent
of the Township as a result of any declarations, returns, investigations, hearings or
verifications required or authorized by this article shall be confidential except in
accordance with a proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law.
E. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Collector shall have the right of appeal
as provided by law.
A. The Collector may sue for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be begun within
three years after such tax is due or within three years after a declaration or return
has been filed, whichever date is later; provided, however, that this limitation shall
not prevent the institution of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined
to be due in the following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person, although a declaration
or return was required to be filed by him under the provisions of this article,
there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return in the possession of the
Collector or any other evidence relating to such declaration or return reveals a
fraudulent evasion of taxes, there shall be no limitation.
§ 448-604 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 448-606
448:40
§ 448-607. Interest and penalties.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per annum on
the amount of the tax and an additional penalty of 0.5% of the amount of the unpaid
tax for each month or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid shall be
added and collected. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person
liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and
penalties herein imposed, together with attorneys' fees when authorized by law.
§ 448-608. Payment under protest and refunds.
The Collector is hereby authorized to accept payment under protest of the amount of tax
claimed by the Township in any case where any person disputes the validity or amount
of the Township's claim for the tax. If it is thereafter judicially determined by a court of
competent jurisdiction that there has been an overpayment to the Collector, the amount
of overpayment shall be refunded to the person who paid under protest.
§ 448-609. Applicability.
§ 448-610. Violations and penalties.
(3) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this article and
has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the Collector, or where any person
has willfully failed or omitted to make the deductions required by this article,
there shall be no limitation.
(4) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or more and
no fraud, suit shall be instituted within six years.
(5) The Collector may file suit for the recovery of an erroneous refund, provided
that such civil action is filed within two years of the date such refund is made.
However, if it appears that any such refund was induced by fraud or
misrepresentation of material fact, then such action may be brought within five
years of same. The Township shall also be entitled to employ all other means
of collection authorized by law.
A. The tax imposed by this article shall not apply:
(1) To any person as to whom it is beyond the legal power of the Township to
impose the tax herein provided for under the Constitution of the United States
and the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) To institutions or organizations operated for public, religious, educational or
charitable purposes, to institutions or organizations not organized or operated
for private profit, or to trusts and foundations established for any of the said
purposes.
B. This section shall not be construed to exempt any person who is an employer from
the duty of collecting the tax at source from his employees and paying the amount
collected to the Collector under the provisions of § 448-604 of this article.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or return required
§ 448-606 TAXATION § 448-610
448:41
§ 448-611. Effect on other provisions.
Any ordinance or any part of any article conflicting with the provisions of this article
is hereby repealed, so far as the same affects this article. Further, it is the intention of
the Board that this article be interpreted in a manner consistent with the Act and that
any conflict between the provisions of this article and the Act be resolved so that the
provisions of the Act control. The provisions of the Act that are inconsistent with this
article (if any) are incorporated herein as though set forth at length.
§ 448-612. Effective date. [Amended 12-30-2013 by Ord. No. 13-05]
This article is effective January 1, 2014, by virtue of the adoption of Resolution No.
13-27R of the Board of Supervisors imposing and levying the taxes provided for
hereinabove and providing for the collection of the same, all of which such taxes shall be
in force and shall continue on a fiscal and calendar year basis hereafter without annual
reenactment by the Township.
by this article; any employer who fails, neglects or refuses to register or to pay the
tax deducted from his employees; any person who refuses to permit the Collector
or any agent designated by him to examine his books, records and papers; and
any person who makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return or attempts to do
anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the amount of his net profits or
earnings to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this
article shall, upon conviction thereof before any Magisterial District Judge or court
of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each
offense and costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to be imprisoned
in the County Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under the
provisions of § 448-605D of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any
Magisterial District Judge or court of competent jurisdiction, be sentence to pay a
fine of not more than $500 for each offense and costs and, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to be imprisoned in the Bucks County Jail for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any other penalty
imposed by any other section of this article.
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure the forms required for making the
declaration or returns required by this article shall not excuse him from making
such declaration or return.
§ 448-610 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 448-612
448:42
ARTICLE VII
Parking Place Tax
[Adopted 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 06-17]
§ 448-701. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Parking Tax Ordinance."
§ 448-702. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context indicates clearly a different meaning, the
following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below:
COMMERCIAL PARKING PLACE or PARKING PLACE — Any place within
Middletown Township, whether wholly or partially enclosed or open, at which motor
vehicles are parked or stored for any period of time in return for a consideration, not
including:
CONSIDERATION — Refers to consideration received upon an express or implied
contract or under a lease or otherwise, whether or not separately stated, and whether or
not paid, provided or allowed by the person on whose behalf the motor vehicle is parked
or stored or by some other person.
GROSS RECEIPTS — The monetary amount of the aggregate consideration from
transactions.
HOTEL, TOURIST COURT, AND TRAILER PARK — Are used herein as defined in
Chapter 500, Zoning.147
MONTH — A calendar month.
OPERATOR—Any person conducting the operation of a parking place or receiving the
consideration for the parking or storage of motor vehicle at such parking place.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, unincorporated association, firm or
corporation. Whenever used in any provision prescribing a fine or a penalty, the word
"person," as applied to partnerships, shall mean the partners thereof; as applied to
unincorporated associations, shall mean the members thereof; and as applied to
corporations, shall mean the officers thereof.
RESIDENCE — Any building designed and used for living or sleeping purposes, other
than a hotel, tourist court or trailer park.148
Any parking area or garage to the extent that it is provided or leased to occupants
of a residence on the same or other premises for use only in connection with, and as
accessory to, the occupancy of such residence; and
A.
Any parking area or garage operated exclusively by an owner or lessee of a hotel,
tourist court or trailer park, to the extent that the parking area or garage is provided
to guests or tenants of such hotel, tourist court or trailer park for no additional
consideration.146
B.
146.Editor's Note: See also definitions of "hotel, tourist court, and trailer park" and "residence."
147.Editor's Note: See also definition of "residence."
§ 448-701 TAXATION § 448-702
448:43
TOWNSHIP — Middletown Township.
TRANSACTION — The transaction involved in the parking or storing of a motor
vehicle at a commercial parking place for a consideration.
TREASURER — The Township Treasurer or Secretary-Treasurer to the Board of
Supervisors of Middletown Township, Bucks County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
For purposes of this article, the Treasurer or Secretary-Treasurer to the Board of
Supervisors of Middletown Township shall have the ability to appoint someone or an
entity in his place to collect the parking tax so long as that appointment is ratified by
motion and/or resolution of the Board of Supervisors of Middletown Township. Once
the aforesaid requirements are met, that person and/or entity shall be considered the
Treasurer.
§ 448-703. Imposition of tax.
A tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon all transactions of each
operator with respect to each commercial parking place at the rate of 10% of the
gross receipts from all such transactions received upon and after the effective date of
this article. No person shall conduct such transaction without complying with all the
provisions of this article and paying the tax hereby imposed.
§ 448-704. Records.
Each operator shall maintain, separately with respect to each parking place, complete
and accurate records of transactions and of gross receipts of all transactions. Each
operator shall issue to the person paying consideration written evidence of such
transactions or classes of transactions as the Township Treasurer may prescribe by
regulations. Where consideration in a transaction is not separately stated, the operator
shall maintain such evidence and records as are necessary to segregate the consideration
applicable to the transaction. Each operator shall afford the Treasurer and his designated
employees and agents access to all such records and evidence at all reasonable times and
shall provide verification of the same as the Treasurer may require.
§ 448-705. Returns and payment.
Any person desiring to conduct or continue to conduct any parking lot which charges
a fee for parking shall file with the Township an application for a permit on forms
provided by the Township. Every permit shall be issued in duplicate. The original, to
which the Township seal shall be affixed, shall be given to the person applying for
the permit, and the duplicate shall be kept on file by the Township in the Township
municipal offices. Every person to whom a permit shall have been issued shall, not less
than four times per calendar year, prepare and file a return with the Township, showing
a computation of the tax due for the preceding three months, on forms to be supplied by
the Township and, at the same time, shall pay over to the Township the entire amount of
the tax due.
148.Editor's Note: See also definition of "hotel, tourist court, and trailer park."
§ 448-702 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 448-706
448:44
§ 448-706. Treasurer's powers and duties.
The Treasurer, on behalf of the Township, shall receive and collect four times per
calendar year the taxes, interest, fines and penalties imposed by this article and shall
maintain records showing the amounts received and the dates such amounts were
received. The Treasurer is hereby authorized to examine the books and records of any
person filing a return in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return
was made, to ascertain the tax due.
§ 448-707. Collection.
The Treasurer shall collect, four times per calendar year, by suit or otherwise, all taxes,
interest, costs, fines and penalties due under this article and unpaid. If for any reason any
tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per year on the amount of unpaid
tax and an additional penalty of 1% of the amount of unpaid tax for each three-month
period during which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Whenever suit
is brought for the recovery of unpaid tax, the operator shall, in addition, be liable for
the costs of collection, including attorneys' fees, as well as for interest and penalties.
All taxes, interest and penalties collected or recovered shall be paid into the Township
treasury as general revenue to be used for general revenue purposes.
§ 448-708. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to carry out any of the provisions or requirements of this
article, or neglecting, failing or refusing to furnish complete and correct returns or to
pay over any tax levied by this article at the time required, or knowingly making any
incomplete, false or fraudulent return, or doing or attempting to do anything whatever
to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed under this article
shall be liable to a fine or penalty not exceeding $300 for each and every offense and
the costs of prosecution thereof and, in default of payment of any such fine and costs,
to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days. Provided that such fine
or penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other section of
this article. Each day that a violation of this article persists shall be deemed a separate
offense, punishable as provided hereunder.
§ 448-709. Legislative authority; when effective.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6902
et seq.,149 and its amendments and supplements. This article shall be effective from the
28th day of November 2006.
149.Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 448-706 TAXATION § 448-709
448:45

ARTICLE VIII
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. 07-13]
§ 448-801. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or language clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning:
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation, governmental
body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, commission or
other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — The singular and plural number as well as male and neuter gender.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, who after the 1st day of January 2008
engages in any occupation, trade or profession of any nature, type or kind whatsoever
within the corporate limits of the Middletown Township, whether in the employ of
another or self-employed.
LOCAL SERVICES TAX RECEIVER — The person designated by Board of
Supervisors for the collection of this tax.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any type, kind
or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or performed within the
corporate limits of the Middletown Township, for which compensation is charged or
received, whether by means of salary, wages, commissions or fees for services rendered.
TAX — The local services tax in the amount of $52 levied by this article on each
individual engaged in any occupation as hereinbefore defined within the corporate limits
of the Township of Middletown.
§ 448-802. Levy and collection of tax.
From the effective date of this article and annually thereafter, Middletown Township
hereby levies and imposes on each person engaged in an occupation as herein defined
within its corporate limits a local services tax. This tax is in addition to all other taxes
of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the Middletown Township. It shall be the
obligation of each such person so engaged in an occupation to pay or cause to be paid
the tax herein imposed. The adoption of this article shall constitute notice and demand
for payment of the tax.
§ 448-803. Amount and use of tax.
The amount of the local services tax shall be $52, to be paid by each individual so
engaged in an occupation as herein defined. The use of the tax shall be restricted
to include those services permitted under state legislation. These services include
emergency services, road construction and maintenance, and homestead exemption
property tax relief. At least 25% of the tax shall be used for emergency services funding.
§ 448-801 TAXATION § 448-804
448:47
§ 448-804. Exemption.
Any person who derives less than $12,000 per year from such occupations shall be
exempt from the payment of the tax.
§ 448-805. Upfront exemption.
Employers are required to stop withholding the local services tax if an employee files
an upfront municipal affidavit. In order to receive an upfront exemption, employees
must file an annual upfront municipal affidavit with the municipality and the employee's
employer. The affidavit would verify that the employee receives earned income and net
profits of less than $12,000 for the year. A copy of the employee's last pay stubs or W-2
forms from the prior year must be attached to the exemption affidavit.
§ 448-806. Restoration of withholding.
Employers must restart withholding the local services tax from an employee who files
an exemption affidavit in the following circumstances:
§ 448-807. Duty of employers.
Every employer within Middletown Township as well as those employers situated
outside Middletown Township but who engage in business within the said Township are
hereby charged with the duty of collecting from each of his employees engaged by him
and performing for him within the Township the said tax of $52 per annum and making
a return and payment thereof to the local services tax receiver. Further, each employee in
his employ, whether said employee is paid by salary, wages or commission and whether
or not part or all such services are performed within the Township, shall be subject to
the tax. The tax must be assessed and collected on a pro rata basis determined by the
number of payroll periods established by an employer for the calendar year. The pro rata
share of the tax assessed on each taxpayer for a payroll period is calculated by dividing
combined rate of the local services tax by the number of payroll periods established by
the employer. When calculating the pro rata share, employers are required to round down
to the nearest 1/100 of a dollar. Employers must remit withheld taxes to the designated
tax collector 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter.
§ 448-808. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the tax on
forms to be supplied to him/her by the local services tax receiver. It is further provided
that if the employer fails to file said return and pay said tax, whether or not be makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him to said employee,
the employer shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
originally been levied against him.
A. If instructed to do so by the Township;
B. If notified by the employee that they are no longer eligible for the exemption; or
C. If the employer pays the employee more than $12,000 for a calendar year.
§ 448-804 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 448-809
448:48
§ 448-809. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
Each employer shall use his employment records as of the first day of May in
determining the number of employees from whom the said local services tax shall be
deducted and paid over to the local services tax receiver, said payment to be made on
or before July 31. Each employer who engages the services of any individual in an
occupation to be performed in the Middletown Township on or after the first day of May
shall require said employee to furnish to him any certificate of payment from the local
services tax receiver showing that the local services tax has theretofore been paid. In the
event that such employee has not previously paid his local services tax, the employer
shall deduct same within 30 days after the employee is hired and remit to the local
services tax receiver.
§ 448-810. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation.
Each individual who shall have more than one occupation within Middletown Township
shall be subject to the payment of this tax on his principal occupation, and his principal
employer shall deduct this tax and deliver to him evidence of deduction on a form to
be furnished to the employer by the local services tax receiver, which form shall be
evidence of deduction having been made and, when presented to any other employer,
shall be authority for such employer to not deduct this tax from the employee wages but
to include such employee on his return by setting forth his name and the account number
of the employer who deducted this tax.
§ 448-811. Concurrent employment.
If a taxpayer has two or more jobs in different political subdivisions during a payroll
period, the priority claim to collect the local services tax is as follows:
§ 448-812. Self-employed individuals.
All self-employed individuals who perform services of any type or kind, engage in any
occupation or profession within Middletown Township shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the tax to the local services tax receiver on July 31, or as soon
thereafter as he engages in an occupation. The tax for self-employed individuals should
be prorated on a quarterly basis. Self-employed taxpayers shall pay the tax 30 days after
each quarter ends.
§ 448-813. Employers and self-employed individuals residing beyond corporate
limits.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their place of business
outside of the Middletown Township, but who perform services of any type or kind or
engage in any occupation or profession within the Middletown Township do by virtue
thereof agree to be bound by and subject themselves to the provisions, penalties and
regulations promulgated under this article with the same force and effect as though
A. Where the taxpayer maintains his/her principal office or is principally employed;
B. Where the taxpayer resides and works; and
C. Where the taxpayer is employed that is nearest in miles to the taxpayer's home.
§ 448-809 TAXATION § 448-813
448:49
they were residents of the Middletown Township. Further, any individual engaged in an
occupation within the Township and an employee of a nonresident employer may, for
the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed person, and in the event this
tax is not paid, the local services tax receiver shall have the option of proceeding against
either the employer or employee for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 448-814. Administration of tax.
§ 448-815. Suits for collection.
§ 448-816. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by this article or
who refuses inspection of his books, records or accounts in his custody and control,
setting forth the number of employees subject to this tax who are in his employment, or
whoever fails or refuses to file any return required by this article or who shall fail to pay
tax due shall, upon conviction before any court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not less than $300 and not more than $1,000 for each offense and, in
default of payment of said fine and costs, be imprisoned in Bucks County Prison for
A. It shall be the duty of the local services tax receiver to accept and receive payments
of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount received by him from
each employer or self-employed person together with the date the tax was received.
B. The local services tax receiver is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered to prescribe,
adopt and promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of the payroll records of any employer subject to this article; the
examination and correction of any return made in compliance with this article and
any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed
or found to have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the local
services tax receiver shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of
Bucks County as in other cases provided.
C. The local services tax receiver is hereby authorized to examine the books and
payroll records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made
by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Each employer
is hereby directed and required to give the local services tax receiver the means,
facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30 days after the
due date above set forth, the local services tax receiver may sue for the recovery of
any such tax due or unpaid under this article together with interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% on the
amount of said tax, calculated beginning with the due date of said tax and penalty
beginning with the due date of said tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the
flat rate of said tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax, the individual liable therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable
for the costs of collection.
§ 448-813 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 448-816
448:50
a period not exceeding 30 days for each offense. It is further provided that the action
to enforce the fine and penalty herein provided may be instituted against any person in
charge of the business of any employer who has failed or refuses to file a return required
by this article.
§ 448-817. Saving clause.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower Middletown
Township to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any occupation not within
the taxing power of said municipality under the Constitution of the United States
and the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be held by any
court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution or laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall
not affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of the tax
so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 448-816 TAXATION § 448-817
448:51

Chapter 453
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 436. Zoning — See Ch. 500.
§ 453-101. Definition of terms.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and abbreviations
shall have the meanings ascribed to them below. Definitions of words defined in the
Communications Act shall have the meaning ascribed to them therein, unless otherwise
set forth in this chapter. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number:
AFFILIATE — A person or entity:
ATTACHMENT — Any wire, optical fiber or other cable and any related device,
apparatus or auxiliary equipment for the purpose of voice, video or data transmission.
COMMUNICATIONS ACT — The Communications Act of 1934, as now or hereafter
amended.150
CONDUIT FACILITY — Any structure or section thereof containing one or more
ducts, conduits, manholes, handholes or other such facilities in the grantee's
telecommunications system.
DUCT — A single enclosed raceway for conductors, optical fiber, wire or other cable.
FACILITY — Any tangible component of the telecommunications system.
FCC—Federal Communications Commission or successor governmental entity thereto.
FRANCHISE — The nonexclusive right and privilege granted to grantee under this
With a direct or indirect ownership interest in the subject entity of 5% or more
or which controls such interest, including forms of ownership, such as general,
limited or other partnership interests, direct ownership interests, limited liability
companies and other forms of business organizations and entities, but not including
corporations.
A.
With a stock interest in the subject entity where the subject entity is a corporation
and such stockholder or its nominee is an officer or director of the grantee or who
directly or indirectly owns or control 5% or more of the outstanding stock, whether
voting or nonvoting.
B.
Which controls grantee and/or is controlled by or is under common control with
such person or entity.
C.
150.Editor's Note: See 47 U.S.C. § 151 et seq., as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996.
§ 448-817 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 453-101
453:1
chapter.
FRANCHISE AUTHORITY or FRANCHISING AUTHORITY — The Township of
Middletown, Bucks County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or the lawful successor,
transferee or assignee thereof.
GRANTEE — A person in continuous compliance with this chapter.
LICENSEE — Any person franchised, licensed, permitted or otherwise lawfully
occupying space in the public way.
PERSON — Any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, association, limited
liability company, corporation or other form of organization authorized to do business in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and includes any natural person.
PUBLIC WAY — The surface of and the space above and below any public street,
highway, turnpike, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way,
land, public way, drive, circle or other public right-of-way, including public utility
easements, dedicated utility strips or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses, and
any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter
held by the franchise authority in the service area which shall entitle the franchise
authority and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of constructing, leasing,
operating and maintaining the telecommunications system. "Public way" shall also mean
any easement now or hereafter held by the franchise authority within the service area
for the purpose of public travel and/or for utility and/or public service use, dedicated
for compatible uses, and shall include other easements and/or rights-of-way as shall
within their proper use and meaning entitle the franchise authority and the grantee to
use thereof for the purposes of constructing, leasing, operating or maintaining grantee's
telecommunications system over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits,
pedestals, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as
may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the telecommunications system.
SERVICE AREA — The present Township boundaries of the franchising authority and
shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.
SURPLUS DUCTS OR CONDUITS — Conduit facilities other than those occupied by
the grantee or any prior licensee and occupied duct(s) held by grantee for emergency or
spare use.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES —
The transmission of communications or information in electrical, electronic or
optical form or by any means, whether now known or hereafter to become known,
including, but not limited to, voice, video or data, whether or not the content
of the transmission or the medium of the transmission is owned by the grantee
itself, unless the licensee is able to demonstrate to the franchise authority by
a preponderance of the evidence that such transmission is excluded from the
definition of telecommunications service under this subsection.
A.
Telecommunications services do not include the following:
(1) Over-the-air broadcasts.
A specific telecommunications service regulated by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission as a public utility, for which a
(2)
B.
§ 453-101 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 453-101
453:2
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — All wires, cables, ducts, conduits, vaults,
poles and other necessary facilities owned and/or used by the grantee for the purpose of
providing telecommunications services and located in, under and above a public way.
YEAR, ANNUAL or ANNUALLY — The period consisting of a full calendar year,
beginning January 1 and ending December 31, unless otherwise provided in the
franchise.
§ 453-102. Grant of franchise.
§ 453-103. Standards of service.
certificate of public convenience has been obtained and a tariff therefor has
been filed.
A. Grant. Subject to state or federal law, it shall be unlawful for any person to
construct, lease, maintain or operate a telecommunications system within the public
ways unless in compliance with this chapter. Continuous compliance with this
chapter grants to grantee a nonexclusive right and privilege which authorizes the
grantee to construct, lease, maintain and operate a telecommunications system in,
along, upon, across, above, over, under or in any manner connected with public
ways within the service area and, for that purpose, to erect, install, construct, repair,
replace, reconstruct, maintain and/or retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and/or
along any public way and all extensions thereof and additions thereto such poles,
wires, cables, fiber-optic cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes,
pedestals, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and/or other related property or
equipment as may be necessary or appurtenant to the telecommunications system.
B. Nonexclusive grant. The right to use and occupy said public ways, as defined
above, for the purpose herein set forth shall not be exclusive in grantee. This
telecommunications chapter shall not apply to use of the public ways by a
governmental entity or quasi-governmental entity.
C. Not a cable system. The franchise does not authorize the grantee to operate a cable
television system, nor shall it apply to "cable service," as defined by § 602 of the
Communications Act (47 U.S.C. § 522).
D. Not a pole attachment agreement. The franchise does not authorize the grantee to
attach to any poles, to occupy any conduit facility, or to attach or occupy any other
property owned by the Township, jointly owned by the Township or the poles,
conduit facility or other property rented or obtained by other arrangements by the
Township from another owner, any wire, optical fiber or cable or related service,
apparatus or auxiliary equipment.
A. Conditions of street occupancy. All transmission and distribution structures, poles,
other lines and equipment installed or erected by the grantee pursuant to the terms
hereof shall be located so as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper use
of public ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners
who own property that adjoins any of said public ways.
B. Restoration of public ways. If during the course of grantee's construction, operation
and/or maintenance of the telecommunications system there occurs a disturbance of
§ 453-101 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 453-103
453:3
any public way by grantee, grantee shall, at its expense, replace and restore such
public way to a condition which existed immediately prior to such disturbance and
in a manner approved by the franchising authority. If grantee excavates the surface
of any public way, grantee shall be responsible for restoration of the public way
and its surface within the area affected by the excavation. The Township may, after
providing notice to grantee, refill and/or repave any opening made by grantee in
the public way, and the expense thereof shall be paid by grantee. The Township
reserves the right, after providing notice to grantee, to remove and/or repair any
work done by grantee which, in the sole determination of the Township Engineer, is
inadequate. The cost thereof, including the cost of inspection and supervision, shall
be paid by the grantee. All excavations made by grantee in the public way shall be
properly safeguarded for the prevention of accidents. All of grantee's work shall be
done in strict compliance with all applicable rules, regulations and ordinances of
the Township.
C. Relocation at request of franchising authority. Upon its receipt of reasonable
advance notice, except under exigent circumstances, the grantee shall, at its own
expense, locate, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the public way
and/or remove from the public way or other property owned by the franchising
authority any property of the grantee, when lawfully required by the franchising
authority by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street abandonment, freeway
and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of
sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, electrical conduits or any other type of structures
or improvements by the franchising authority; provided, however, the grantee in all
such cases shall share proportionately with utility companies in any federal, state or
county funds awarded to the franchising authority specifically for any of the
purposes enumerated above. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require
the franchising authority to make application for or seek a grant for any funds. Upon
the failure of the grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work required by
law (or by the provisions of grantee's franchise or any other applicable federal, state
or local law, ordinance, rule or regulation) to be done in any public way or other
public place within the time prescribed and to the satisfaction of the franchising
authority, the franchising authority, at its option, may cause such work to be done
and the grantee shall pay to franchising authority the cost thereof in the itemized
amounts reported by the franchising authority to the grantee within 30 days after
receipt of such itemized report. But the grantee, upon prior approval of the
franchising authority, may elect to abandon any or all of the telecommunications
system rather than relocate it.
D. Relocation at request of third party. The grantee shall, on the request of any person
holding a requisite lawful permit issued by the franchising authority, temporarily
raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of any equipment, building, material
or otherwise, provided:
(1) The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires is paid by said
person, including, if required by the grantee, making such payment in advance.
(2) The grantee is given not less than 10 days' advance written notice to arrange
for such temporary wire changes. The grantee may request the franchising
authority to temporarily raise or lower its wires to make other changes in its
plant and equipment to accommodate grantee's construction, which request
§ 453-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 453-103
453:4
shall be promptly considered by the franchising authority.
E. Trees and shrubbery. The grantee shall notify the franchising authority and all
affected property owners regarding grantee's need to trim trees or other natural
growth upon and overhanging public ways so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the telecommunications system of the grantee; at
the option of the franchising authority, such trimming may be done by the
franchising authority at the reasonable expense of the grantee of by the grantee
under the franchising authority's supervision and direction at the expense of the
grantee. Trimming shall be limited to the area required for clear
telecommunications system passage and shall not include major structural branches
which materially alter the appearance and natural growth habits of the tree. Grantee
shall give the franchising authority and all affected property owners five business
days' prior written notice of the grantee's intent to trim trees or other natural growth
pursuant to this section.
F. Use of grantee's equipment by franchising authority. Except as already set forth in
this chapter and subject to any applicable state or federal regulations or tariffs, the
franchising authority shall have the right to make additional use for any public
purpose of any poles or conduits controlled or maintained exclusively by or for the
grantee in any public way, provided that:
(1) Such use by the franchising authority does not interfere with use by the
grantee.
(2) The franchising authority holds the grantee harmless from and against any and
all claims, demands, costs and/or liabilities of every kind and nature
whatsoever arising out of such use of said poles or conduits, including, but not
limited to, reasonable attorney's fees and costs; provided, however, that the
franchising authority shall not hold harmless the grantee from claims and
damages arising out of willful or negligent acts caused by grantee.
(3) At the grantee's sole discretion, the franchising authority may be required to
pay a reasonable rental fee or otherwise reasonably compensate the grantee for
use of such poles, conduits or equipment.
G. Safety requirements. Construction, installation and maintenance of the
telecommunications system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike
manner. All cable, wires, conductors and other components, elements and parts of
the telecommunications system shall be installed, where possible, parallel with and
in the same manner as electric and telephone lines. All such work shall be
performed in accordance with applicable safety code or technical requirements,
including, but not limited to, National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of
Standards), National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters), Bell
System Code of Pole Line Construction and applicable FCC and/or other federal
and state regulations. Multiple cable wires, lines, fiber-optic cable, waveguides and/
or other similar facility configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled
with due respect for engineering considerations. The telecommunications system
shall not endanger and/or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the
service area. In particular, grantee shall comply with all federal laws and/or
regulations which govern plant signal leakage and/or interfere with
§ 453-103 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 453-103
453:5
communications media. Any antenna structure used in the telecommunications
system shall comply with all construction, marking and lighting of antenna
structure requirements of the United States Department of Transportation (Federal
Aviation Administration), the Township's zoning requirements (Chapter 500) and
the FCC. If at any time it is determined by the franchising authority and/or any
other agency or authority of competent jurisdiction that any part of the
telecommunications system, including, without limitation, any means used to
distribute telecommunications service, is harmful to the health and safety of any
person, then the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, promptly correct all such
conditions.
H. Maps. Prior to beginning any construction, the grantee shall provide the Township
with an initial construction schedule for work in the public ways and the estimated
total cost of such work. When grantee's construction in the public ways is
completed, the grantee shall provide the Township with a map showing the location
of its installed telecommunications system in the public ways, as built. Such as-built
maps shall be provided in both paper form as well as in an electronic format for
placement on the Township's GIS system, each in a form acceptable to the
Township Engineer. Annually thereafter, the grantee shall provide a map to the
Township showing the location of the grantee's facilities in the public ways on a
scale of 150 feet per inch or whatever standard scale the Township adopts for
general use.
I. Aerial and underground construction. In those areas of the service area where all of
the transmission or distribution facilities in the form of cables, wires, lines, fiberoptic
cable, waveguides and/or other similar facilities of the respective public
utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are underground,
the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and
distribution facilities underground. In those areas of the service area where the
transmission and/or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing
telephone communications and electric services are both aerial and underground,
grantee shall have the sole discretion to construct, operate and maintain all of its
transmission and distribution facilities, or any part thereof, aerially or underground.
If at any time the franchising authority determines that existing wires, cables or
other like facilities of public utilities anywhere in the service area shall be changed
from an overhead to an underground installation, the grantee shall also, at no
expense to the franchising authority, convert its telecommunications system to an
underground installation. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the
franchising authority to request any such utility relocation. Grantee's design and
engineering specifications. The grantee's design and engineering specifications
shall take into account the existing landscaping of the property.
J. Excavations. The grantee may make excavations in public ways for any facility
needed for the maintenance or extension of the grantee's telecommunications
system, subject to obtaining excavation permits from the Township. Prior to doing
such work, grantee must apply for and obtain appropriate permits from the
Township and give appropriate notices to any other franchises, licensees and/or
permittees of the Township and/or other units of government owning or
maintaining facilities which may be affected by the proposed excavation.
K. Installation of service. All installation of telecommunications system shall be
§ 453-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 453-103
453:6
performed in a workmanlike manner, using materials of good and durable quality
with due regard to the preservation and protection of existing structures. All work
to be performed in, on or about the dwelling or structure of a customer or potential
customer shall be performed under the reasonable direction or with the consent of
such customer or potential customer.
L. Maintenance of facilities. Grantee shall provide and put in use all
telecommunications system facilities necessary to control and carry grantee's
telecommunications services so as to prevent injury to the Township's property or
property belonging to any person within the Township. The grantee, solely at its
own expense, shall repair, renew, change and improve said facilities, from time to
time, as may be necessary to accomplish this purpose. The grantee shall not
construct its telecommunications system in a manner that requires any customer,
except the Township, to install cables, ducts, conduits or other facilities in, under or
over the Township's public ways.
M. Emergency usage. The grantee shall comply with emergency or disaster notification
requirements of the Federal Communications Commission and all state and local
emergency and/or disaster agencies.
N. Technical performance and standards. All performance and technical standards
governing construction, reconstruction, installation, operation, testing, maintenance
and dismantling of the telecommunications system provided herein shall be in
accordance with all FCC and other applicable federal, state and local laws,
ordinances and regulations.
O. Reservation of Township public ways. Nothing in the franchise shall be construed
to prevent the Township from constructing sewers, grading, paving, repairing and/
or altering any street and/or laying down, repairing and/or removing water mains
and/or constructing and/or establishing any other public work or improvement. If
any of the grantee's telecommunications system interferes with the construction or
repair of any street or public improvement, including construction, repair or
removal of a sewer or water main, the grantee's telecommunications system shall
be removed or replaced in the manner the Township shall direct; provided,
however, the Township will cooperate with the grantee to identify alternate
locations within the public ways. Any and all such removal or replacement shall be
at the expense of the grantee. Should the grantee fail to remove, adjust or relocate
its facilities by the date established by the Township Engineer's written notice to
grantee, the Township may cause and/or effect such removal, adjustment or
relocation, and the expense therefor shall be paid by the grantee, including all costs
and expenses incurred by the Township due to the grantee's delay.
P. Common users. The grantee acknowledges that the public ways have a finite
capacity for containing conduits. Therefore, grantee agrees that, whenever the
Township Engineer determines it is impracticable to permit construction of an
underground conduit system by any person which may at the time have authority
from the Township to construct or maintain conduits or ducts in the public ways,
the Township Engineer may require grantee to afford to such other person the right
to use grantee's surplus ducts or conduits in common with the grantee, pursuant to
the terms and conditions of an agreement for use of surplus conduits and ducts
being entered into by the grantee and the licensee.
§ 453-103 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 453-103
453:7
Q. Notice to common users. The grantee shall give a licensee and the Township 120
days' advance notice of grantee's need to occupy a licensed conduit and shall
propose that the licensee take the first feasible action listed:
(1) Pay conduit rent to grantee designed to recover the cost of retrofitting the
conduit with multiplexing, optical fibers or other space-saving technology
sufficient to meet the licensee's space needs.
(2) Pay conduit rent to grantee based on the cost of new conduit constructed to
meet the licensee's space needs.
(3) Vacate ducts that are no longer needed.
(4) Construct and maintain sufficient new conduits to meet the licensee's space
needs.
R. Occupancy right. When two or more licensees occupy a section of conduit facility,
the last licensee to occupy the conduit facility shall be the first to vacate or construct
a new conduit. When conduit rent is revised because of retrofitting of space-saving
technology and/or construction of new conduit, all licensees shall bear the revised
cost.
S. Safety standards for licensees. All attachments shall meet local, state and federal
clearance and other safety requirements, be properly grounded and anchored and
meet the provisions of contracts executed between the grantee and the licensee. The
grantee may, at its option, correct any attachment deficiencies and charge the
licensee for its cost. Each licensee shall pay the grantee for any fines, fees, damages
or other reasonable costs the licensee's attachments cause the grantee to incur.
T. Removal of equipment. Upon its failure to comply with this telecommunications
chapter, the franchising authority shall have the right to require the grantee to
remove, at its own expense, all portions of the telecommunications system from all
public ways. The grantee shall, within six months after having been given written
notice, remove from the public ways all such property of such telecommunications
system other than any which the franchising authority may permit to be abandoned
in place. In the event of such removal, the grantee shall promptly restore the public
way or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition as
good as that prior to such work.
(1) Any property of the grantee remaining in place six months after the grantee is
given notice pursuant to this subsection may, at the option of the franchising
authority, be considered permanently abandoned. The franchising authority
may extend such time not to exceed an additional 90 days.
(2) Any property of the grantee which the franchising authority permits to be
abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such manner as the franchising
authority shall prescribe. Subject to the provisions of any utility joint-use
attachment agreement, upon permanent abandonment of the property of the
grantee in place, the property shall become that of the franchising authority,
and the grantee shall submit to the franchising authority an instrument in
writing, to be approved by the franchising authority, transferring to the
franchising authority the ownership of such property.
§ 453-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 453-104
453:8
§ 453-104. Regulation by franchise authority.
§ 453-105. Compliance and monitoring.
A. Franchise fee. Unless waived by the franchising authority or otherwise agreed by
the franchising authority and the grantee, the grantee shall pay to the franchising
authority a franchise fee in an amount determined by the Township. The franchise
fee shall be determined so as to fully reimburse the Township for all costs incidental
to and incurred by the Township as a result of the grantee's construction, leasing,
maintenance and operation of its telecommunications system and the disruption to
the public and disturbance of the public ways or other public property relating to
such construction, leasing, maintenance or operation. Such costs shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
(1) The costs incurred by the Township for managing the public ways, including,
but not limited to, costs associated with implementing and administering this
chapter to the grantee, review and investigation of documentation and other
information concerning grantee, inspecting job sites, creating and updating
managing systems, engineering services, determining the adequacy of public
ways' restoration, budget analysis, recordkeeping, legal assistance and systems
analysis.
(2) Any costs incurred in returning the public ways to original condition, if done
or caused to be done by the Township.
(3) Any costs to the Township for police, fire or EMS services.
(4) Accelerated deterioration of the public way caused by the grantee's
construction, installation, excavation or other work related to any part of a
telecommunications system or disturbance of the public way, resulting in the
need to reconstruct the public way earlier than would be required if such
construction, installation, excavation or other work did not occur.
(5) The decreased value of the public works should the same not be returnable to
its original condition.
B. The franchise fee shall be assessed on an annual basis and shall be payable to the
franchising authority no later than 30 days after the grantee's receipt of a statement
from the Township setting forth the franchise fee for which payment is due. Upon
request by the franchising authority, the grantee shall provide such additional
information as may be reasonably required.
C. In the event that any franchise fee or other payment is not made or the requisite
documentation is not provided on or before the applicable dates heretofore
specified, interest shall be compounded daily and set at the one-year United States
Treasury bill rate existent on the date payment was due, plus 3% points. Any
amount recomputed to reflect correct payment due shall bear interest as described
from the date such payment was originally due.
A. Testing for compliance.
(1) From time to time, upon request of the franchising authority, a licensee shall
§ 453-104 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 453-105
453:9
§ 453-106. Insurance, indemnification and bonds or other surety.
furnish to the franchising authority, at no expense to the franchising authority:
(a) A complete inventory of the features and services offered and/or being
carried over its telecommunications system.
(b) A copy of all technical tests performed on the telecommunications system
by it or on its behalf.
(2) The franchising authority may perform technical tests of the
telecommunications system during reasonable times and in a manner which
does not unreasonably interfere with the normal business operations of the
grantee or the telecommunications system in order to determine whether or not
the grantee is in compliance with the terms hereof and all applicable laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations. Except in emergency circumstances, such
tests may be undertaken only after giving grantee reasonable notice thereof in
writing, not to be less than five days, and providing a representative of the
grantee an opportunity to be present during such tests. In the event that such
testing demonstrates that the grantee has failed to comply with this chapter, the
reasonable costs of such tests shall be borne by the grantee and paid to the
franchising authority within 30 days. In the event that such testing
demonstrates that grantee has complied therewith, the cost of such testing shall
be borne by the franchising authority.
A. Grantee shall save the Township, its agents, employees and elected and appointed
officials harmless from and against all claims, damages, losses and expenses,
including reasonable attorney's fees sustained by the Township on account of any
suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever arising out of the
construction, leasing, operation or maintenance of the telecommunications system
authorized herein, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized,
allowed and/or prohibited by the franchise and the rights granted thereunder.
B. Insurance.
(1) Grantee shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect throughout the term
of the franchise insurance with an insurance company licensed to do business
and doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and acceptable to
the franchising authority. All companies will be required to be rated A-VII or
better by A.M. Best or A or better by Standard and Poors. Grantee shall
provide franchising authority with proof of such insurance so required at the
effective date. The franchising authority reserves the right to review these
insurance requirements during the franchise and, upon reasonable advance
notice to grantee, to reasonably adjust insurance coverage and their limits
when deemed necessary and prudent by the franchising authority, based upon
changes in statutory law, court decisions and/or the claims history of the
industry and/or the grantee.
(2) Subject to grantee's right to maintain reasonable deductibles in such amounts
as are approved by the franchising authority, grantee shall obtain and maintain
in full force and effect for the duration of the franchise, at grantee's sole
§ 453-105 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 453-106
453:10
expense, insurance coverage in the following types and minimum amounts:
Type Amount
Workers' compensation and statutory
employers' liability
$100,000/$500,000/$100,000
Commercial general (public liability),
to include coverage for the following
where the exposure exists:
Premises operations; independent
contractors
Products/completed operations
Personal injury
Contractual liability
Explosion, collapse and
underground property damage
Combined single limit for bodily
injury and property damages
$2,00,000 per occurrence or its
equivalent
Comprehensive automobile insurance
coverage for loading and unloading
hazards, for:
Owned/leased automobiles
Nonowned automobiles
Hired automobiles
Combined single limit of bodily
injury and property damage
$1,000,000 per occurrence or its
equivalent
(3) The franchising authority shall receive, without expense, copies of certificates
of insurance evidencing coverage stated above. The franchising authority may
make reasonable requests for deletion, revision or modification of particular
policy terms, conditions, limitations or exclusions, except where policy
provisions are established by law or regulation binding upon either franchising
authority or grantee or upon the underwriter for any of such policies. Upon
request for deletion, revision or modification by the franchising authority,
grantee shall exercise its best reasonable efforts to accomplish the changes and
shall pay the cost thereof.
(4) Grantee agrees that, with respect to the above-required insurance, all insurance
certificates will contain the following required provisions:
(a) Name the franchising authority and its officers, employees, board
members and elected and appointed officials as additional insured parties
(as the interests of each insured may appear) as to all applicable coverage
(except worker's compensation).
(b) Provide for 30 days' written notice to the franchising authority for
cancellation, nonrenewal or material change.
(c) Provide that all provisions of this chapter concerning liability, duty and
standard of care, including the indemnity provisions, shall be
§ 453-106 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 453-106
453:11
§ 453-107. Enforcement and termination of franchise.
underwritten by contractual coverage sufficient to include such
obligations within applicable policies, subject to policy terms and
conditions.
(5) Companies issuing the insurance policies shall have no recourse against the
franchising authority for payment of any premiums or assessments which all
are set at the sole risk of the grantee. Insurance policies obtained by the grantee
shall provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of
subrogation against the franchising authority in connection with any damage
covered by these policies.
C. Grantee shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, and file with the
franchising authority a corporate surety bond with a surety company authorized to
do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and found acceptable by the
franchising authority in the amount of 15% of the grantee's estimated project costs,
to secure the grantee's performance of its obligation and faithful adherence to all
requirements of the franchise. The Township shall have the right to verify all such
estimated project costs and to require the grantee to increase the amount of said
bond accordingly.
(1) The rights reserved to the franchising authority with respect to the bond are in
addition to all other rights of the franchising authority, whether reserved by the
franchise or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right
with respect to such bond shall affect the franchising authority's rights to
demand full and faithful performance under the franchise or limit grantee's
liability for damages.
(2) The bond shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby understood
and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the surety nor any intention
not to renew be exercised by the surety until 60 days after receipt by the
Township of Middletown, by registered mail, of written notice of such intent."
D. All expenses of the above-noted insurance and bond shall be paid by the grantee.
E. The insurance policies mentioned herein shall contain an endorsement stating the
following: "Should any policies of insurance be canceled or coverages be reduced
before the expiration date of said policies of insurance, the issuer shall deliver 30
days' advance written notice to the Township."
F. Neither the provisions of this agreement nor any insurance accepted by the
Township pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the Township thereunder,
shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee and/or limit the
liability of the grantee under the franchise issued hereunder and/or for damages
either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise.
A. General. In addition to all other rights, remedies and powers reserved and/or
retained by the franchising authority under this telecommunications chapter or
otherwise, the franchising authority reserves the right to forfeit and revoke the
franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee in the event of willful or
repeated violation of this chapter.
§ 453-106 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 453-107
453:12
§ 453-108. Miscellaneous provisions.
B. Penalties. Any person which commits or suffers the violation of this chapter shall,
upon being found liable in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a fine of $600 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's
fees incurred by the Township. A separate offense shall arise for each day or portion
thereof in which a violation is found to exist or for each section of this chapter
which is found to have been violated. In addition to civil actions before a
Magisterial District Judge, the Township may enforce this chapter in an action in
equity brought in the Bucks County Court of Common Pleas.
A. Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. The grantee shall, at all times
during the term of this agreement, be subject to the exercise of the police power by
the franchising authority and to such other lawful ordinances, rules and regulations
as the franchising authority shall hereafter adopt. There is hereby reserved to the
franchising authority every right and power which is required to be herein reserved
or provided by any ordinance, rule or regulation of the franchising authority, and
the grantee shall comply with any action or requirements of the franchising
authority in its exercise of such right or power heretofore or hereafter enacted or
established. The grantee shall comply with all lawful ordinances, codes, laws, rules
and regulations of the franchising authority, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the United States of America which are now in effect or hereafter
enacted.
B. Conflict. Whenever the requirements of this chapter are in conflict with other
requirements of the ordinances of the Township of Middletown, the most restrictive
or those imposing the highest standards shall govern any award of franchise by the
Township at law or equity now or henceforth existing to proceed versus grantee for
enforcement of the franchise or violation of the franchise or ordinances of the
Township.
§ 453-107 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 453-108
453:13

Chapter 462
TREES, SHADE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal claims and attorneys' fees — See Ch. 316.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 363.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 436.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 440.
Zoning — See Ch. 500.
§ 462-101. Definitions. [Amended 3-7-1978 by Ord. No. 78-1; 12-1-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-13; 3-1-1994 by Ord. No. 94-02]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PERMIT — A permit in writing as issued by the Director of Public Works.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or corporation.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — Any right-of-way or easement accepted and dedicated to the
Township of Middletown or the State of Pennsylvania.
SHADE TREE—Any shade tree, shrub or other woody plant on any public highway in
the Township of Middletown or that part of any shade tree, shrub or other woody plant
which extends within the lines of any public highway in said Township.
§ 462-102. Regulations. [Amended 3-7-1978 by Ord. No. 78-1; 12-1-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-13; 3-1-1994 by Ord. No. 94-02]
A. The application for any permit required hereunder shall be made in writing to the
Director of Public Works on forms furnished by the Township and shall specify the
particular kind of work or operation the applicant desires to perform thereunder and
shall state the exact location and species of any tree or trees affected. The Director
of Public Works shall have the authority to approve or disapprove such
applications. The permit shall be effective for such length of time as the Director of
Public Works shall, in each case, determine, which shall be indicated on the permit,
and such permit may be revoked at any time at the direction of the Director upon
proof satisfactory to the Director that the terms and conditions upon which the
permit has been issued are or have been violated. The Director may, in his/her
discretion, as a condition precedent to the issuance of the permit, require the
applicant to file a bond satisfactory to him/her to guarantee the compliance by the
applicant with the terms and conditions upon which the permit is issued.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, without first obtaining a permit as established
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, to cut, prune, break,
climb with spurs, injure in any manner or remove any shade tree; to cut down or
interfere in any way with the main roots of any shade tree; to spray with any
chemicals or insecticides injurious to any tree; to place any rope, guy wire, cable,
§ 453-108 TREES, SHADE § 462-102
462:1
signs, posters or other fixtures on a tree or tree guard; or to injure, misuse or remove
any device placed to protect shade trees, except in case of immediate necessity for
protection of life or property.
C. No shade tree shall be planted on any public highway, street or road in Middletown
Township until a permit is granted therefor, such permit to designate the place
where such tree is to be planted. The Director may refuse a permit to plant any
species of tree which, in his/her opinion, is not suited to the location.151
D. All shade trees shall be kept trimmed so that the minimum height where they
overhang any public road shall be nine feet; seven feet above any public walk.
However, the Township reserves the right to designate a higher clearance on certain
highways, where heavy traffic or conditions make it expedient. All trees standing
on private property and having branches projecting over a public highway shall be
kept trimmed by the owner of such private property so that the lowest branches
shall have a minimum height of 14 feet or to such other height as may be specified
by the Township. In case the owner of such property shall neglect or refuse to trim
such trees upon being notified in writing by the Township to do so and within the
time specified by such notice, the Township may, after the expiration of the date
specified in said notice, cause such trimming to be done at the expense of the owner,
and the entire cost thereof shall be a lien upon said premises and shall be filed and
collected by the Township in the same manner as municipal claims are filed and
collected.
E. No person shall, without first obtaining a permit, place or hereafter maintain any
stone, cement or other substance which shall impede the passage of water and air to
the roots of any shade tree unless such person shall leave an open space of ground
surrounding the trunk of the tree, such space to be not less than four feet square.
F. In connection with any building operation or the performance of any work
whatsoever in the Township in the vicinity of any shade trees, before any such work
shall be commenced guards or protective barriers shall be placed at all shade trees
which may be affected by such work so as to effectually prevent injury to them.
G. No person shall pour salt water, oil or other materials at any place in such a manner
that injury may result to any shade tree.
H. No person shall, without first obtaining a permit therefor, attach any electric wire,
insulator or any device for the holding of an electric wire to any shade tree.
I. Every person having any wire or wires charged with electricity running through a
public highway shall securely fasten such wire or wires so they shall not come in
contact with any tree so as to injure the same.
J. Whenever in order to take down or prune any shade tree in the public highway or
having branches extending over the public highway it shall be deemed necessary to
remove any wire or wires, every person having any such wire or wires running
through a public highway shall temporarily remove the same or cut off the flow of
current therefrom within 24 hours after service of written notice from the Township
151.Editor's Note: Original Subsection 4 of this section of the 2009 Code, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 3-1-1994 by Ord. No. 94-02.
§ 462-102 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 462-102
462:2
§ 462-103. Removal of diseased trees. [Amended 3-1-1994 by Ord. No. 94-02]
The Director of Public Works may, upon five days' prior written notice by certified
mail to owners of property or by written notice posted in a conspicuous place on said
property, require the owner to cut and remove trees afflicted with Dutch elm or other
disease which threatens or appears to the Director of Public Works to threaten to injure
or destroy shade trees in the Township, under regulations prescribed by ordinance. Upon
failure of any owner to comply with such notice and/or requirements, the Township may
cause the work to be done by the Township and levy and collect the costs thereof from
the owner of the property. The cost of such work shall be a lien upon the premises from
the time of the commencement of the work, which date shall be fixed by the Director
of Public Works and shall be filed with the Township Secretary. Any such lien may be
collected by action in assumpsit or by lien filed in the manner provided by law for the
filing and collection of municipal claims.
§ 462-104. Assessments; liens.
so to do.
K. Regulations governing shade trees shall be enforced by a tree warden to be
appointed by the said Board of Supervisors. The tree warden shall be the Director
of Public Works.
L. Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the regulations of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$600 and costs and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues
shall constitute a separate offense. Such fines or penalties shall be collected as
prescribed by law.152
M. All shade trees must be of a two-and-one-half-inch caliper six feet above ground
line with thirty-foot centers except where the Arbor Commission designates
otherwise. Varieties should consist of a type hardy to the area. Prior to the approval
of said tree and shrub planting plans, the builder or owner shall submit a total cost
figure for said plantings. Upon approval, the Township shall designate the amount
of monies that must be placed in escrow to cover the total cost of plantings (trees
and shrubs). Upon completion and approval of the Township Engineer of said
plantings, 15% of the escrow account shall be held for a period of 18 months to
guarantee that all plantings are alive and growing.
N. It shall also be stated that the owners of said shade trees shall maintain all trees and
shrubs in perpetuity.
O. The Township shall have the authority to direct the owner of said shade trees to
institute replacement of any trees or shrubs that may have died or may be dying
from whatever cause. Failure to comply with said directive within six months would
render owner or parties responsible liable to a fine of $500 a day for each and every
violation.
152.Editor's Note: Original Subsection 14 of this section of the 2009 Code, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 3-1-1994 by Ord. No. 94-02.
§ 462-102 TREES, SHADE § 462-104
462:3
§ 462-105. Disposition of penalties. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13;
3-1-1994 by Ord. No. 94-02]
The penalties or assessments imposed under this chapter shall be paid to the Township
Treasurer.
A. Upon the filing of a certificate of lien and assessment with the Township
Supervisors, the Township Secretary shall cause 30 days' written notice to be given
to the persons against whose property an assessment has been made. The notice
shall state the amount of the assessment and the time and place of payment and shall
be accompanied by a copy of the certificate.
B. The amount assessed against the real estate shall be a lien from the time of the filing
of the certificate with the Township Supervisors, and if not paid within the time
designated in the notice, a claim may be filed and collected by the Township in the
same manner as municipal claims are filed and collected.153
153.Editor's Note: Original § 105 of this chapter of the 2009 Code, amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 3-1-1994 by Ord. No. 94-02.
§ 462-104 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 462-105
462:4
Chapter 470
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Impoundment and towing of vehicles — See Ch. 474.
§ 462-105 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 462-105
470:1

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 470-101. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 470-102. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted as ordinances,
as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as amendments to this chapter,
except where the law specifically authorizes less formal action.
§ 470-103. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances and
regulations in force immediately before the enactment of this chapter, are intended as
a continuation of those earlier ordinances and regulations and not as new enactments.
Nothing in this chapter shall affect any act done or liability incurred or any suit or
prosecution pending or to be instituted under any of those repealed or superseded
ordinances or regulations.
§ 470-104. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or articles to
which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in the Vehicle Code (the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended,
except that, in this chapter, the word "street" may be used interchangeably with the
word "highway" and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined
in the Vehicle Code.154
B. The term "legal holidays" as used in this chapter shall mean and include: New
Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the
singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Chief of Police shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and parking
temporarily and in time of emergency: [Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06;
12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish temporary
traffic and/or parking regulations; and
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the conduct of
parades, processions or public events, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or
parking in limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the Police
Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any person who shall
operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such regulations, or who shall
154.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 470-101 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-104
470:3
§ 470-105. Experimental regulations.
The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time by resolution, designate places upon
and along the highways in the Township of Middletown where, for a period of not more
than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and restrictions
shall be in force and effect, and shall designate such locations by proper signs and
markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective as if they had
been specified in this chapter. No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in
violation of any such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority
of this section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this
chapter for a violation of such nature, and in case of a violation for which no specific
penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25,
together with costs of prosecution, provided the purpose of this section is to allow for
the test and experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent
changes in the ordinances of the Township of Middletown relative to traffic and parking.
§ 470-106. Traffic on streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance or
special events.
§ 470-107. Use of streets by processions and assemblages.
move, remove, destroy, injure or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or
made to give notice of any such regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation
of such nature and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth
in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25, together with
costs of prosecution.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to close any street or specific part of
a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police officers at each end
of the closed portion while construction or maintenance work is under way or a
special event is being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to establish a restricted traffic area
upon any street where construction or maintenance work is under way and to station
flagmen at each end of the restricted portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to
drive a vehicle upon any such restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman
is displaying a sign directing that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a
flag or other device, not to proceed.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. For the purpose of this section, the words "assemblage" and "procession" shall have
the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles which interferes with
the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any street;
§ 470-104 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-107
470:4
§ 470-108. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Township are hereby authorized to direct traffic on the
highways of the Township and at intersections thereof and to otherwise enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 470-109. Authorization for use of speed-timing devices.
PROCESSION —A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or objects moving
along a street in a way that interferes with the normal movement of traffic. A
"procession" shall not include a funeral caravan or military convoy.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any assemblage unless
the person organizing or conducting the assemblage first obtains a permit from the
Chief of Police, which shall be issued without fee. Application for the permit shall
be made at least one week in advance of the day on which the assemblage is
proposed to be held, but in any case where a state-designated highway is proposed
to be used, application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the proposed
date. The permit shall state the place where and the date when the assemblage is to
be held, the hour when the assemblage may convene and the hour by which it shall
have been completely dispersed. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to
participate in any assemblage unless the permit has been granted or at any time or
place other than that authorized by the permit. [Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No.
08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any procession unless
the person organizing or conducting the procession first obtains a permit from the
Chief of Police, which shall be issued without fee. Application for the permit shall
be made at least two weeks in advance of the day when the procession is proposed
to be held, but in any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to be used,
application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the proposed date. The
permit shall specify the date on which the procession is to be held, the route to be
followed by the procession, the hour when and place where participants may
commence to assemble and form before the procession is under way, the time when
the procession may commence to move along its route, and the time by which the
end of the procession shall have reached the end of the route of the procession and
the procession shall have been disbanded. It shall be unlawful for any person to
hold or to participate in any procession unless the permit shall have been granted or
under any conditions as to time or route or otherwise than those stated in the permit.
[Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The Township Police Department is hereby authorized to use all speed-timing
devices for the determination of speed of a motor vehicle as are approved or will be
approved by the Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in accordance with Title 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3368.
B. This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways within the
Township of Middletown, be they Township, county or state highways, and does
§ 470-107 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-109
470:5
also hereby elect to exercise all powers granted to "local authorities" under the
Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6101 et seq.
(1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General
Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 470-109 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-109
470:6
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 470-201. Maximum speed limits established on certain streets. [Amended
1-30-1996 by Ord. No. 96-01; 8-26-1997 by Ord. No. 97-15; 9-22-1998 by Ord. No.
98-10; 12-22-1998 by Ord. No. 98-15; 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 99-16; 1-18-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-01]
A. Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets, as follows,
and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle, on any part of a street
where a maximum speed limit applies, at a higher speed than the maximum
prescribed for that part of the street:
Street
Maximum Speed Limit
(mph) Between
Adams Avenue 25 Entire length
Alberts Way 25 Entire length
Algate Road 25 Entire length
Arbutus Avenue 25 Entire length
Argyle Road 25 Entire length
Aspen Avenue 25 Entire length
Avenue A 25 Entire length
Avenue B 25 Entire length
Avenue C 25 Entire length
Avenue D 25 Entire length
Avenue E 25 Entire length
Avenue F 25 Entire length
Banks Road 25 Entire length
Barley Court 25 Entire length
Basil Road 25 Entire length
Beechwood Avenue 25 Entire length
Belle Aire Drive 20 Entire length
Bellevue Avenue 25 Gillam Avenue and Route 1
access road
Bernick Drive 25 Entire length
Big Oak Road
[Amended 2-6-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-01]
25 Entire length
Birch Avenue 25 Entire length
Bluebell Avenue 25 Entire length
Branford Way 25 Entire length
§ 470-201 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-201
470:7
Street
Maximum Speed Limit
(mph) Between
Bridal Drive 25 Entire length
Broadview Avenue 25 Entire length
Bromley Way 25 Entire length
Brownsville Road 35 Entire length
Buttonwood Avenue 25 Entire length
Cable Road 25 Entire length
Cabot Boulevard West 25 Entire length
Cactus Road 25 Entire length
Calicobush Road 25 Entire length
Cambridge Drive 25 Entire length
Camellia Road 25 Entire length
Cameo Place 25 Entire length
Cameo Road 25 Entire length
Canal Road 25 Entire length
Canary Road 25 Entire length
Candle Road 25 Entire length
Candytuft Road 25 Entire length
Canna Road 25 Entire length
Canoebirch Road 25 Entire length
Canton Lane 25 Entire length
Canvasback Lane 25 Entire length
Canyon Road 25 Entire length
Cardinal Road 25 Entire length
Carter Avenue 25 Entire length
Cedar Avenue 25 Entire length
Center Street 25 Entire length
Chaff Court 25 Entire length
Chickenfoot Road
(Wistar Road)
25 Entire length
Chilton Court 25 Entire length
Choate Court 25 Entire length
Clay Avenue 25 Entire length
Claymont Avenue 25 Entire length
Clearview Avenue 25 North of Brownsville Road
Cleftrock Road 25 Entire length
§ 470-201 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-201
470:8
Street
Maximum Speed Limit
(mph) Between
Cliff Road 25 Entire length
Cloister Road 25 Entire length
Coach Road 25 Entire length
Cobalt Cross Road 25 Entire length
Cobalt Ridge Drive East 25 Entire length
Cobalt Ridge Drive
North
25 Entire length
Cobalt Ridge Drive
South
25 Entire length
Colby Lane 25 Entire length
Concord Place 25 Entire length
Conifer Road 25 Entire length
Coral Road 25 Entire length
Cosmos Road 25 Entire length
Cotton Road 25 Entire length
Crestwood Road 25 Entire length
Croasdale Drive 25 Entire length
Crown Road 25 Entire length
Crystal Place 25 Entire length
Crystal Road 25 Entire length
Curry Hill Road 25 Entire length
Danby Lane 25 Entire length
David Drive 25 Entire length
Dawn Road 25 Entire length
Deep Dale Drive East 25 Entire length
Deep Dale Drive West 25 Entire length
Deep Dale Way 25 Entire length
Delaware Avenue 25 Entire length
Dolphin Road 25 Entire length
Dorset Court 25 Entire length
Double Woods Road 35 Entire length
Downhill Road 25 Entire length
Durham Road 35 Penndel Borough line and
Trenton Road
§ 470-201 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-201
470:9
Street
Maximum Speed Limit
(mph) Between
Durham Road 40 Trenton Road and New
Falls Road
East End Avenue 25 Entire length
East Gillam Avenue 25 Entire length
East Penncrest Drive 25 Entire length
East Rising Sun Avenue 25 Entire length
Ellis Road 35 Entire length
Exeter Court 25 Entire length
Fairhill Avenue 15 Entire length
Fairman Lane 25 Entire length
Fairview Avenue 25 Entire length
Fairway Drive 25 Entire length
Falcon Road 25 Entire length
Fallen Rock Road 25 Entire length
Fieldstone Road 25 Entire length
Firebush Road 25 Entire length
First Street 25 Entire length
Firtree Road 25 Entire length
Fite Terrace 25 Entire length
Flagstone Place 25 Entire length
Flamehill Road 25 Entire length
Flamingo Road 25 Entire length
Flour Lane 25 Entire length
Forrest Avenue 25 Entire length
Forsythia Crossing 25 Entire length
Forsythia Drive East 25 Entire length
Forsythia Drive North 25 Entire length
Forsythia Drive South 25 Entire length
Forsythia Way 25 Entire length
Fountain Road 25 Entire length
Fourleaf Road 25 Entire length
Fourth Street 25 Entire length
Foxglove Road 25 Entire length
Frosty Hollow Road 30 New Rodgers Road and
Oxford Valley Road
§ 470-201 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-201
470:10
Street
Maximum Speed Limit
(mph) Between
Fulling Mill Road 35 Entire length
Fullturn Road 25 Entire length
Fulton Avenue 15 Entire length
Grand Avenue 25 Entire length
Granite Avenue 25 Entire length
Granite Hill Court 25 Entire length
Green Ridge Road 25 Entire length
Green Valley Road 25 Entire length
Grove Avenue 25 Entire length
Hale Road 25 Entire length
Halfturn Road 25 Entire length
Hamlet Road 25 Entire length
Hampton Drive 25 Entire length
Handy Road 25 Entire length
Hanover Court 25 Entire length
Harbor Road 25 Entire length
Harding Avenue 25 Entire length
Hardy Road 25 Entire length
Harmony Road 25 Entire length
Harp Road 25 Entire length
Harris Avenue 25 Entire length
Harrison Avenue 25 Entire length
Harrow Road 25 Entire length
Harvest Road 25 Entire length
Haven Road 25 Entire length
Hawk Road 25 Entire length
Hay Road 25 Entire length
Healy Way 25 Entire length
Hearth Road 25 Entire length
Heartwood Turn 25 Entire length
Heartwood Road [Added
10-18-2010 by Ord. No.
10-3; repealed 1-3-2011
by Ord. No. 11-01]
Hedge Road 25 Entire length
§ 470-201 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-201
470:11
Street
Maximum Speed Limit
(mph) Between
Hemlock Road 25 Entire length
Hidden Road 25 Entire length
High Road 25 Entire length
Highland Avenue 30 Entire length
Highland Park Drive
[Amended 10-18-2010
by Ord. No. 10-3;
1-3-2011 by Ord. No.
11-01]
25 Entire length
Highland Park Entrance 25 Entire length
Highland Park Place 25 Entire length
Highland Park Way 25 Entire length
Hillside Avenue 25 Entire length
Hillside Road 25 Entire length
Hilltop Court 25 Entire length
Hilltop Road 25 Entire length
Hoe Road 25 Entire length
Hollow Road 25 Entire length
Homestead Road
[Amended 10-18-2010
by Ord. No. 10-3;
1-3-2011 by Ord. No.
11-01]
25 Entire length
Honeylocust Road 25 Entire length
Hook Road 25 Entire length
Hope Road 25 Entire length
Horn Road 25 Entire length
Host Road 25 Entire length
Hulme Street 25 Entire length
Hulmeville Road 35 Entire length
Hunt Road 25 Entire length
Huntington Place 25 Entire length
Hyacinth Road 25 Entire length
Hybrid Road 25 Entire length
Hydrangea Road 25 Entire length
Iron Rock Court 25 Entire length
§ 470-201 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-201
470:12
Street
Maximum Speed Limit
(mph) Between
Jadewood Road 25 Entire length
James Court 25 Entire length
Janney Road 25 Entire length
Janney Terrace 25 Entire length
Jasmine Road 25 Entire length
Jefferson Avenue 25 Entire length
Jollybrook Road 25 Entire length
Jumphill Road 25 Entire length
June Road 25 Entire length
Juniper Drive 25 Entire length
Knoll Avenue 25 Entire length
Larkspur Road 25 Entire length
Lawrence Circle 25 Entire length
Limewood Road 25 Entire length
Long Loop Road 25 Entire length
Longview Avenue 25 Entire length
Lower Orchard Drive 25 Entire length
Lower Orchard Turn 25 Entire length
Madison Avenue 25 Entire length
Mallard Lane 25 Entire length
Maple Point Drive 25 Entire length
Maplewood Drive 25 Entire length
Meadow Lane 25 Entire length
Meadowview Court 25 Entire length
Middle Avenue 25 Entire length
Millstone Court 25 Entire length
Mistletoe Drive 25 Entire length
Monroe Avenue 25 Entire length
Myrtle Avenue 25 Entire length
Neshaminy Street 35 Entire length
New Falls Road 40 Entire length
North Buckthorn Avenue 25 Entire length
North Canterbury
Avenue
25 Entire length
North Clearview Avenue 25 Entire length
§ 470-201 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-201
470:13
Street
Maximum Speed Limit
(mph) Between
North Flowers Mill Road
(LR 252)
45 West Maple Avenue and
Winchester Avenue
North Street 25 Entire length
Oak Ridge Drive 25 Entire length
Oakland Avenue 25 Entire length
Old Lincoln Highway 35 West Maple Avenue and
U.S. Route 1
Old Mill Drive 25 Entire length
Olive Street 25 Entire length
Par Drive 25 Entire length
Parker Street 25 Entire length
Parkland Avenue 25 Entire length
Parkvale Avenue 25 Entire length
Parkview Avenue 25 Entire length
Parkway Avenue 25 Entire length
Penn Hill Drive 25 Entire length
Periwinkle Avenue 25 Entire length
Pine Street 25 Entire length
Pintail Court 25 Entire length
Playwicki Street 15 Entire length
Pleasant Avenue 25 Entire length
Poplar Street 25 Entire length
Prospect Avenue 25 Entire length
Quail Road 25 Entire length
Quaint Road 25 Entire length
Quaker Hill Road 25 Entire length
Quaker Hill Turn 25 Entire length
Quakeroak Road 25 Entire length
Quarry Road 25 Entire length
Quarterturn Road East 25 Entire length
Quarterturn Road West 25 Entire length
Quartz Road 25 Entire length
Quay Road 25 Entire length
Queen Anne Road 25 Entire length
Queenlily Road 25 Entire length
§ 470-201 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-201
470:14
Street
Maximum Speed Limit
(mph) Between
Queensbridge Road 25 Entire length
Quest Road 25 Entire length
Quickset Road 25 Entire length
Quiet Road 25 Entire length
Quill Road 25 Entire length
Quincy Avenue 25 Entire length
Quincy Drive 25 Entire length
Rainlily Road 25 Entire length
Raintree Court 25 Entire length
Ramble Road 25 Entire length
Red Ridge Road 25 Entire length
Red Rose Drive 25 Entire length
Red Rose Way 25 Entire length
Redberry Road 25 Entire length
Redwood Avenue 25 Entire length
Reetz Avenue 25 Entire length
Richardson Avenue 25 Entire length
Rockwood Road 25 Entire length
Rose Apple Road 25 Entire length
Rosewood Avenue 25 Entire length
Round Hill Road 25 Entire length
Roving Road 25 Entire length
Russell Avenue 25 Entire length
Rust Hill Road 25 Entire length
Sandybrooke Drive 20 Entire length
Scarlet Oak Road 25 Entire length
Seckelpear Road 25 Entire length
Second Street 25 Entire length
Shadywood Road 25 Entire length
Shaw Avenue 25 Entire length
Shellflower Road 25 Entire length
Shelton Road 25 Entire length
Silver Lake Road 25 Entire length
Silver Spruce Road 25 Entire length
§ 470-201 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-201
470:15
Street
Maximum Speed Limit
(mph) Between
Silverbell Road 25 Entire length
Smoketree Road 25 Entire length
Snowball Drive 25 Entire length
South Buckthorn Avenue 25 Entire length
South Clearview Avenue 25 Entire length
South Flowers Mill Road 35 Old Lincoln Highway to
East Lincoln Highway
(Business Route 1)
South Hawthorne
Avenue
25 Entire length
South Myrtlewood
Avenue
25 Entire length
South Walnut Terrace 25 Entire length
South Woodbine Avenue 25 Entire length
Spicebush Road 25 Entire length
Spindletree Road 25 Entire length
Spinythorn Road 25 Entire length
Spring Street 25 Entire length
Spring Valley Road 25 Entire length
Steeplebush Road 25 Entire length
Stoneybrook Court 25 Entire length
Sugarplum Road 25 Entire length
Summit Avenue 25 Entire length
Summit Trace Road 25 Entire length
Sunflower Avenue 25 Entire length
Sunflower Road 25 Entire length
Sunset Avenue 25 Entire length
Sweetgum Road 25 Entire length
Swift Road 35 Entire length
Sycamore Road 25 Entire length
Tarn Road 25 Entire length
Tawny Road 25 Entire length
Taylor Drive 25 Entire length
Teal Drive 15 Entire length
Teal Drive 25 Entire length
§ 470-201 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-201
470:16
Street
Maximum Speed Limit
(mph) Between
Tempo Road 25 Entire length
Terrace Road 25 Entire length
The Ramble 25 Entire length
Third Street 25 Entire length
Thistle Road 25 Entire length
Tinder Road 25 Entire length
Tinsel Road 25 Entire length
Toll Gate Road 35 Entire length
Top Road 25 Entire length
Towns Road 25 Entire length
Township Line Road 35 Entire length
Towpath Road 25 Entire length
Trail Road 25 Entire length
Trellis Road 25 Entire length
Trim Road 25 Entire length
Tulip Tree Road 25 Entire length
Turf Road 25 Entire length
Tweed Road 25 Entire length
Twin Oak Drive 25 Entire length
Twin Oak Entry 25 Entire length
Twin Oak Way 25 Entire length
Umber Road 25 Entire length
Underwood Road 25 Entire length
Unity Turn 25 Entire length
Uphill Road 25 Entire length
Upland Road 25 Entire length
Upper Orchard Drive 25 Entire length
Upper Orchard Pass 25 Entire length
Village Road 35 Entire length
Virginia Avenue 25 Entire length
Waldon Road 25 Entire length
Walsh Avenue 25 Entire length
Washington Avenue 25 Entire length
Webster Avenue 25 Entire length
§ 470-201 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-201
470:17
§ 470-202. Maximum speed limits established on certain bridges and elevated
structures.
Street
Maximum Speed Limit
(mph) Between
West End Avenue 25 Entire length
West Gillam Avenue 25 Entire length
West Maple Avenue 40 Langhorne Borough to
Neshaminy Creek
West Penncrest Drive 25 Entire length
West Rising Sun Avenue 25 Entire length
West Virginia Avenue 25 Entire length
Wheel Court 25 Entire length
Wheeler Way 25 Entire length
Winchester Avenue 35 Entire length
Windham Drive 25 Entire length
Winter Avenue 25 Entire length
Wood Duck Lane 15 Entire length
Wood Duck Lane 25 Entire length
Wood Lane 35 Entire length
Woodbourne Road 35 SR 6332 and Wood Lane
Woodland Avenue 25 Entire length
Woods Edge Place 25 Entire length
Woodstream Court 25 Entire length
Woodvale Avenue 25 Entire length
Wyoming Avenue 25 Entire length
Zimmerman Lane 35 Entire length
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by
more than five miles per hour shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each
mile in excess of five miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.
§ 470-201 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-202
470:18
§ 470-203. Maximum speed limits established for certain vehicles on hazardous
grades.
§ 470-204. Maximum speed limits established in parks.
§ 470-205. Traffic signals at certain locations.
A. Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain bridges and elevated
structures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any such
bridge or elevated structure at a higher speed than the maximum prescribed for that
bridge or elevated structure:
Bridge or Elevated
Structure Maximum Speed Limit Location
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by
more than five miles per hour shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each
mile in excess of five miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. The following are declared to be hazardous grades, and upon any such hazardous
grade, no person shall drive a vehicle having a gross weight in excess of that
referred to for that grade in the direction stated for that grade at a speed in excess of
that established in this section for that grade, and if so stated for a particular grade,
the driver of every such vehicle shall stop the vehicle before proceeding downhill:
Street
Maximum
Speed Limit
Direction
of Travel
Maximum
Gross Weight Location
Required to
Stop Before
Proceeding
Downhill
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by
more than five miles per hour shall pay an additional fine of $2 for each mile in
excess of five miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. A speed limit of 15 miles per hour is established on all streets and roadways in the
public parks maintained and operated by the Township of Middletown, except in
the following locations, where the lower maximums, as specified, shall apply:
Park Street
Maximum Speed
Limit Location
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by
more than five miles per hour shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each
mile in excess of five miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.
§ 470-202 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-205
470:19
§ 470-206. Intersections where turn prohibited on red signal.
§ 470-207. One-way streets established.
§ 470-208. Turning at certain intersections prohibited or restricted.
A. At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be erected (or are
ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those locations shall be directed by
those signals:
Location Type of Signal
(Reserved)
B. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles headed in
the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from making a right turn (or a
left turn from a one-way street into another one-way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection Vehicles Traveling On Facing
(Reserved)
B. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other than in the direction
established for traffic on that street:
Street
Direction of
Travel From To
Bridal Drive Park Avenue Mistletoe Drive
Golf Club Drive Easterly West Maple Avenue West Maple
Avenue
Mistletoe Drive Bridal Drive Periwinkle Avenue
Old Lincoln
Highway
West West Lincoln
Highway (Business
Route 1)
Township line
Park Avenue West Periwinkle Avenue Bridal Drive
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle of the type indicated, traveling
upon the first-named street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make a left turn and/or a right turn into the
second-named street, as indicated, at any time when such a turn is prohibited by this
section:
§ 470-205 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-208
470:20
§ 470-209. Right turns only permitted at certain intersections.
§ 470-210. U-turns prohibited at certain locations.
§ 470-211. No-passing zones.
Vehicles
Traveling on
Direction of
Travel Not to Make Into When
Applicable
Vehicle Type
Highland Park
Entry [Added
10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-3;
repealed
1-3-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-01]
Highland Park
Place [Added
10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-3;
repealed
1-3-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-01]
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle traveling upon the first-named
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or directions indicated
in each case, to make other than a right turn, at any time stated, both left turns and
straight-across traffic being prohibited:
Vehicles
Traveling On
Direction of
Travel Times
Not to Make Left Turn
Into or Travel Straight
Across
Terrace Road West All Woodbourne Road
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon any of the
following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated for that street,
to make a U-turn:
Street Portion Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as no-passing zones, and it shall be unlawful for the
§ 470-208 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-211
470:21
§ 470-212. Through highways established. [Amended 8-7-2001 by Ord. No. 01-08;
1-15-2002 by Ord. No. 02-01; 10-29-2002 by Ord. No. 02-15]
driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another vehicle or to drive on the left side
of the roadway in any no-passing zone:
Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Langhorne-Newtown
Road
Both From Langhorne Borough to
Newtown Township
Madison Avenue Both From Trenton Road to Woodland
Avenue
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following highways are established as through highways, thus authorizing stop
or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching every intersection with the
through highway except for those intersections with traffic signals or with
exceptions or modifications as indicated below. Every driver of a vehicle
approaching a stop or yield sign authorized by this section shall stop the vehicle or
yield right-of-way as required by § 3323(b) or § 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code,155 as
the case may be, and shall not proceed into or across the through highway until he
has followed all applicable requirements of that section of the law.
Highway Location
Cobalt Cross Road Except at Woodbourne-Emilie Road and Cobalt
Ridge Drive South
Cobalt Ridge Drive East Except at Cobalt Ridge Drive North and at Cobalt
Cross Road
Cobalt Ridge Drive North Except at Bristol-Oxford Valley Road and
Woodbourne-Emile Road
Cobalt Ridge Drive South Except at Bristol-Oxford Valley Road near Frosty
Hollow and near Red Rose Way
Crystal Road Except at Cobalt Ridge Drive North and South
Double Woods Road Except for westbound traffic at Fulling Mill Road
and at Langhorne-Newtown Road
Durham Road Entire length
East Lincoln Highway
(Business Route 1)
Entire length
Ellis Road Entire length
Forsythia Drive East Except at Trenton Road and at Forsythia Drive
South
155.Editor's Note: See Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b) or 3323(c).
§ 470-211 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-212
470:22
Highway Location
Forsythia Drive North Except at Forsythia Drive South and Forsythia
Drive East
Forsythia Drive South Except at Trenton Road and Bristol-Oxford Valley
Road
Frosty Hollow Road Except at Durham Road, New Rodgers Road and
Bristol-Oxford Valley Road
Fulling Mill Road Except at Toll Gate Road
Harmony Road Except at Woodbourne-Emilie Road and
Heartwood Road
Harvest Road Except at Heartwood Road, Haven Road and
Highland Park Drive
Heartwood Road Except at Highland Park Parkway and Trenton
Road
Highland Avenue Except at Old Lincoln Highway, U.S. Route 1 and
Hulmeville Road
Highland Park Drive Except at Highland Park Place and Trenton Road
Highland Park Way Except at East Lincoln Highway (Business Route
1)
Hollow Road Except at Highland Park Drive and Heartwood
Road
Hollywood Avenue Except at Clearview Avenue, Walnut Terrace and
Canterbury Avenue
Homestead Road Except at Harvest Road and Trenton Road
Hulmeville Road Except at Old Lincoln Highway and at U.S. Route
1
Juniper Drive Except at Frosty Hollow Road, Langhorne-
Newtown Road and Langhorne-Yardley Road
Lower Orchard Drive Except at northerly intersection with Long Loop
Road
Madison Avenue Except at Woodland Avenue and Trenton Road
Neshaminy Street Entire length
New Rodgers Road Entire length
Old Lincoln Highway Except at U.S. Route 1, at West Maple Avenue and
at East Lincoln Highway (Business Route 1)
Oxford Valley Road Except at Trenton Road, at Woodbourne-Emilie
Road and New Falls Road
Parkview Avenue Except at Adams Avenue, Bellevue Avenue and
Birch Avenue
Parkway Avenue Except at Durham Road and Wyoming Avenue
§ 470-212 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-212
470:23
§ 470-213. Stop intersections established. [Amended 3-30-1993 by Ord. No. 93-02;
12-13-1994 by Ord. No. 94-19; 3-7-1995 by Ord. No. 95-08; 10-10-1995 by Ord. No.
95-16; 9-22-1998 by Ord. No. 98-10; 10-20-1998 by Ord. No. 98-11; 12-22-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-15; 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-02; 6-22-1999 by Ord. No. 99-13;
1-18-2000 by Ord. No. 00-01; 5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 01-06; 8-7-2001 by Ord. No.
Highway Location
Periwinkle Avenue Except at West Maple Avenue, Clover Drive,
Bridle Drive (south) and Brownsville Road
Poplar Street Except at Sunflower Avenue and Hulmeville Road
Prospect Avenue Except at Avenue A and Avenue F
Quarry Road Except at Woodbourne-Emilie Road and
Newportville-Fallsington Road
Queenlily Road Except at Quarry Road and at New Falls Road
Quincy Drive Except at Woodbourne-Emily Road and
Newportville-Fallsington Road
Red Rose Drive Except at Forsythia Drive and at Frosty Hollow
Road
Snowball Drive Except at Frosty Hollow Road, at New Rodgers
Road and at Trenton Road
Terrace Road Except at Oxford Valley Road, Top Road and
Woodbourne Road
Toll Gate Road Except at Woodbourne-Emilie Road and
Langhorne-Newtown Road
Towns Road Except at Terrace Road and at Twin Oak Drive
Trenton Road Entire length
Twin Oak Drive Except at Terrace Road and at Trenton Road
U.S. Route 1 Except at Old Lincoln Highway east of Langhorne
Borough
Upper Orchard Drive Except at Frosty Hollow Road and Underwood
Road
Village Road Except at Basil Road
West Lincoln Highway
(Business Route 1)
Except at U.S. Route 1
West Maple Avenue Entire length
Winchester Avenue Entire length
Woodbourne Road Except for southbound traffic at Ellis Road; at
Wood Lane, at Langhorne-Yardley Road, at Old
Lincoln Highway and at Trenton Road
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 470-212 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-213
470:24
01-08; 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-11; 1-15-2002 by Ord. No. 02-01; 9-24-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-11; 10-29-2002 by Ord. No. 02-15; 12-10-2002 by Ord. No. 02-16;
4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 03-07; 7-22-2003 by Ord. No. 03-9; 8-12-2003 by Ord. No.
03-10]
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the through highways
established by § 470-212 are established as stop intersections, and official stop
signs shall be erected (or are ratified if previously erected) in such a position as to
face traffic approaching the second-named street (the intersecting or through street)
on the first-named street (the stop street) in the direction or directions indicated for
that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on the firstnamed
or stop street, in the direction indicated in each case, shall stop the vehicle
as required by § 3323(b) of the Vehicle Code,156 and shall not proceed into or across
the second-named or intersecting or through street until he has followed all
applicable requirements of that section of the law.
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Adams Avenue Longview Avenue North and south
Adeline Place Algate Road North
Alberts Way Bernick Drive East and west
Alberts Way Cambridge Drive East and west
Alberts Way Danby Lane South
Algate Road Silver Lake Road West
Andover Drive Tareyton Drive South
Apple Street Center Street East and west
Apple Street Oxford Valley Road East
Arbutus Avenue Rosewood Avenue East and west
Arbutus Avenue South Clearview Avenue East and west
Argyle Road Dawson Road South
Atkinson Lane Fairman Lane West
Atkinson Lane Maple Point Drive East and west
Banks Road Silver Lake Road South
Banks Road Swift Road North
Barley Court Argyle Road West
Barnsbury Road Algate Road North and south
Barnsbury Road Dorset Court West
Basil Road [Amended
8-15-2016 by Ord. No.
16-05]
Barnsbury Road (3-way)
Basil Road Dawson Road North
156.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b).
§ 470-213 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-213
470:25
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Basil Road Village Road (3-way)
Baylis Road Argyle Road West
Bellevue Avenue U.S. Route 1
Big Oak Road Township Line Road East
Bluebell Avenue Redwood Avenue South
Boxwood Drive Boxwood Lane West
Branford Way Hampton Drive North
Branford Way Windham Drive South
Broadview Avenue North Hawthorne Avenue West
Bromley Way Canton Lane West
Bromley Way Hampton Drive East
Buchanan Drive Ramble Road and The Ramble East
Canna Road Cobalt Ridge Drive South South
Canna Road Curry Hill Road North
Canton Lane Hamtpon Drive East
Canton Lane Healy Way West
Canvasback Lane Teal Drive East
Canvasback Lane Teal Drive West
Canyon Road Cloister Road
Canyon Road Cobalt Ridge Drive
Center Street Apple Street North and south
Center Street Nursery Avenue South
Center Street Roberts Avenue North and south
Chaff Court Old Mill Drive South
Chilton Road Baylis Road North and south
Chilton Road Chilton Place North
Chilton Road Dawson Road South
Clay Avenue Longview Avenue North and south
Clay Avenue Madison Avenue West
Clearview Avenue Meadow Lane North and south
Clearview Avenue,
South
South Clearview Avenue South
Clover Drive Periwinkle Avenue West
Cobalt Ridge Drive
East
Cobalt Cross Road (3-way)
§ 470-213 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-213
470:26
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Cobalt Ridge Drive
South
Cactus Road West
Cobalt Ridge Drive
South
Canna Road East
Concord Place Hampton Drive West
Coventry Lane Andover Drive North
Coventry Lane Tareyton Drive South
Croasdale Drive Fairman Lane East and west
Croasdale Drive
[Added 3-18-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-02]
Maple Point Drive North
Danby Lane Hampton Drive East
Dawn Road Dawn Road West
Dawn Road Dolphin Road East
Dawson Road Argyle Road East
Dawson Road Argyle Road West
Dawson Road Barnsbury Road South
Deep Dale Drive West Dawn Road East
Delaware Avenue Parkway (4-way)
Dilworth Lane Maple Point Drive West
Dilworth Lane Waln Lane South
Fairman Lane Croasdale Drive North and south
Fairman Lane Maple Point Drive East
Fairview Avenue Avenue A East
Fairway Drive Fairway Drive East
Fairway Drive Maple Avenue South
Fawnhill Drive Norsam Drive East and west
Fee Avenue Poplar Street South
Fir Avenue Harrison Avenue North
Fir Avenue Longview Avenue 4-way
First Street Woodbourne Road East
Flour Lane Old Mill Drive East
Flour Lane Wheatsheaf Lane West
Ford Avenue
[Amended 11-25-2013
by Ord. No. 13-03]
Harding Avenue (4-way)
§ 470-213 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-213
470:27
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Forsythia Drive East
[Added 11-25-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-04]
Fruitree Road (3-way)
Forsythia Drive East Nursery Avenue North and south
Forsythia Drive South Flamehill Road West
Forsythia Drive South Rust Hill Road East
Fourth Street Middle Street East and west
Fourth Street Woodbourne Road East
Four Leaf Road
[Added 3-16-2020 by
Ord. No. 20-02]
Forsythia Drive East Northeast
Fulling Mill Road Tollgate Road South
Gillam Avenue Parkvale Avenue East and west
Granite Hill Court Summit Trace Road West
Grove Avenue Parkway Avenue (3-way)
Hampton Drive Branford Way East and west
Hampton Drive Danby Lane East and west
Hampton Drive Hampton Court East and west
Hampton Drive Hampton Drive South
Hampton Drive Healy Way North and south
Hampton Drive Newtown-Langhorne Road East
Hampton Drive Shelton Lane (3-way)
Harmony Road Hay Road (4-way)
Harmony Road Hoe Road (3-way)
Harrison Avenue Adams Avenue West
Harrison Avenue Madison Avenue (4-way)
Harvest Road Haven (3-way)
Hawthorne Avenue,
North
Broadview Avenue North and south
Hawthorne Avenue,
South
Meadow Lane North and south
Heartwood Road
[Added 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-3;
repealed 1-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
§ 470-213 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-213
470:28
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Heartwood Road
[Added 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-3;
repealed 1-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
Heartwood Road
[Added 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-3;
repealed 1-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
Heartwood Road
[Added 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-3;
repealed 1-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
Heartwood Road
[Added 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-3;
repealed 1-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
Heartwood Road Highland Park Way North
Heartwood Road
[Added 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-3;
repealed 1-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
Hedge Road Host Road East and west
Henry Avenue Hulmeville Road East
Henry Avenue Parkvale Avenue West
Hidden Spring Lane Swift Road South
Highland Park Drive
[Added 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-3;
repealed 1-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
Highland Park Drive
[Added 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-3;
repealed 1-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
§ 470-213 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-213
470:29
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Highland Park Drive
[Added 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-3;
repealed 1-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
Highland Park Drive
[Added 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-3;
repealed 1-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
Highland Park Drive
[Added 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-3;
repealed 1-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
Highland Park Drive Hollow Road North and south
Highland Park Drive
[Added 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-3;
repealed 1-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
Highland Park Drive
[Added 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-3;
repealed 1-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
Highland Park Place
[Added 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-2]
Highland Park Way (4-way)
Highland Park Way Heartwood Road East and west
Hilltop Court Summit Trace Road North
Hollow Road Hook Road East and west
Hollow Road Hope Road East and west
Hollywood Avenue North Buckthorn Avenue West
Homestead Road
[Added 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-3;
repealed 1-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
§ 470-213 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-213
470:30
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Homestead Road
[Added 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-3;
repealed 1-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
Homestead Road
[Added 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-3;
repealed 1-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
Homestead Road
[Added 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-3;
repealed 1-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
Homestead Road
[Added 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-3;
repealed 1-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
Hook Road Hollow Road South
Iron Rock Court Oak Ridge Drive North
Jefferson Avenue Harrison Avenue North and south
Jefferson Avenue Longview Avenue North and south
Jeffrey Lane Fee Avenue East and west
Kenton Drive Andover Drive South
Kenton Drive Winchester Avenue North
Lawrence Circle West Maple Avenue South
Lincoln Avenue Adams Avenue West
Lincoln Avenue Jefferson Avenue East
Lincoln Avenue Madison Avenue West
Lincoln Avenue Quincy Avenue East and west
Longview Avenue Fir Avenue 4-way
Longview Avenue Linden Avenue West
Madison Avenue Harrison Avenue North and south
Mallard Lane Langhorne-Yardley Road East
Mallard Lane Teal Drive West
Maple Point Drive Paxson Lane South
Maple Point Drive Trappe Lane 4-way)
§ 470-213 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-213
470:31
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Maple Point Drive Trappe Lane North and south
Maple Point Drive Waln Lane North
McKinley Avenue Reetz Avenue North
Meadow Lane Clearview Avenue West
Meadow Lane South Hawthorne Avenue East
Millstone Court Old Mill Drive South
Norsam Drive Fawnhill Drive North and south
North Buckthorn
Avenue
Redwood Avenue South
Nursery Avenue Center Street East and west
Nursery Avenue Forsythia Drive East
Nursery Avenue Oxford Valley Road East
Oak Ridge Drive Meadowview Court East and west
Oak Ridge Drive Summit Trace Road North and west
Oak Ridge Drive Woods Edge Place South
Oak Ridge Drive Woodstream Court East
Old Mill Drive Bridgetown Road North
Old Mill Drive Millstone Court North
Old Mill Drive Route 413 West
Old Mill Drive Wheatsheaf Lane South
Old Mill Drive Wheel Court East and west
Par Drive Fairway Drive East and west
Parkvale Avenue Gillam Avenue North
Parkway Avenue Delaware Avenue (4-way)
Parkway Avenue Grove Avenue (3-way)
Parkway Avenue Sunset Avenue (3-way)
Parkway Avenue Wyoming Avenue (3-way)
Paxson Lane Maple Point Drive East
Periwinkle Avenue Clover Drive Both
Periwinkle Avenue Mistletoe Drive (3-way)
Pintail Court Teal Drive North
Poplar Street Avenue D East
Poplar Street Avenue E East
Poplar Street Avenue F East and west
Poplar Street Fee Avenue West
§ 470-213 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-213
470:32
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Poplar Street Parkvale Avenue East and west
Quakerhill Road Queenlily Road East
Quarry Road Quaint Road East
Quarry Road Quill Road West
Queenlily Road Quakerhill Road North and south
Quest Road Quincy Drive West
Quincy Avenue Madison Avenue West
Quincy Drive Quest Road North and south
Raintree Court Oak Ridge Drive South
Ramble Road Buchanan Drive and The
Ramble
South
Red Ridge Road Red Rose Way North
Red Ridge Road Roving Road North and south
Red Rose Drive Red Rose Way North and south
Redwood Avenue North Buckthorn Avenue East
Reetz Avenue Harding Avenue East and west
Ridge Drive Dawn Road West
Rising Sun Avenue Carter Avenue East
Roberts Avenue Oxford Valley Road East
Rosewood Avenue Arbutus Avenue North and south
Roving Road Red Ridge Road East
Rugby Drive Hillbrook Lane North and south
Scarlet Oak Road Sweetgum Road East
Seckelpear Road Spring Valley Road South
Second Street Woodbourne Road East
Silver Lake Road Banks Road South
Silverspruce Road Snowball Drive South
Silverspruce Road Spring Valley Road South
Smoketree Road Snowball Drive South
Smoketree Road Sweetgum Road North
Snowball Drive Spring Valley Road North and south
Snowball Drive
[Added 9-3-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-06]
Both entrances to Veterans
Highway/New Rodgers Road
North and south
Spindletree Road Snowball Drive East and south
Spring Valley Road Snowball Drive East and west
§ 470-213 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-213
470:33
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Stoneybrook Court Oak Ridge Drive North
Summit Trace Road Granite Hill Court North
Summit Trace Road Oak Ridge Drive East and south
Summit Trace Road Route 413 West
Summit Trace Road Summit Square Shopping
Center
North and south
Sunset Avenue Parkway Avenue (3-way)
Swift Road Banks Road West
Swift Road Hidden Spring Lane East and west
Tareyton Drive Flowers Mill Road East
Teal Drive Canvasback Lane (East) North and south
Teal Drive Canvasback Lane (West) North and south
Terrace Road Tarn Road East and west
Terrace Road Top Road East and west
Terrace Road Towns Road East
Terrace Road Twin Oak Drive East
The Ramble Buchanan Drive and The
Ramble Road
West
Third Street Woodbourne Road East
Tollgate Road Fulling Mill Road East and west
Top Road Terrace Road South
Towns Road Terrace Road North
Township Line Road Big Oak Road South
Trail Road Twin Oak Drive South
Trellis Road Twin Oak Drive South
Twin Oak Drive Terrace Road North
Twin Oak Drive Tulip Tree Road East and west
Twin Oak Drive Twin Oak Entry South
Twin Oak Drive Twin Oak Way South
Underwood Road Upland Road (3-way)
Upland Road Underwood Road (3-way)
Upper Orchard Drive Underwood Road (3-way)
Village Road Wood Duck Lane East and west
Waln Lane Maple Point Drive West
Wheatsheaf Lane Old Mill Drive East
§ 470-213 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-213
470:34
§ 470-214. Yield intersections established.
§ 470-215. Operation of motor vehicles restricted on public lands.
§ 470-216. School zones. [Added 6-22-1999 by Ord. No. 99-11]
It shall be unlawful for the driver or operator of any motor vehicle to drive at a speed
greater than 15 miles per hour in the vicinity of the following schools:
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Wheel Court Old Mill Drive North
Wood Duck Lane Teal Drive South
Wood Duck Lane Village Road North
Woods Edge Place Oak Ridge Drive (2 locations) West
Woodstream Court Oak Ridge Drive North
Woodvale Avenue Fairview Avenue North and south
Wyoming Avenue Parkway Avenue (3-way)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the through highways
established by § 470-212 are established as yield intersections, and official yield
signs shall be erected (or are ratified if previously erected) in such a position as to
face traffic approaching the second-named street (the through street) on the firstnamed
street (the yield street) in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on the firstnamed
or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case, shall slow down or
stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code,157 and then yield the
right-of-way as required by that subsection of the Vehicle Code.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. No motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, pedalcycle or minibike, shall be operated
on any property owned by the Township of Middletown or any other public agency
or instrumentality within the Township.
B. Any person who violates an provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. Samuel Everett Elementary School.
157.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(c).
§ 470-213 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-216
470:35
B. Carl Sandburg Middle School/Albert Schweitzer Elementary School.
C. Pearl S. Buck Elementary School.
§ 470-216 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-216
470:36
ARTICLE III
Restrictions on Size, Weight and Type of Vehicle and Load
§ 470-301. Vehicle weight limits established on certain streets and bridges.
§ 470-302. Restrictions on size of vehicles on certain streets and bridges.
§ 470-303. Restrictions as to weight and size of vehicles on certain streets and
bridges.
A. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority granted by
§ 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code,158 it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to
drive any vehicle or combination having a gross weight in excess of the maximum
prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street, as the case may be:
Street or Bridge
Maximum Gross
Weight Location
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be prosecuted under
§§ 4902(a) and 4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle Code,159 and, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of $150 plus $150 for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in
excess of 3,000 pounds over the maximum allowable weight and costs.
A. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority granted by
§ 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code,160 it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any
vehicle or combination in violation of the size restrictions prescribed below for that
bridge or street or part of street:
Street or Bridge Location Restrictions
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be prosecuted under
§§ 4902(a) and 4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle Code,161 and, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of $75 and costs.
A. By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by authority
granted by § 4902(b) of the Vehicle Code,162 it shall be unlawful for any person to
drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the restriction prescribed below for
that bridge or street or part of street.
Street or Bridge Location Restrictions
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be prosecuted under
158.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a).
159.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 4902(a) and 4902(g)(1).
160.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a).
161.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 4902(a) and 4902(g)(1).
162.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(b).
§ 470-301 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-303
470:37
§ 470-304. Truck traffic restricted on certain streets.
§§ 4902(b) and 4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle Code,163 and, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 and not more than $100 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a passenger car on
any of the following streets or parts of streets:
Street Location
All Township streets
B. Provided that nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from driving an
emergency vehicle on any of those streets or parts of streets or from driving on any
of those streets or parts of streets a truck or other commercial vehicle making local
deliveries to or pickups from premises located along that street or part of a street.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
163.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 4902(b) and 4902(g)(1).
§ 470-303 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-304
470:38
ARTICLE IV
General Parking Regulations
§ 470-401. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual vehicle,
every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines bounding that space,
and it shall be a violation of this article for any person to park a vehicle or allow it to
remain parked otherwise.
§ 470-402. Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations. [Amended 4-4-1995
by Ord. No. 95-09; 6-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-04; 7-15-1996 by Ord. No. 96-05;
5-27-1997 by Ord. No. 97-09; 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 99-21; 1-18-2000 by Ord. No.
00-01; 5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 01-06]
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Location
Alberts Way From 331 Alberts Way to 351 Alberts Way
Alberts Way From 354 Alberts Way to 342 Alberts Way
Alberts Way North From 104 Alberts Way to Langhorne-
Newtown Road
Barnsbury Road West From Dawson Road north 355 feet
Beechwood Avenue East From West Maple Avenue to a point 1,000
feet south of West Maple Avenue
Bridgetown Pike Acceleration and deceleration lanes on
Bridgetown Pike at the Bridgetown Grant
Development
Carter Avenue Right From East Lincoln Highway to Rising Sun
Avenue
Cobalt Cross Road Right From Cobalt Ridge Drive to Woodbourne-
Emilie Road
Cobalt Ridge Drive
North
Right From Bristol-Oxford Valley Road to
Woodbourne-Emilie Road
Cobalt Ridge Drive
South
From Right Bristol-Oxford Valley Road to
Cobalt Cross Road
Deep Dale Drive East Right From Deep Dale Drive to Deep Dale Way
Durham Road Both Between Trenton Road and New Falls Road
East Ravine Avenue
[Added 3-16-2020 by
Ord. No. 20-02]
Northwest/
southeast
At the intersection of East Ravine Avenue
and Old Lincoln Road, beginning at the
painted stop bar at the entrance of East
Ravine Avenue and extending down East
Ravine Avenue for 102 feet
Flowers Mill Road
North
West Entire length
§ 470-401 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-402
470:39
Street Side Location
Flowers Mill Road
South
Both Between Maple Avenue and Lincoln
Highway
Forsythia Drive East West From Nursery Avenue to Forsythia Drive
South
Forsythia Drive South Right From Trenton Road to Bristol-Oxford Valley
Road
Golf Club Drive
[Amended 6-30-2014
by Ord. No. 14-04]
Both The two-way portion of Golf Club Drive
beginning at the intersection with West
Maple Avenue and extending north to the
point where Golf Club Drive becomes one
way
Highland Park Drive Right From Highland Park Place to Trenton Road
Highland Park Place Right From Highland Park Way to New Rodgers
Road
Highland Park Way Right From northeast intersection with East
Lincoln Highway to southwest intersection
with East Lincoln
Hoe Road West From Harmony Road to southern terminus
Langhorne-Yardley
Road
From Mallard Lane to Township Line Road
Langhorne-Yardley
Road
From Woodbourne Road to Mallard Lane
North Hawthorne
Avenue
Right From West Maple Avenue to Brownsville
Road
North Street Left From Myrtle Avenue east to dead end
Oak Ridge Drive West From Summit Trace Road to Raintree Court
Quincy Drive Both From New Falls Road to Queen Anne Road
Quincy Drive Right From Woodbourne-Emilie Road to New
Falls Road
Red Rose Drive Right From Forsythia Drive South to Frosty
Hollow Road
Rising Sun Avenue Right From Carter Avenue to East Lincoln
Highway
South Hawthorne
Avenue
Right From Brownsville Road to Old Lincoln
Highway
Tareyton Drive Right From Stratton Court to Oxford Court
§ 470-402 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-402
470:40
Street Side Location
Terrace Road [Added
9-3-2019 by Ord. No.
19-06]
North At the four corners comprising the
intersection of the two entrances to Pearl S.
Buck Elementary School and Terrace Road
for 15 feet along Terrace Road at 103
Terrace Road, 2 Top Road, 143 Terrace
Road, and across the street from 152 Terrace
Road
Twin Oaks Way North Between Woodbourne Road and Twin Oaks
Drive
West Gillam Avenue
[Added 2-3-2020 by
Ord. No. 20-01]
North From Old Lincoln Highway to a point 459.50
feet east along West Gillam Avenue
West Rising Sun
Avenue
Right From western terminus to West Lincoln
Highway
§ 470-403. Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations except for local
deliveries. [Amended 3-8-1994 by Ord. No. 94-04; 8-16-2000 by Ord. No. 00-10;
8-7-2001 by Ord. No. 01-08]
Except for the purpose of making a local delivery, parking shall be prohibited at all times
in the following locations:
Street Side Location
Big Oak Road Both From Woodbourne Road to Township Line
Road
Bridal Drive Both Unspecified
Brownsville Road Both Unspecified
Cabot Boulevard West Both From Falls Township line to end of cul-desac
Carter Avenue Both From West Lincoln Highway to Rising Sun
Avenue
Cobalt Drive North North From Crestwood Road to Cobalt Drive East
Deep Dale Way Both Unspecified
Durham Road East From Frosty Hollow Road to Trenton Road
East End Avenue Both From Frosty Hollow Road to southern
terminus
East Lincoln Highway Both Entire length
East Rising Sun Avenue Both From Carter Avenue east to terminus
Fairhill Avenue Both Entire length
Fairhill Avenue West From Old Lincoln Highway to Granite Road
Forsythia Crossing Both Entire length
Forsythia Way Both Entire length
§ 470-402 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-403
470:41
Street Side Location
Frosty Hollow Road Both From Durham Road to Bristol-Oxford Valley
Road
Hay Road Both From Harmony Road to southern terminus
Highland Avenue Both Entire length
Highland Avenue Both From U.S. Route 1 to Hulmeville Road
Highland Park Entrance Both Entire length
Jefferson Avenue Both From Woodland Avenue to 80 feet south of
Woodland Avenue
Lincoln Highway
(Business Route 1)
Both Entire length
Long Avenue Both Entire length
Lower Orchard Turn Both Entire length
Madison Avenue Both Entire length
New Rodgers Road Both Entire length
North Flowers Mill
Road
East From East Maple Avenue to a point 900 feet
away
Old Lincoln Highway Both From dead end to LR 281 spur
Old Lincoln Highway Both From Highland Avenue East to end of Old
Lincoln
Old Lincoln Highway Both From Woodbourne Road to Lincoln Highway
Oxford Valley Road Both From Falls Road to Lincoln Highway
Parkland Avenue Both From Avenue B to Avenue C
Periwinkle Avenue East Entire length
Pleasant Avenue Both Entire length
Spring Street East From Parker Street to Eastbrook Street
Trail Road Both Tax parcel No. 22-52-232 to No. 22-52-233
Trenton Road Both Entire length
Twin Oak Entry Both Entire length
Twin Oak Way Both Entire length
Wheeler Way Both From TR 213 north to end of cul-de-sac
Woodbourne Road Both From Falls Road to SR 6332
Woodland Avenue South From intersection at Washington Avenue to
exit at Durham Road
Wyoming Avenue Both From Creek Street to a point 420 feet from
Parkway Avenue
§ 470-404. Parking prohibited in certain locations certain days and hours.
[Amended 3-8-1994 by Ord. No. 94-04; 11-18-1997 by Ord. No. 97-20; 8-24-1999
§ 470-403 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-404
470:42
by Ord. No. 99-14; 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 99-17; 1-18-2000 by Ord. No. 00-01;
8-16-2000 by Ord. No. 00-10]
A. Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days and
between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
Street Side Hours/Days Location
Cobalt Drive South North 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
From Bristol-Oxford
Valley Road to Canal
Road
Deer Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Eagle Lane Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Entire length
East Ravine South Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Fairhill Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Forsythia Drive
South
North 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
From Forsythia
Crossing to Red Rose
Drive
Grand Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Granite Road Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Harmony Road Both 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
From Heartwood Road
to Hay Road
Heartwood Turn
[Added 9-19-2016
by Ord. No.
16-07]
Both 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Highland Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
From Old Lincoln
Highway to dead end
Orchard Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Entire length
§ 470-404 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-404
470:43
Street Side Hours/Days Location
Pheasant Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Poplar Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
From Avenue F to
Hulmeville Road
Quarry Road Both 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Queen Anne Road West 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
From Quincy Drive to
a point 200 feet
therefrom
Sunflower Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
From Avenue A to
Poplar Street
Terrace Road
[Added 9-3-2019
by Ord. No.
19-06]
South 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
From the right corner
of the intersection of
Towns Road and
Terrace Road until 15
feet after the crosswalk
across Terrace Road at
the entrance to Pearl S.
Buck Elementary
School
Trenton Road Both 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
From Elm Avenue to
Hulmeville Borough
Trenton Road North 6:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.
Sunday
From Forsythia Way to
Woodbourne-Emilie
Road
Turtle Lane Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Entire length
West Maple
Avenue
Both 6:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.
Sunday
From Langhorne
Borough to Flowers
Mill Road
B. Where parking has been prohibited between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.,
Mondays through Fridays on certain streets known as Fairhill Avenue, Grand
Avenue, Eagle Lane, East Ravine Street, Deer Drive, Pheasant Drive, Orchard
Avenue, Turtle Lane and Granite Road, residents are allowed a maximum of three
parking permits per household for vehicles registered at their address. Residents
must register each vehicle with the Middletown Township Police Department and a
numbered parking sticker will be issued. A sticker must be displayed on the back of
the inside rear-view mirror of the proper vehicle to which registration applies. The
§ 470-404 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-404
470:44
§ 470-405. Parking of trucks, buses and certain other vehicles prohibited in
certain locations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or to allow to remain parked, on any of the
following streets or parts of streets, any vehicle other than a passenger car (which shall
not include any bus, motor home or passenger car attached to a trailer of any kind): All
streets except those located in manufacturing zoning districts.
§ 470-406. Parking time limited in certain locations certain days and hours.
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer than the time
indicated, in any of the following locations, at any time on the days and between the
hours indicated:
Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 470-407. Special purpose parking zones established; parking otherwise
prohibited.
The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and it shall be unlawful
for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked in any such zone, except
as specifically provided for that zone:
Street Side Location or Vehicle Authorized Purpose
(Reserved)
§ 470-408. Standing or parking on roadway for loading or unloading.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other than a
pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb
of any street, except that standing or parking for the purpose of loading or unloading
persons or property shall be permitted on the following named streets on Monday
through Saturday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. and between the hours
of 1:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., and for no longer than necessary for the loading or unloading.
Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 470-409. Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited at all times. [Added
8-24-2020 by Ord. No. 20-05164]
Stopping, standing, or parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Chief of Police is hereby directed to issue parking permits only to residents of the
streets where permit parking is designated in this section and chapter. [Amended
12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
164.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 470-409 and 470-410 as §§ 470-410 and 470-411
§ 470-404 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-409
470:45
Street Side Location
Cabot Boulevard West Both From Falls Township line to end of cul-desac
§ 470-410. Enforcement. [Added 11-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-05]
A. In accordance with § 470-108 of this chapter of the Township's Code, any police
officer, together with any other duly designated parking enforcement officer of the
Township, is authorized and empowered to enforce the parking regulations set forth
in this article. Further, in addition to the foregoing, the Fire Marshal shall also be
empowered to enforce all parking regulations dealing with duly established fire
zones and fire lanes.
B. Any police officer or other duly designated parking enforcement officer of the
Township, as forth above, who observes a violation of this article shall issue a
parking violation notice, on a form as shall be approved by the Township from time
to time, and which notice shall contain the following information:
(1) The date and hour of the violation;
(2) The date and hour of the issuance of the parking violation notice;
(3) The location at which the vehicle is, or has been, parked, stopped or standing
in violation of any provision of this article;
(4) The license or registration number, and the state of issuance of the license or
registration, of the vehicle;
(5) The make and model of the vehicle;
(6) The section or sections of this article violated;
(7) The penalties associated with the violation or violations; and
(8) Any other facts that, in the opinion of the officer, may be useful for a thorough
description of the vehicle and/or the circumstances attending the violation.
C. The police officer or other duly designated parking enforcement officer shall place
on, or attach to, the subject vehicle the parking violation notice. The parking
violation notice shall further advise the owner and/or driver of the subject vehicle
that the failure to either report to the Township and pay the prescribed penalties
within five calendar days following the date of the notice, or to place the prescribed
penalties within the envelope provided with the parking violation notice and mail
the same to the Township within five calendar days following the date of the notice,
shall result in the issuance of one or more criminal citations, which shall be
forwarded to and filed with the appropriate Magisterial District Judge for the
assessment of penalties, fines and costs.
D. The failure by the owner and/or driver to pay the prescribed penalties to the
Township within five calendar days following the date of issuance of a parking
violation notice shall result in the institution of criminal proceedings against the
owner or owners of the subject vehicle by issuance of a citation, which shall be
§ 470-409 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-410
470:46
§ 470-411. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-05]
forwarded to and filed with the appropriate Magisterial District Judge.
A. Any person, including but not limited to a corporation, partnership or other legal
entity, who violates any provision of this article shall pay to the Township a penalty
of not more than $15 and costs for each such violation. Failure to pay all prescribed
penalties to the Township within five calendar days following the date of issuance
of a parking violation notice shall result in the institution of criminal proceedings
against the owner or owners of the subject vehicle by issuance of a citation, which
shall be forwarded to and filed with the appropriate Magisterial District Judge.
B. All penalties assessed by and paid to the Township for violations of this article shall
be paid to and collected by the Township Cashier and shall become general funds
of the Township.
C. Any person, including but not limited to a corporation, partnership or other legal
entity, who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction by the Court,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 for each and any such violation,
together with all costs as may be assessed by the Court and/or the commonwealth.
§ 470-410 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-411
470:47

ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice Emergency
§ 470-501. Parking prohibited during snowfall. [Amended 11-15-2010 by Ord. No.
10-05]
No person shall park, store or stand any motor vehicle on any street within the Township
during the period of time commencing one hour after snow begins to fall within the
Township and ending 12 hours after snow ceases to fall within the Township.
§ 470-502. Notice and declaration of snow and ice emergency. [Added 1-24-1995
by Ord. No. 95-01]
There shall be no requirement upon the Township to officially declare or announce "a
snow or ice emergency" as a condition precedent to the issuance of vehicle citations
to vehicles found in violation of § 470-501 of this article. The Township Manager is
authorized and directed to use reasonable efforts to publicize the adoption of this article
and its terms to the residents of the Township of Middletown at the appropriate time.
§ 470-503. Enforcement. [Amended 11-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-05]
A. In accordance with § 470-108 of this chapter of the Township's Code, any police
officer, together with the Director of Public Works, any Superintendant or Assistant
Superintendant within the Public Works/Highways Department, or any other duly
designated parking enforcement officer of the Township, is authorized and
empowered to enforce the parking regulations set forth in this article.
B. Any police officer or other duly designated parking enforcement officer of the
Township, as more specifically set forth and described above, who observes a
violation of this article shall issue a parking violation notice, on a form as shall be
approved by the Township from time to time, and which notice shall contain the
following information:
(1) The date and hour of the violation;
(2) The date and hour of the issuance of the parking violation notice;
(3) The location at which the vehicle is, or has been, parked, stored or left standing
in violation of this article;
(4) The license or registration number, and the state of issuance of the license or
registration, of the vehicle;
(5) The make and model of the vehicle;
(6) The section or sections of this article violated;
(7) The penalties associated with the violation or violations; and
(8) Any other facts that, in the opinion of the officer, may be useful for a thorough
description of the vehicle and/or the circumstances attending the violation.
C. The police officer or other duly designated parking enforcement officer shall place
§ 470-501 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-503
470:49
§ 470-504. Violations and penalties. [Added 1-24-1995 by Ord. No. 95-01;
amended 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. 99-20; 11-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-05]
on, or attach to, the subject vehicle the parking violation notice. The parking
violation notice shall further advise the owner and/or driver of the subject vehicle
that the failure to either report to the Township and pay the prescribed penalties
within five calendar days following the date of the notice, or to place the prescribed
penalties within the envelope provided with the parking violation notice and mail
the same to the Township within five calendar days following the date of the
notice, shall result in the issuance of one or more criminal citations, which shall
be forwarded to and filed with the appropriate Magisterial District Judge for the
assessment of penalties, fines and costs.
D. The failure by the owner and/or driver to pay the prescribed penalties to the
Township within five calendar days following the date of issuance of a parking
violation notice shall result in the institution of criminal proceedings against the
owner or owners of the subject vehicle by issuance of a citation, which shall be
forwarded to and filed with the appropriate Magisterial District Judge.
A. Any person, including but not limited to a corporation, partnership or other legal
entity, who violates any provision of this article shall pay to the Township a penalty
of not more than $15 and costs for each such violation. Failure to pay all prescribed
penalties to the Township within five calendar days following the date of issuance
of a parking violation notice shall result in the institution of criminal proceedings
against the owner or owners of the subject vehicle by issuance of a citation, which
shall be forwarded to and filed with the appropriate Magisterial District Judge.
B. All penalties assessed by and paid to the Township for violations of this article shall
be paid to and collected by the Township Cashier and shall become general funds
of the Township.
C. Any person, including but not limited to a corporation, partnership or other legal
entity, who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction by the Court,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $25 for each and any such violation,
together with all costs as may be assessed by the Court and/or the commonwealth.
§ 470-503 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-504
470:50
ARTICLE VI
Regulation of Pedalcycles and Nonmotorized Vehicles
§ 470-601. Riding and parking of pedalcycles on sidewalks along certain streets
prohibited.
§ 470-602. Skates, skateboards, coasters, sleds and other toy vehicles.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or to park a pedalcycle on the sidewalk
along the following portions of the streets in the Township of Middletown:
Street Side Location
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in roller-skating, skateboarding or to
ride upon or propel any coaster or other toy vehicle upon:
(1) Any street except in order to cross the roadway; or
(2) Any sidewalk located in a business district, except that nothing in this
paragraph shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a coaster or other toy
vehicle, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
§ 470-601 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-602
470:51

ARTICLE VII
Citizens Traffic Commission
[Added 2-5-2018 by Ord. No. 18-01]
§ 470-701. Establishment of Citizens Traffic Commission.
An advisory committee to be known as the "Middletown Township Citizens Traffic
Commission," is hereby created and shall continue to function until this article is
repealed.
§ 470-702. Membership.
The Citizens Traffic Commission shall be composed of five members. All of the
committee members shall be Township residents.
§ 470-703. Member appointment procedure.
Committee members shall be appointed in accordance with the following procedures:
§ 470-704. Compensation.
Citizens Traffic Commission members shall receive no compensation for their services,
but may be reimbursed for any actual and necessary expenses incurred by them in the
performance of their duties. Such expenses shall be preapproved at the discretion of the
Township Manager or Board of Supervisors.
§ 470-705. Advisory purpose.
The Citizens Traffic Commission is to be advisory to and shall coordinate its activities
with those parties and/or Township committees as the Board of Supervisors may from
time to time designate.
§ 470-706. Bylaws.
The Citizens Traffic Commission may adopt bylaws with the approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
A. All committee members shall be appointed by the Middletown Township Board of
Supervisors.
B. Committee members' terms of office shall expire on December 31 of the last year
of their term of office.
C. Duly appointed committee members shall serve a term of three years, except that
initial appointment shall be so staggered that the terms of one of the membership
shall expire after one year, two of the membership shall expire after two years and
the balance of the membership shall have the full term of three years.
D. Any vacancy on said Commission caused by reasons other than by expiration of the
term shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments and shall be for
the remaining unexpired term of the member.
§ 470-701 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 470-707
470:53
§ 470-707. Purpose, duties and responsibilities.
The purpose of the Citizens Traffic Commission is to investigate traffic concerns in
Middletown Township and make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors
regarding the appropriate course of action, if any, to reduce dangerous conditions,
promote safe driving, or other similar concerns. The Citizens Traffic Commission shall
have the following duties:
§ 470-708. Meetings.
The Citizens Traffic Commission shall meet on a regular basis at a time and place to
be determined by said Citizens Traffic Commission. Additional meetings shall occur
as determined by the Commission chair or the Board of Supervisors. Representatives
of the Township Manager, Township Police Department, Public Works, and Township
Traffic Engineer may attend the meetings of the Citizens Traffic Commission and
make recommendations to the Commission, but they will not be voting members of the
Commission.
§ 470-709. Record keeping and reporting.
The Citizens Traffic Commission shall keep written records of its meetings and activities
and shall periodically report and consult with the Board of Supervisors. The Commission
shall also make an annual report available to the Middletown Township Board of
Supervisors. All meetings shall be advertised in advance in accordance with
Pennsylvania law.
A. Develop and maintain a working knowledge of the Township's existing road, trail
and signage system.
B. Make recommendations with respect to the transportation needs of the Township.
C. Make recommendations that promote traffic enforcement and pedestrian safety in
the Township.
D. Make recommendations that address circulation and safety issues in the Township.
E. Make recommendations that improve bike and pedestrian links within the
Township and with neighboring municipalities.
F. Make recommendations on traffic calming methods.
G. Make recommendations on grant moneys that the Township can pursue to help
finance transportation improvements in the Township.
H. Advise the Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors on the traffic impacts
of development in the Township.
I. Seek input from the community on these duties.
§ 470-707 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 470-709
470:54
Chapter 474
VEHICLES, IMPOUNDMENT AND TOWING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 470.
§ 474-101. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
indicated hereinbelow. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present
tense shall include the future; words used in the singular shall include the plural; and
words used in the plural shall include the singular. The word "shall" is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
DISABLED OR WRECKED VEHICLE — An automobile, truck, truck tractor, trailer,
motorcycle, motor home, or other vehicle or device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, road or street, which is no
longer capable of safe operation on a highway, road or street and presents a safety hazard
to the public by virtue of its location on or adjacent to a public highway, road or street in
the Township of Middletown.
FLATBED WRECKER — A flatbed vehicle equipped with a roll body and winch
designed for and capable of lifting and transporting passenger and commercial vehicles.
HEAVY-DUTY WRECKER — A vehicle with a minimum twenty-five-ton capacity,
designed for and capable of lifting and transporting passenger and commercial vehicles.
LIGHT-DUTY WRECKER — A vehicle designed for and capable of lifting and
transporting passenger vehicles.
PERSON — Any individual person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Township of Middletown.
TOWER — A person engaged in the business or offering the services of a vehicle
wrecker, tow truck, car carrier or other vehicle, whereby disabled or wrecked vehicles
are towed or otherwise removed from the place where they are disabled or wrecked by
use of a vehicle so adapted to that purpose.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middletown.
§ 474-102. License required for towing.
No person shall offer his services to or be called by the Township or its Police
Department as a tower for the purpose of removal of disabled or wrecked vehicles unless
that person is the holder of a current towing license as hereinafter provided.
§ 474-103. Application for license. [Amended 12-23-1986 by Ord. No. 86-25;
§ 470-709 VEHICLES, IMPOUNDMENT AND TOWING OF § 474-103
474:1
2-17-1987 by Ord. No. 87-3; 5-12-1987 by Ord. No. 87-10; 5-12-1987 by Ord. No.
87-10; 7-21-1987 by Ord. No. 87-14; 9-15-1987 by Ord. No. 87-19; 11-24-1987 by
Ord. No. 87-22; 2-23-1988 by Ord. No. 88-4; 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
A. Applications for a towing license shall be made to the Township Manager upon a
form available from his office, which form shall require the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the business for which the towing
license is sought.
(2) The type of business organization under which the business is operated (i.e.,
sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, etc.).
(3) The name, home and business addresses and telephone numbers of all of the
owner(s) or, in the case of a corporation, stockholder(s) of the business for
which the towing license is sought.
(4) A list of the tow trucks, vehicle wreckers, car carriers or other vehicles
available for service to the Township, including a description of each vehicle
or piece of equipment (type, make, model, year, etc.), the name and address of
the owner of each vehicle or piece of equipment, and their location and hourly
availability.
(5) The address and description of the premises which any disabled or wrecked
vehicles will be towed to and/or stored upon, including the size of the area on
the premises available for storage of vehicles, the approximate number of
vehicles which may be stored in that area, whether said area is fenced, and a
description of any security precautions or protection methods for vehicles
stored in said area.
(6) A certificate of insurance or other proof acceptable to the Township that the
applicant has obtained the general liability and garagekeeper's liability
insurance required for the issuance of a towing license.
B. Applications for a towing license shall be made and signed by the owner(s) of the
business for which the license is sought or, in the case of a corporation, the
president of the corporation.
C. Applicants must execute an agreement to indemnify the Township for any and all
losses or expenses incurred by virtue of any acts performed in the course of service.
D. The application for a towing license shall be accompanied by an application fee in
the amount established from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
E. The application for a towing license shall be reviewed by the Township Manager
and the Township Police Department within 20 days of receipt of the application
and application fee, and the Township Manager shall promptly thereafter advise the
applicant of whether the license has been approved or disapproved.
F. Towing licenses shall be issued for a period of one year, commencing on March 1
and terminating on the last day of February of the following year. Any applicant
whose application for a license has been approved shall be issued a license effective
the following March 1.
§ 474-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 474-104
474:2
§ 474-104. Standards for issuance of towing license. [Amended 2-23-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-4; 11-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-31]
A towing license shall be issued to all applicants who meet all of the following
requirements:
§ 474-105. Issuance of license. [Added 2-23-1988 by Ord. No. 88-4; amended
12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13]
A. The following vehicles shall be owned by the applicant, garaged on the premises
from which applicant's towing business is conducted, and available on call for
service at the request of the Township or its Police Department:
(1) One heavy-duty wrecker, one light-duty wrecker, and two flatbed wreckers; or
(2) One heavy-duty wrecker, two light-duty wreckers, and one flatbed wrecker.
B. All of the aforesaid required vehicles shall bear a sign indicating the name and
telephone number of the applicant's towing business, and the applicant shall make
said vehicles available for verification by the Township.
C. All of the aforesaid required vehicles shall be maintained in a safe and usable
operating condition.
D. A fenced-in storage yard or other secure storage facility, open or closed, containing
not less than 10,000 square feet, shall be located on the premises from which the
applicant's towing business is conducted, and such yard or storage area shall be
authorized by the appropriate zoning, use and occupancy, and other Township
permits. The applicant shall permit inspection of the storage yard or facility by the
Township. The applicant shall install screening and comply with all the provisions
of the state and federal highway beautification acts. "Storage yard," as used in this
section, shall not include the area of any buildings or structures unless they are used
primarily for the storage of towed vehicles.
E. The applicant's place of business shall be located within the Township boundaries
in order that the response time to a call for service is timely.
F. All applicants shall maintain the following insurance and present proof thereof to
the Township upon request:
(1) General public liability insurance in the minimum amount of $1,000,000; and
(2) Garagekeeper's legal liability insurance in the minimum amount of $50,000.
G. Each applicant shall operate his towing business from a single and separate
location. It is specifically provided that no more than one towing license may be
issued for any single location.
A. A towing license shall be issued to each applicant whose application has been
approved by the Township Manager upon payment to the Township of a license
fee, as established from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
B. The towing license shall be prominently displayed on the premises where the
applicant's towing business is conducted.
§ 474-104 VEHICLES, IMPOUNDMENT AND TOWING OF § 474-105
474:3
§ 474-106. License status.
A towing license is issued by the Township on the condition of and with the express
agreement of the licensee that the licensee shall, at all times, act as independent
contractor to and not as an employee of the Township or its Police Department and that
payment for services rendered pursuant to said license shall be by the owner, operator or
custodian of the disabled or wrecked vehicle.
§ 474-107. Duties of licensees. [Amended 7-23-1988 by Ord. No. 88-4]
§ 474-108. Suspension and revocation of license. [Amended 7-23-1988 by Ord. No.
88-4]
C. Along with the issuance of a towing license, a vehicle sticker shall be issued for
each vehicle listed on the application, which sticker shall be prominently displayed
on the right front door of each such vehicle.
D. A towing license shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of its
issuance.
A. All licensees shall keep and maintain all of the vehicles listed on their application
in a safe and operable condition and in a condition which shall pass the motor
vehicle inspection standards of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and shall have
said vehicles immediately available to answer calls for service by the Police
Department during the duty tow shift assigned to the licensee. All licensees shall
not use or employ a vehicle which does not have the required towing license vehicle
sticker displayed as set forth hereinabove to answer calls by the Township or its
Police Department.
B. All licensees shall respond within 15 minutes from their receipt of the Police
Department's call requesting service to the arrival of the licensee's appropriate
towing vehicle at the location of the disabled or wrecked vehicle, except in bad
weather or adverse road conditions.
C. If any licensee shall make arrangements with another licensee to respond to the call,
he shall so advise the Police Dispatcher. If a licensee's vehicle is delayed while in
transit to the requested location, the vehicle operator shall advise the Police
Dispatcher of the delay and of his present location, whereupon a determination shall
be made by the appropriate police official as to whether another licensee shall be
called.
D. All licensees shall comply with all rules and regulations established by the Police
Department with regard to use of the duty tow.
A. The Township reserves the right to suspend the license of an operator at any time if
an inspection by a Township police officer or a Township official determines that
the required equipment is missing or inoperable or unsafe. Any such suspension of
any operator's license shall continue, without rebate of either the application fee or
license fee, until such time as the Township Manager or his designee determines
the applicant is in full compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter.
(1) The operator agrees to execute a hold harmless agreement for any and all
§ 474-105 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 474-108
474:4
§ 474-109. Township police duty tow.
§ 474-110. Informal arbitration. [Added 11-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-31; amended
12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
Any fee dispute under this chapter arising between licensed towers and members of the
general public shall be submitted to a panel of five arbitrators for informal arbitration.
claims, actions or causes of actions arising from suspension of license for the
reasons set forth in Subsection A above at the time of initial application for a
towing license.
(2) The Township shall give the operator warning or notice that the operator is in
violation of the provisions and terms of this chapter prior to any formal action
to suspend the license. The Township shall permit the operator to correct
deficiencies within the time frames as follow:
(a) In the case of a nonsafety violation, the operator shall have 10 days in
which to correct deficiencies.
(b) In the case of safety-related violations, the operator shall have 48 hours
in which to correct deficiencies.
B. A towing license shall be revoked upon a finding by the Township Manager of any
of the following grounds:
(1) The license was procured by fraudulent conduct or false statement or omission
of a material fact and, in this event, the license shall be null and void as if an
application had never been filed.
(2) The licensee failed to perform or violated any of the duties of a licensee set
forth hereinabove.
(3) The licensee no longer meets all the standards for issuance of a towing license.
(4) The licensee's application is found to be defective in any way or contains
misinformation or omissions of fact and, in this event, the license shall be null
and void as if an application had never been filed.
(5) The licensee failed to correct safety-related or nonsafety-related deficiencies
within the allotted time as provided by Subsection A(2)(a) and (b).
A. All disabled or wrecked vehicles shall be removed from the roadway immediately
following an accident, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
B. If the owner or operator cannot remove the disabled or wrecked vehicle or refuses
or fails to have the vehicle removed within a reasonable time, a Township police
officer shall call the towing licensee assigned to the police duty tow to effect such
removal.
C. The Police Department shall establish rules and regulations for the establishment of
a police duty tow, the rotation of assignment of towing licensees to the duty tow,
and the use of the duty tow by the Township police officers.
§ 474-108 VEHICLES, IMPOUNDMENT AND TOWING OF § 474-110
474:5
The panel shall consist of the Chief of Police, the Director of Community Services, one
representative of the business community not affiliated with the towing industry, one
resident of the community, and one duty tower. The representative from the business
community and the representative resident from the community shall serve for a term of
one year and shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors at its annual reorganization
meeting. The representative from the duty towers shall be nominated by the licensed
duty towers, shall serve for a term of one year, and shall be appointed by the Board
of Supervisors at its annual reorganization meeting. It shall be the responsibility of
the licensed duty towers to communicate in writing their nominee to the Board of
Supervisors each year by January 1. If a licensed tower or a member of the general
public desires arbitration under this provision, he/she shall make a request for informal
arbitration within 10 days of the date of dispute, and the informal arbitration must be
completed and a decision rendered within a reasonable amount of time. Notwithstanding
the provisions of this section, any party has the right to take any dispute directly to a
court of competent jurisdiction before or after informal arbitration as provided herein.
§ 474-111. Greater restriction governs. [Amended 11-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-31]
Whenever the requirements of this chapter are in conflict with other requirements of the
ordinances of the Township of Middletown, the most restrictive or those imposing the
higher standards shall govern.
§ 474-110 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 474-111
474:6
Chapter 481
WARRANTLESS ARRESTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 81.
Curfew — See Ch. 200.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 208.
§ 481-101. Statutorily permitted warrantless arrest.
In addition to any other statutorily permitted warrantless arrest, officers of the
Middletown Township Police Department shall, upon view, have the right to arrest
without warrant upon probable cause when there is ongoing conduct that imperils the
personal security of any person or endangers public or private property, for the following
offenses:
§ 481-102. Procedure following arrest without warrant.
A. Disorderly conduct, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5503.
B. Public drunkenness, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5505.
C. Obstructing highways, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5507.
D. Underage drinking, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6308.
A. When a defendant has been arrested without a warrant, the defendant shall be either
released from custody pursuant to Subsection B of this section or taken before the
proper issuing authority under Subsection C of this section.
B. When a defendant has been arrested without a warrant, the arresting officer may,
when the officer deems it appropriate, promptly release the defendant from custody
when the following conditions have been met:
(1) The defendant is a resident of the commonwealth.
(2) The defendant poses no threat of immediate physical harm to any other person
or to himself or herself.
(3) The arresting officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the defendant will
appear as required.
(4) The defendant does not demand to be taken before an issuing authority. A
citation shall be issued to the defendant at the time of release, and thereafter
the case shall proceed in accordance with Rules 55 to 59 as if the proceedings
had been instituted by issuing a citation to the defendant.
C. When the defendant has not been released from custody under § 481-102B, the
defendant shall be taken without unnecessary delay before the issuing authority,
§ 474-111 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 481-102
481:1
§ 481-103. Juvenile defendants.
In the case of juvenile defendants:
where a citation shall be filed against the defendant. The defendant shall be given
an immediate trial unless:
(1) The commonwealth is not ready to proceed or the defendant requests a
postponement, and in either event, the defendant shall be given the opportunity
to deposit collateral for appearance on the new date and hour fixed for trial.
(2) The defendant's criminal record must be ascertained before trial as specifically
required by statute for purposes of grading the offense charged, in which event
the defendant shall be given the opportunity to deposit collateral for
appearance on the new date and hour fixed for trial, which shall be after the
issuing authority's receipt of the required information.
A. Timely attempt shall be made to contact a parent, guardian or other responsible
adult who shall have an interest in such juvenile.
B. The juvenile shall be promptly released to a parent, guardian or other responsible
adult after completion of processing and the issuance of a citation.
C. If after a period of six hours a parent, guardian or other responsible adult cannot be
contacted, or such shall refuse to accept custody, the officer shall contact the Bucks
County Department of Children and Youth or the Juvenile Probation Department to
arrange shelter for such juvenile.
§ 481-102 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 481-103
481:2
Chapter 500
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Advisory Council — See Ch. 38.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 76.
Adult businesses — See Ch. 120.
Construction standards — See Ch. 190.
Firesafety inspections — See Ch. 249.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 312.
Municipal claims and attorneys' fees — See Ch. 316.
Noise — See Ch. 320.
Storage facilities and units — See Ch. 425.
Stormwater management — See Chs. 430 and 431.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 440.
Telecommunications — See Ch. 453.
Shade trees — See Ch. 462.
§ 481-103 ZONING § 481-103
500:1

ARTICLE I
Purpose; Interpretation; Short Title; Statement of Community Goals and
Objectives
§ 500-101. Purpose. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-15]
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
§ 500-102. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be
the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater
restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of
this chapter shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or
regulation impose greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such statute,
other ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
A. To promote, protect and facilitate the public health, safety, morals, general welfare,
coordinated and practical community development, proper density of population,
emergency management preparedness and operations, airports and national defense
facilities, the provisions of adequate light and air, access to incident solar energy,
police protection, vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water, sewage,
schools, recreational facilities and public grounds, the provision of a safe, reliable
and adequate water supply for domestic, commercial, agricultural and industrial
uses, and other public requirements, as well as preservation of the natural, scenic
and historic values in the environment and preservation of forests, wetlands,
aquifers, floodplains and other natural resources.
B. To prevent overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in travel and
transportation, loss of health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other
dangers.
C. To provide for the use of land within the Township for residential housing of
various dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of housing, including singlefamily
and two-family dwellings, and a reasonable range of multifamily dwellings
in various arrangements, mobile homes and mobile home parks; provided, however,
that a zoning ordinance shall not be deemed invalid for the failure to provide for
any other specific dwelling type.
D. To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including population and
employment growth, and opportunities for development of a variety of residential
dwelling types and nonresidential uses.
E. To minimize danger to public health and safety and damage to property by
providing for management of stormwater runoff in a manner consistent with the
stormwater management regulations contained in the Middletown Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter 440) and the Neshaminy
Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan.165
165.Editor's Note: See Ch. 431, Stormwater Management for Neshaminy Creek Watershed, of this Code.
§ 500-101 ZONING § 500-103
500:3
§ 500-103. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Middletown Township Zoning
Ordinance."
§ 500-104. Statement of community goals and objectives.
The following statement of community goals and objectives is designed to guide growth
and development in Middletown Township. This statement shall serve as an adjunct
to the Middletown Township Comprehensive Plan, the East Middletown Development
Guide, the North Middletown Study, and the West Middletown Study. This statement
is in compliance with the requirements of § 606 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (Act 247, as amended by Act 170).166
A. Growth. Growth is a primary concern in planning for the future of Middletown
Township. The Township is an attractive locale for both residential and
nonresidential development, and this trend can be expected to continue in the
future. Many facets of the community are affected by growth, either directly or
indirectly. These include the natural and man-made environment, the transportation
network, and community services and facilities. These impacts can be positive and
negative. Thus, zoning should allow growth to occur but should control those
aspects of growth which are undesirable.
(1) Goal. To manage growth in Middletown Township so that both individual
landowners' rights and the interests of the community as a whole are protected.
(2) Objectives.
(a) To promote a land use pattern that protects those historical, cultural and
natural features which are important to the character of the Township
while still allowing opportunities for growth.
(b) To direct more intensive development to those areas of the Township
which are most appropriate for growth and which can best accommodate
it.
(c) To limit the impact of new development on existing development through
appropriate land use standards such as buffer yards and setback
requirements.
(d) To develop regulations so that the individual landowner can choose a
variety of alternative methods of using his land.
B. Environmental protection. The environment is a common or public good. Article
I-27 of the Pennsylvania Constitution guarantees all citizens the right to public
natural resources in the state. The Constitution provides for the state to protect these
resources for present and future generations. Furthermore, § 604 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code states that one of the purposes of
zoning is to preserve the natural, scenic and historic values in the environment.
Thus, Middletown Township can justify environmental protection regulations on
166.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 500-103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-104
500:4
the basis of the State Constitution and various implementing statutes.
(1) Goal. To protect the people's right to clean air, pure water, and the other
natural and historic resources of our environment and to guarantee a quality
environment for present and future populations.
(2) Objectives.
(a) To preserve the unique qualities and natural resources of the Township
by incorporating environmental protection standards and other
appropriate land use standards into this chapter.
(b) To evaluate the environmental impacts of changes in zoning and
proposed developments, making every effort to minimize adverse
environmental impacts through sound planning and design.
C. Balanced community.
(1) Land should be allocated for all reasonable types of uses to satisfy community
needs and to provide a wide range of opportunities for Township residents.
Commercial uses provide convenient goods and services while industrial uses
provide employment opportunities. Both of these uses expand the tax base,
alleviating some of the tax burden on Township residents. A wide range of
housing types presents opportunities for people of all socioeconomic
backgrounds and offers housing options for Township residents. Thus, the
allocation of land for all reasonable uses will create numerous and expanded
opportunities for Township residents.
(2) Proper land use planning creates the opportunity for a balance between the
Township's existing land uses and the demands of anticipated growth. This
balance is provided by allocating the land in the Township for specific types
and intensities of land use.
(a) Goal. To provide for a balanced community containing all reasonable
types of land uses including residential, commercial, industrial,
agricultural, recreational and institutional.
(b) Objectives.
[1] To ensure that this chapter permits a variety of land uses in
appropriate locations in the Township.
[2] To ensure that this chapter permits a range of housing types at
varying densities so that all socioeconomic groups have access to the
community.
[3] To analyze all planning and zoning proposals to ensure that new
growth and development enhance the balance of land uses in the
Township.
§ 500-104 ZONING § 500-104
500:5

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 500-201. Word usage.
§ 500-202. Specific terms. [Amended 3-23-1999 by Ord. No. 99-03; 3-23-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-04; 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY —
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in
A. Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following words and phrases shall
have, for the purposes of this chapter, the meanings given in the following clauses.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, words and terms used herein shall be interpreted as
follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future.
(2) The singular includes the plural.
(3) The word "person" includes an individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
company, association or government entity, including a trustee, a receiver, an
assignee or a similar representative.
(4) The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
(5) The term "shall" is mandatory.
(6) The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be
construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be
occupied."
(7) The word "Supervisors" and the words "Board of Supervisors" always mean
the Middletown Township Board of Supervisors.
(8) The word "Commission" and the words "Planning Commission" always mean
the Middletown Township Planning Commission.
(9) The words "Zoning Hearing Board" always mean the Middletown Township
Zoning Hearing Board.
(10) The words "Zoning Officer" always mean the Middletown Township Zoning
Officer.
(11) The word "Township" always means Middletown Township.
C. Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of standard
usage.
A. ACCESSORY BUILDING — See "building, accessory."
B. ACCESSORY USE — See "use, accessory."
§ 500-201 ZONING § 500-202
500:7
the structural parts, or an enlargement or diminution, whether by extending on a side or
by increasing in height, or the moving from one location or position to another.
AREA —
ASSEMBLY — Fitting together and/or attaching by any means, including, but not
limited to, brazing, welding, bonding, riveting, bolting and screwing.
AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant to the Act of May 2,
1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945."167
BASEMENT — A space having 1/2 or more of its floor-to-ceiling height above the
average level of the adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling height of not less
than 6 1/2 feet. A basement shall be counted as a story for the purposes of height
measurement or the determination of square footage or floor area.
BOARD — Any body granted jurisdiction under this chapter or under the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code168 (Act 247, as amended by Act 170) to render final
adjudications.
BODY PIERCING — The process of breaching the skin or mucous membrane for the
purpose of insertion of any object, including, but not limited to, jewelry for cosmetic
purposes.
BUILDING — A structure having a roof which is used or intended to be used for the
shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property. The word "building" shall include
any part thereof.
BUILDING COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot area covered by buildings.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance of a building or structure measured from
the mean level of the ground abutting the building or structure to the highest point of the
roof or the structure.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line parallel to the street line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the minimum front yard required for the district in which
the lot is located.
BUILDING SPACING — The minimum distance between buildings. The minimum
building spacing shall be measured from the outermost wall or projection, excluding bay
A. LOT AREA — See "lot area."
B. FLOOR AREA — See "floor area."
C. SITE AREA — See "site area."
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A subordinate building located on the same lot
as a principal building and clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal
building. Any portion of a principal building devoted or intended to be devoted to
an accessory use is not an accessory building.
A.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL—A building in which is conducted, or is intended to be
conducted, the principal use of the lot on which it is located.
B.
167.Editor's Note: See now the Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
168.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 500-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-202
500:8
windows, chimneys, flues, columns, ornamental features, cornices and gutters. These
exceptions may encroach no more than two feet.
CELLAR—A cellar is a space with less than 1/2 of its floor-to-ceiling height above the
average finished grade of the adjoining ground or with a floor-to-ceiling height of less
than 6 1/2 feet. A cellar is not counted as a story for the purposes of height measurement
or the determination of square footage or floor area unless the cellar is used for dwelling,
office or business purposes.
CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — A facility consisting of the
equipment and structures involved in receiving telecommunications or radio signals
from a mobile radio communications source and transmitting those signals to a central
switching computer which connects the mobile unit with the land-based telephone lines.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district pursuant to the
provisions of § 500-3109.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate
ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by
the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless the undivided
interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners. A condominium is a unit
with all of the following characteristics:
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted jurisdiction under
this chapter or the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as amended by
Act 170) to do so, either by reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of
appeals from determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the Court of Common
Pleas of the county and judicial district wherein the municipality lies.
DENSITY — Density is a measure of the number of dwelling units per unit of area. It
shall be expressed in dwelling units per acre. The measure is arrived at by dividing the
number of dwelling units by the base site area.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH — The Department of Health of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.[Added 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-03]
TOWER — A structure intended to support equipment used to transmit and/
or receive telecommunications signals. Examples of such structures include
monopoles and lattice construction steel structures.
A.
ANTENNA — A device used to collect or transmit telecommunications or radio
signals. Examples are panels and single poles known as whip antennas.
B.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING—The structure in which
the electronic receiving and relay equipment for a cellular telecommunications
facility is housed.
C.
The unit may be any permitted land use. A condominium is an ownership
arrangement, not a land use.
A.
All or a portion of the exterior open space and any community interior spaces
are owned and maintained in accordance with the Pennsylvania Uniform
Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq., and in accordance with the
provisions for open space, roads or other development features in this chapter and
Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development.
B.
§ 500-202 ZONING § 500-202
500:9
DETERMINATION —
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a building and
forming a single, habitable unit with facilities used or intended to be used for living,
sleeping, cooking and eating by one family. See "family."
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to
another for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity.
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION — An assemblage of equipment for purposes other than
generation or utilization, through which electric energy in bulk is passed for the purpose
of switching or modifying its characteristics to meet the needs of the general public.
EMPLOYEE — A person who is employed or is engaged in gainful activity. For the
purposes of this chapter, the term shall refer to the maximum number of employees on
duty at any time at a place of business, whether the employees are full- or part-time. If
shifts are involved in which two shifts overlap, it refers to the total of both shifts.
EXPLOSIVE — Any chemical compound or other substance intended for the purpose
of producing an explosion or which contains oxidizing or combustible units or other
ingredients in such proportions or quantities that ignition by fire, by friction, by
concussion, by percussion, by induction or by detonation may produce an explosion
capable of causing injury to persons or damage to property.
FAMILY — One person or two or more persons related by blood, foster relationship,
marriage or adoption, and in addition, any domestic servants or gratuitous guests thereof,
or a group of not more than five persons who need not be so related, and in addition,
domestic servants or gratuitous guests thereof, who are living together in a single,
nonprofit and nontransient dwelling unit and maintaining a common household with
single cooking facilities. A roomer, boarder, lodger, or other transient person shall not
be considered a member of the family.[Amended 6-6-2016 by Ord. No. 16-01]
FARM BUILDING — Any building used for storing agricultural equipment or farm
produce, housing livestock or poultry, or processing dairy products. The term "farm
building" shall not include dwellings.
FELLING — The act of cutting a standing tree so that it falls to the ground.
FENCE — A barrier or partition having any combination of posts, wire, lumber, stone,
brick or similar materials in which the principal dimensions are height and length and
which does not support and is not attached to a ceiling or roof.
FISCAL IMPACT ANALYSIS — A projection of the direct, current, public costs and
Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with the administration of this
chapter or applications hereunder, except the following:
(1) The Board of Supervisors.
(2) The Zoning Hearing Board.
A.
Determinations shall be appealable only to the Board designated as having
jurisdiction for such appeal.
B.
§ 500-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-202
500:10
revenues associated with residential or nonresidential growth to the local jurisdictions in
which the development is proposed.
FLOODPLAIN — Areas adjoining streams, ponds or lakes subject to the one-hundredyear
recurrence-interval flood. The areas considered floodplain within Middletown
Township shall include those areas identified as being subject to the one-hundred-year
flood in the Flood Insurance Study for Middletown Township prepared by the Federal
Insurance Administration, dated June 1979, and the accompanying Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map, dated December 4, 1979.
FLOODPLAIN SOILS — Areas subject to periodic flooding and listed in the Soil
Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties, Pennsylvania, United States Department
of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, July 1975, as being "on the
floodplain" or subject to "flooding." The following soil types are floodplain soils:
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the areas of the several floors of the building or
structure, including areas used for human occupancy or required for the conduct of the
business or use, and basements, attics and penthouses, as measured from the exterior
faces of the walls. It does not include cellars, unenclosed porches, attics not used
for human occupancy, nor any floor space in an accessory building nor in the main
building intended or designed for the parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the
parking requirements of this chapter, nor any such floor space intended and designed for
accessory heating and ventilating equipment.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The ratio of the floor area to the lot area, as determined by
dividing the floor area by the lot area.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when practiced in
accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing, cultivating,
harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial purposes, which does not
FLOODWAY — That portion of the floodplain including the watercourse channel
and adjacent land areas which must be reserved to carry the one-hundred-year
recurrence-interval flood without cumulatively increasing that flood elevation more
than one foot.
A.
B. FLOOD-FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain which is outside the floodway.
APPROXIMATE ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOODPLAIN — That portion of the
floodplain for which no detailed flood profiles or one-hundred-year flood elevations
have been provided.
C.
A. Alluvial land (Ae).
B. Alton gravelly loam, flooded (A1A).
C. Bowmansville silt loam (Bo).
D. Hatboro silt loam (Ha).
E. Marsh (Mh).
F. Pope loam (PoA).
G. Rowland silt loam (Ro).
§ 500-202 ZONING § 500-202
500:11
involve any land development. Clear cutting or selective cutting of forestlands for a land
use change are excluded from this definition.
GARAGE—A structure which is accessory to a dwelling unit and which is used for the
parking and storage of vehicles owned and operated by the residents thereof, and which
is not a separate commercial enterprise available to the general public. See § 500-2402
for applicable regulations.[Amended 9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 14-05]
HEARING — An administrative proceeding conducted by a board pursuant to
§ 500-3111.
HOME OCCUPATION — An activity for gain customarily carried on in a dwelling, or
in a building or structure accessory to a dwelling, clearly incidental and secondary to the
use of the dwelling for residential purposes.
HYDRIC SOILS — A soil that is saturated, flooded or ponded long enough during the
growing season to develop anaerobic conditions that favor the growth and regeneration
of wetlands vegetation. Wetlands vegetation are those plant species that have adapted to
the saturated soils and periodic inundations occurring in wetlands. The following soils,
classified in the Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties, Pennsylvania, United
States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, July 1975,
are hydric soils:
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Impervious surfaces are those surfaces which do not
absorb rain. All buildings, paving areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, swimming pools,
and any areas in concrete and asphalt, including porous asphalt paving, shall be
considered impervious surfaces within this definition. In addition, paved areas and other
areas determined by the Township Engineer to be impervious within the meaning of this
definition will also be classed as impervious surfaces.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO — The impervious surface ratio is a measure of
the intensity of use of a piece of land. It is measured by dividing the total area of all
impervious surfaces within the site by the base site area.
LAKES AND PONDS — Natural or artificial bodies of water which retain water year
round. Artificial ponds may be created by dams or result from excavation. Lakes are
bodies of water two or more acres in extent. Ponds are bodies of water less than two
acres in extent.
LAND AND POND SHORELINES — The landside edges of lakes and ponds from
established shoreline to an upland boundary. Lake and pond shorelines shall be measured
100 feet from the spillway crest elevation.
LANDING — A place where logs, pulpwood or firewood are assembled for
A. Bowmansville silt loam (Bo)
B. Fallsington silt loam (Fa)
C. Towhee silt loam (ToA, ToB)
D. Towhee extremely stony silt loam (TwA, TwB)
E. Doylestown silt loam (DoA)
F. Hatboro silt loam (Ha)
§ 500-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-202
500:12
transportation to processing facilities.
LANDOWNER — An individual, partnership, company, firm, association or
corporation that is in actual control of forestland, whether such control is based on legal
or equitable title or on any other interest entitling the holder to sell or otherwise dispose
of any or all of the timber on such land in any manner, and any agents thereof acting on
their behalf, such as forestry consultants, who set up and administer timber harvesting.
LITTER — Discarded items not naturally occurring on the site, such as tires, oil cans,
equipment parts and other rubbish.
LOP — To cut tops and slash into smaller pieces to allow the material to settle close to
the ground.
LOT—A parcel of land, used or set aside and available for use as the site of one or more
buildings and any buildings accessory thereto or for any other purpose, in one ownership
and not divided by a street, nor including any land within the limits of a public or private
street right-of-way upon which said lot abuts, even if fee to such right-of-way is in the
owner of the lot. A "lot" for the purpose of this chapter may or may not coincide with a
lot of record.
LOT LINE — Any boundary line of a lot.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of the individual
parcels of land shown on a subdivision plan, excluding any area within an existing
or designated future street right-of-way or any area required as open space under
this chapter and including the area of any easements.
A.
CORNER LOT — A lot which has an interior angle of less than 135° at the
intersection of two street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be
considered a corner lot if the tangent to the curve at the points beginning within the
lot or at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the street lines intersect
at an angle of less than 135°.
B.
THROUGH LOT — An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets.
C.
LOT DEPTH — The mean distance from the street line of the lot to its opposite
rear line, measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot.
D.
LOT WIDTH — The distance measured between the side lot lines at the minimum
building setback line, as defined in the definition of "building setback line." In a
case where there is only one side lot line, lot width shall be measured between such
side lot line and the opposite rear lot line or street line.
E.
F. VACANT LOT — A lot on which no permanent building is erected.
LOT LINE, REAR (b) — Any lot line which is parallel to or within 45° of being
parallel to a street line, except for a lot line that is itself a street line. In the case
of a corner lot, the lot line opposite the street line which the front of the principal
building faces shall be considered the rear lot line. In the case of a lot having no
street frontage or a lot of an odd shape, only the one lot line furthest from any street
shall be considered a rear lot line. In the case of a triangular lot, a line 10 feet in
length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the street
A.
§ 500-202 ZONING § 500-202
500:13
MEDIATION —A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a dispute mutually
select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and settling their differences,
culminating in a written agreement which the parties themselves create and consider
acceptable.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ACT — Act 16 of 2016 of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.[Added 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-03]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY — A person, including a natural person,
individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, trust, governmental
entity or any other entity, or any combination thereof, and including a trustee, receiver,
assignee and/or other similar representative of the same, that is registered by the
Department of Health under the Medical Marijuana Act to dispense medical marijuana.
The term does not include a "health care medical marijuana organization" as defined in
Chapter 19 of the Medical Marijuana Act.169[Added 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-03]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA GROWER/PROCESSOR — A person, including a natural
person, individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, trust,
governmental entity or any other entity, or any combination thereof, and including
a trustee, receiver, assignee and/or other similar representative of the same, that is
registered by the Department of Health under the Medical Marijuana Act to grow and/or
process medical marijuana. The term does not include a "health care medical marijuana
organization" as defined in Chapter 19 of the Medical Marijuana Act.170[Added
1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-03]
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent
occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two units designed to be joined into one
integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at
a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking
and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
line, shall be considered a rear lot line.
B. LOT LINE, SIDE (c) — Any lot line which is not a street line or a rear lot line.
C. STREET LINE (d) — See "street line."
SAMPLE LOT CONFIGURATIONS — Letters (in illustration below) correspond
to lot line definitions above.
D.
169.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.1901.
170.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.1901.
§ 500-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-202
500:14
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the
necessary utility connections and other appurtenances (accessory attachments) necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PAD — That part of a mobile home lot which has been reserved for
the placement of the mobile home, appurtenant structures or additions.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so
designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home lots for the placement
thereon of mobile homes.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Engineer for Middletown
Township.
NONCONFORMING LOT—A lot the area or dimensions of which was lawful prior to
the adoption or amendment of this chapter but which fails to conform to the requirements
of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure which does
not comply with the applicable area, dimensional, parking, buffer, environmental or
other provisions of this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where
such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment
or prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason
of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to,
nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure, which does not
comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter or amendment heretofore
or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment
of such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance or
amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
OPEN SPACE — Open space is land which shall be kept open in perpetuity and shall
be restricted from future development. Open space shall be permanent and inviolate.
To qualify as open space, such land shall be used only for open space uses: recreation,
amenity, buffer or resource protection. Open space shall not include land occupied by
nonrecreational buildings or structures, roads or road rights-of-way, easements, paving
lots, land reserved for future parking lots, stormwater detention basins or retention
basins, or the yards or lots of dwelling units.
OPEN SPACE RATIO—The open space ratio is a measure of the intensity of land use.
It is arrived at by dividing the total amount of open space within the site by the base site
area.
OPERATOR — An individual, partnership, company, firm, association or corporation
engaged in timber harvesting, including the agents, subcontractors and employees
thereof.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD SUBDIVISION — A development or subdivision that
permits a variety of housing types subject to a series of performance standards. The
performance standard subdivision requires the provision of open space and limits density
and impervious surfaces.
§ 500-202 ZONING § 500-202
500:15
PRECOMMERCIAL TIMBER STAND IMPROVEMENT — A forest practice, such
as thinning or pruning, which results in better growth, structure, species composition or
health for the residual stand but which does not yield a net income to the landowner,
usually because any trees cut are of poor quality, too small or otherwise of limited
marketability or value.
PERSONAL SERVICE ARTIST/OPERATOR—One who engages in body piercing or
tattooing.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any premises where a personal service
artist/operator does body piercing or tattooing.
PRINCIPAL —
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the Board
of Supervisors or Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain public comment,
prior to taking action in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code
(Act 247, as amended by Act 170).
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July 3, 1986
(P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."171
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive weeks in
a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice shall state the time
and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the
hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication
shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing made
by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a solicitor to any other body,
board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the recipient of such report
in the rendering of any decision or determination. All reports shall be deemed
recommendations and advisory only and shall not be binding upon their recipient, board,
officer, body or agency, nor shall any appeal be therefrom. Any report used, received or
considered by the body, board, officer or agency rendering a determination or decision
shall be made available for inspection to the applicant and all other parties to any
proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided at cost of production.
RETAIL STORE — Any shop or store selling commodities and goods to the ultimate
consumer, including, but not limited to, the following: food stores, drugstores, variety
stores, clothing or dry goods stores, stationery or bookstores, and any other facility
dedicated to providing commodities and goods as provided hereunder.[Added
7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; amended 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05; 12-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-06]
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land set aside for use as a street, alley or other means of travel.
A. PRINCIPAL BUILDING — See "building, principal."
B. PRINCIPAL USE — See "use, principal."
EXISTING RIGHT-OF-WAY — The legal right-of-way as established by the
commonwealth or other appropriate governing authority and currently in existence.
A.
171.Editor's Note: See now the Sunshine Act, 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 500-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-202
500:16
SEWER —
SIGN — See § 500-2803.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING—A single detached dwelling unit on an
individual lot with private yards on all sides of the house.
SITE — The site shall be defined as a parcel or parcels of land intended to have one or
more buildings or intended to be subdivided into one or more lots.
SITE AREA — All land area within the site as defined in the deed. This area shall be
determined from an actual site used rather than from a deed description.
SITE AREA, BASE—The area of the site remaining after subtracting land which is not
contiguous, land previously subdivided, and road and utility rights-of-way from the site
area.
SITE AREA, BUILDABLE — The buildable site area is the area of the site which may
be altered, disturbed or regraded for development purposes. The buildable site area could
contain buildings, roads, parking areas, sewage systems and stormwater management
facilities. The buildable site area would not contain required open space, recreation areas
and natural resource protection areas.
SKIDDING — Dragging trees on the ground from the stump to the landing by any
means.
SLASH — Woody debris left in the woods after logging, including logs, chunks, bark,
branches, uprooted stumps and broken or uprooted trees or shrubs.
SOLAR ENERGY—Radiant energy (direct, diffuse or reflected) received from the sun
at wavelengths suitable for conversion into thermal, chemical or electrical energy.
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right-of-way deemed necessary to provide
adequate width for future street improvements.
B.
PUBLIC SEWER — A public sewer is any municipal or privately owned sewer
system in which sewage is collected from buildings from more than one lot and/or
dwelling unit and piped to an approved sewage disposal plant or central septic tank
disposal system. It may also be referred to as "off-lot" or "off-site" sewer. This shall
include capped sewers.
A.
PRIVATE SEWER — An "on-lot" approved disposal system generally providing
for disposal of effluent for only one building or a group of buildings on a single lot.
B.
SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTOR — Any device, structure or part of a device or
structure which is used primarily to transform solar energy into thermal, chemical
or electrical energy. It includes any space or structural component specifically
designed to retain heat derived from solar energy.
A.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A complete design or assembly consisting of
a solar energy collector, an energy storage facility (where appropriate) and
components for the distribution of transformed energy to the extent they cannot be
used jointly with a conventional energy system. Passive solar energy systems are
included in this definition but not to the extent that they fulfill structural or other
functions.
B.
§ 500-202 ZONING § 500-202
500:17
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use permitted in a particular zoning district pursuant to
the provisions of § 500-3108.172
STAND—Any area of forest vegetation whose site conditions, past history and current
species composition are sufficiently uniform to be managed as a unit.
STEEP SLOPES — Areas where the average slope exceeds 8% which, because of this
slope, are subject to high rates of stormwater runoff and, therefore, erosion and flooding.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space
between the floor and the ceiling next above it and including those basements used for
the principal use. A half story is a space under a sloping roof which has the line of
intersection of the roof and wall face not more than three feet above the floor level, and
in which space the possible floor area with headroom of five feet or less occupies at least
40% of the total floor area of the story directly beneath.
Source: Moskowi & Lindbloom. The Illustrated Book of Development Definitions
(1981, Rutgers University).
STORY, GROUND — That story with its floor level immediately above the average
finished grade level of the adjoining ground at any particular point or side of the
building.
STREAM — Any natural or artificial channel of conveyance for surface water with an
annual or intermittent flow within a defined bed and banks.
ACTIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar system that requires external
mechanical power (fans or pumps) to move a conductive medium (water, antifreeze
or freon) to the interior of a building for heating or cooling.
C.
PASSIVE SOLAR SYSTEM — A solar energy system that uses natural properties
of materials and architectural components to collect and store solar energy. In some
cases, external mechanical power (fan) may be required to move the collected heat.
D.
172.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 500-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-202
500:18
STREET—A public or private way used or intended to be used for passage or travel by
automotive vehicles and pedestrians and/or to provide access to abutting properties.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot. The street line shall
be the same as the future right-of-way.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on
or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
TATTOO or TATTOOING—To mark or color the skin by pricking in, by subcutaneous
introduction, nontoxic dyes or pigments so as to form indelible marks or figures by
production of scars.
TELEPHONE CENTRAL OFFICE — A building or part of a building used for the
transmission and exchange of telephone or radio telephone messages.
TENANT HOUSE—An accessory building on a lot used in whole or in part as dwelling
quarters for one or more tenant farmers.
TIMBER HARVESTING, TREE HARVESTING or LOGGING — The process of
cutting down trees and removing logs from the forest for the primary purpose of sale
or commercial processing into wood products. Clear cutting or selective cutting of
forestlands for a land use change are excluded from this definition.
TOP — The upper portion of a felled tree that is unmerchantable because of small size,
taper or defect.
TOURIST HOUSE — A dwelling in which rooms for overnight sleeping
accommodations are provided for or offered to transient guests for compensation.
TRANSIENT DWELLING — A dwelling unit in which between six and 16 persons
who are not considered a family live together and maintain a common household with
single cooking facilities.[Added 6-6-2016 by Ord. No. 16-01]
§ 500-202 ZONING § 500-202
500:19
TREE PROTECTION ZONE (TPZ) — An area that is radial to the trunk of a tree,
in which no construction activity shall occur. The tree protection zone shall be 15 feet
from the trunk of the tree to be retained or the distance from the trunk to the dripline,
whichever is greater. Where there is a group of trees or woodlands, the tree protection
zone shall be the aggregate of the protection zones for the individual trees.
USE — Any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on, or intended to be
carried on, in a building or other structure or on a tract of land.
UTILITIES — Those services customarily rendered by public utility corporations,
municipalities or municipal authorities in the nature of electricity, gas, telephone, water
and sewerage, including the appurtenances used in connection with the supplying of such
services (buildings, wires, pipes, poles and the like).
VARIANCE — Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of § 500-3107.
WALLS, FACING — Walls opposite to and parallel with one another or wall lines
extended off opposite walls intersecting at angles of less than 65°.
WATERCOURSE—Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, canal,
waterway, gully or ravine in which water flows in a definite direction or course, either
continuously or intermittently, and has a defined bed and banks.
WETLAND—Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at
a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do
support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.
WETLANDS MARGIN — The transitional area extending from the outer limit of the
wetland.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS)—A device which connects wind
energy to mechanical or electrical energy.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use located on the same lot with a principal use, and
clearly incidental or subordinate to, and in connection with the principal use.
A.
B. USE, PRINCIPAL — The main use on a lot.
§ 500-202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-202
500:20
WOODLANDS — One-quarter acre or more of wooded land where the largest trees
measure at least six inches in diameter at breast height (dbh) or 4.5 feet from the ground.
The woodland shall be measured from the dripline of the outer trees. Woodlands are also
a grove of trees forming one canopy where 10 or more trees measure at least 10 inches
in diameter at breast height (dbh).
YARD — An open space unobstructed from the ground up except for permitted
projections and plantings, on the same lot with a structure, extending along a lot line or
street line and inward to the structure. The size of a required yard shall be measured as
the shortest distance between the structure and a lot line or street line.
YARD, FRONT — A yard between a structure and a street line and extending the
entire length of the street line. In the case of a lot that fronts on more than one street,
the yards extending along all streets are front yards.
A.
YARD, REAR — A yard between a structure and rear lot line and extending the
entire length of the rear lot line.
B.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between a structure and a side lot line, extending from the
front yard to the rear yard. In the case of a lot having no street frontage or a lot of
odd shape, any yard that is not a front yard or a rear yard shall be considered a side
yard.
C.
§ 500-202 ZONING § 500-202
500:21

ARTICLE III
Classification of Districts
§ 500-301. Classes of districts. [Amended 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05]
For the purposes of this chapter, the Township of Middletown is hereby divided into the
following classes of districts, which shall be designated as follows:
AQC Age-Qualified Community
A-O Apartment-Office District
C Commercial District
CS Shopping Center District
GB General Business District
M-1 Light Manufacturing District
MHP Mobile Home Park District
MR Multi-Residential District
OC Office Campus District
OR Open Recreation District
P Professional District
RA-1 Residence Agricultural District
RA-2 Residence Agricultural District
RA-3 Residence Agricultural District
RC Retirement Community District
R-1 Residence District
R-2 Residence District
R-3 Residence District
SW Solid Waste Management Zoning Overlay District
Neshaminy Creek Watershed Peak Rate Overlay District
Northeast Philadelphia Airport Zoning Overlay District
Stormwater Runoff Peak Rate Zoning Overlay District
§ 500-302. Zoning Map.173
The boundaries of said districts shall be as shown on the map attached to and made
a part of this chapter, which map shall be known as the "Zoning Map of Middletown
Township." Said map and all notations, references, and data shown thereon are hereby
incorporated by reference into this chapter and shall be as much a part of this chapter as
if all were fully described herein.
173.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map of the Township, as amended, is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 500-301 ZONING § 500-303
500:23
§ 500-303. District boundaries.
The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated, either the center lines
of streets or railroad rights-of-way, or such lines extended, or lines parallel or
perpendicular thereto. Where figures are shown on the Zoning Map between a street and
a district boundary line, they indicate that the district boundary line runs parallel to the
street line at a distance therefrom equivalent to the number of feet so indicated.
§ 500-304. Boundary tolerances.
Where a district boundary line divides a lot held in single and separate ownership at the
effective date of this chapter, the regulations applicable to the less restricted district shall
extend over the portion of the lot in the more restricted district a distance of not more
than 50 feet beyond the district boundary line.
§ 500-303 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-304
500:24
ARTICLE IV
RA-1 Residence Agricultural District
[Amended 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13; 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05]
§ 500-401. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of the RA-1 Residence Agricultural District is to discourage the scattering
of commercial, industrial, multifamily residential and other urban-type uses throughout
predominantly rural areas of the Township; to encourage the continued use of land for
agricultural purposes; and to otherwise create conditions conducive to carrying out the
purposes of this chapter as set forth in § 500-101.
§ 500-402. Use regulations.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the
following purposes and no other:
A. Agricultural uses, including tilling of the soil, nursery and the keeping or raising of
livestock, birds, poultry, horses and bees, provided that:
(1) The minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.
(2) Any building used for the keeping or raising of livestock, poultry, birds, horses
or bees shall be situated not less than 100 feet from any street line or property
line. For the keeping of bees, adequate shade and water shall be provided in
the immediate vicinity of the hives.
(3) The keeping or raising of horses shall be limited to one horse per two acres.
(4) The keeping or raising of all other livestock and poultry shall be limited to five
per acre.
(5) A single-family detached dwelling is permitted on the same lot as this use,
provided it meets the area and dimension requirements of § 500-403. A
greenhouse or greenhouses and a roadside stand are also permitted, but only as
accessory uses to the primary agricultural use, subject to the following
restrictions:
(a) At least 50% of the products sold shall be produced on the premises
where offered for sale.
(b) Any such stand shall be situated not less than 30 feet from any street line.
(c) Such roadside stand shall be a structure with no more than three enclosed
sides.
(d) No retail sales, except from a roadside stand, shall be permitted from or
in connection with a greenhouse.
B. Building for public worship.
C. Cemetery.
D. Single-family detached dwelling.
§ 500-401 ZONING § 500-402
500:25
E. Public or private educational institution when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board as a special exception, provided that the public or private educational
institution meets the following standards:
(1) A lot area of not less than five acres shall be provided for each such use.
(2) Such use shall have direct access to either an arterial or a collector highway as
designated in the Middletown Township Comprehensive Plan.
(3) Such use shall not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district
in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property or be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(4) The characteristics of the following are allowable types of public or private
educational institutions.
(a) Academic schools. To include schools of the following character: adult
schools, correspondence schools, colleges, educational tutoring, general
education, schools for handicapped or retarded persons, public schools
and others of like kind.
(b) Business and trade schools. To include schools of the following
character: computer programming, electronics, finance, key punch
machine operator, management development, radio and others of like
kind.
(c) Child-care schools. To include schools of the following character: day
camps, day-care centers, kindergarten, nursery schools, prekindergartens,
resident camps and others of like kind.
(d) Dance and music schools. To include schools of the following character:
acrobatic dance, ballet dance, ballroom dance, freestyle dance, modern
dance, music schools, tap dance, twirling schools, and others of like kind.
(e) Hobby schools. To include schools of the following character: cooking,
sewing, stained glass making, art and printing schools, and others of like
kind.
(f) Martial arts. To include schools of the following character: jujitsu, judo,
karate, and others of like kind.
(g) Occupational licensing schools. To include schools of the following
character: barber schools, beauty culture schools, dental assistant schools,
nursing schools, real estate schools, and others of like kind.
(h) Professional and professional licensing schools. To include schools of the
following character: bartender schools, business schools, chiropractic
schools, schools of fashion, schools of modeling, paralegal schools,
photography schools, secretarial schools, travel agent schools, and others
of like kind.
(i) Religious schools. To include schools of the following character: Sunday
§ 500-402 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-402
500:26
schools, Hebrew schools, Bible schools, and others of like kind.
(j) Sports training schools. To include schools of the following character:
basketball, boxing, fencing, golf, gymnastics, tennis, and others of like
kind.
(k) Tutoring schools. To include schools of the following character: College
Board preparation, math, reading, general tutoring, and others of like
kind.
(l) Any other schools not in the above subsections which are of like kind and
nature.
(5) The following types of educational institutions shall not be permitted:
(a) Educational institutions dealing with animals such as dog obedience
schools, horseback riding schools, animal grooming schools.
(b) Driver educational schools.
(c) Schools for the maintenance and repair of motor vehicles, engines and
aircraft.
(d) Flying schools.
(e) Outdoor athletic institutions.
(f) Schools for the maintenance and repair of appliances, including, but not
limited to, heating and refrigeration, electric repairs, television repair,
washer, dryer, dishwasher, garbage disposal, oven and like repairs.
(g) Welder training schools.
(h) Such other educational institutions having excessive light, noise, dust,
traffic and other safety hazards.
(i) Firearms training school.
F. Hospital, convalescent home or nursing home when authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board as a special exception, provided that:
(1) A lot area of not less than five acres shall be provided for each such use.
(2) The maximum impervious surface ratio shall be 50%.
(3) Such use shall have direct access to either an arterial or a collector highway as
designated in this chapter.
(4) Such use shall be served by adequate public water supply and public sewage
disposal facilities.
(5) A fifty-foot-wide buffer yard shall be provided along all property lines. The
buffer yard shall meet the requirements of § 500-2605.
G. Telecommunications facility. Telephone central office, electric substation, or water
or sewer pump station when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special
§ 500-402 ZONING § 500-402
500:27
exception, provided that:
(1) Such use shall not include the transaction of business with the public; storage
of materials, rotating equipment or trucks; repair facilities or housing of repair
crews.
(2) A fifty-foot-wide buffer yard shall be provided along all property lines and
shall meet the requirements of § 500-2605.
H. Bed-and-breakfast by conditional use.
(1) The property must contain a minimum lot area of three acres.
I. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted use
in this district, subject to the applicable provisions of this article and Article XXIV.
J. Home occupations as an accessory use in accordance with § 500-2408.
K. Signs as accessory uses when erected and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of Article XXVIII.
L. No-impact home-based business as an accessory use.
M. Forestry/timber harvesting, providing that it meets the following standards:
(1) Scope; applicability. A zoning permit shall be required for all forestry/timber
harvesting activities; however, an individual property owner need not obtain a
permit to cut a tree or trees as part of normal home maintenance and upkeep,
and the following activities are specifically exempted:
(a) Removal of diseased or dead trees.
(b) Removal of trees which are in such a condition or physical position as to
constitute a danger to the structures or occupants of properties or a public
right-of-way.
(c) Removal of up to five trees per acre of woodlands per year, not to exceed
a total of 10 trees per lot or any combination of adjoining lots in common
ownership, which are 12 inches or more in diameter measured at breast
height (dbh) and not covered by the exemptions in the foregoing two
subsections. Removal of woodlands shall not exceed the standards set
forth in §§ 500-2601D and 500-2602B. In cases of conflict between the
standards set forth in this section and §§ 500-2601D and 500-2602B, the
stricter of the standards shall apply.
(d) When a building permit is issued for a building, structure or use, the
permittee may cut down any trees which exist in the space to be occupied
by such building, structure or use, or within 30 feet of such building,
structure or use, and all space within 10 feet of all sides of any utility line,
stormwater conveyance or detention structure, driveway, parking area,
water system or sewage disposal system, or permitted accessory uses.
Removal of woodlands shall not exceed the standards set forth in
§§ 500-2601D and 500-2602B. In cases of conflict between the standards
set forth in this section and §§ 500-2601D and 500-2602B, the stricter of
§ 500-402 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-402
500:28
the standards shall apply.
(2) Notification; preparation of a forestry/logging plan.
(a) Notification of commencement or completion. For all forestry and timber
harvesting operations that are expected to exceed one acre, the landowner
shall notify the Township Zoning Officer at least 10 business days before
the operation commences and within five business days before the
operation is complete. No timber harvesting shall occur until the notice
has been provided. Notification shall be in writing and shall specify the
land on which harvesting will occur, the expected size of the harvest area
and, as applicable, the anticipated starting or completion date of the
operation.
(b) Logging plan. Every landowner on whose land timber harvesting is to
occur shall have a written logging plan prepared by a professional forester
or forest technician in the form specified by this chapter. No timber
harvesting shall occur until the plan has been prepared. The provisions of
the plan shall be followed throughout the operation. The plan shall be
available at the harvest site at all times during the operation and shall be
provided to the Township Zoning Officer upon request.
(c) Responsibility for compliance. The landowner and the operator shall be
jointly and severally responsible for complying with the terms of the
logging plan.
(3) Contents of the forestry/logging plan.
(a) Minimum requirements. As a minimum, the logging plan shall include
the following:
[1] Design, construction, maintenance and retirement of the access
system, including haul roads, skid roads, skid trails and landings;
[2] Design, construction and maintenance of water control measures and
structures such as culverts, broad-based dips, filter strips and water
bars;
[3] Design, construction and maintenance of stream and wetland
crossings;
[4] The general location of the proposed operation in relation to
municipal and state highways, including any accesses to those
highways;
[5] Copies of all required permits submitted as an appendix to the plan;
[6] Proof of current general liability and/or worker's compensation
insurance;
[7] Proof of PennDOT highway occupancy permit or Township
driveway permit for temporary access, as applicable; and
[8] Copy of Bucks County Conservation District "Letter of Adequacy"
§ 500-402 ZONING § 500-402
500:29
for the proposed erosion control facilities, including associated
plans, reports and other permits as required.
(b) Map. Each forestry/logging plan shall include a site map containing the
following information:
[1] Site location and boundaries, including both the boundaries of the
property on which the timber harvest will take place and the
boundaries of the proposed harvest area within that property;
[2] Significant topographic features related to potential environmental
problems;
[3] Location of all earth disturbance activities, such as roads, landings
and water control measures and structures;
[4] Location of all crossings of water of the commonwealth; and
[5] The general location of the proposed operation to municipal and
state highways, including any accesses to those highways.
(c) Compliance with state law. The forestry/logging plan shall address and
comply with the requirements of all applicable state laws and regulations,
including, but not limited to, the following:
[1] Erosion and sedimentation control regulations contained in Chapter
102 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, promulgated pursuant to
the Clean Streams Law (35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.);
[2] Stream crossing and wetlands protection regulations contained in
Chapter 105 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, promulgated
pursuant to the Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (32 P.S. § 693.1
et seq.); and
[3] Stormwater management plans and regulations issued pursuant to
the Storm Water Management Act (32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.)
(d) Compliance with federal law/regulations. The forestry/logging plan shall
address and comply with the requirements of all applicable federal laws
and regulations, including, but not limited to, the best management
practices (BMPs) as set forth at 33 CFR 323.4[a][6][i-xv].
(e) The forestry/logging plan shall address and comply with the standards set
forth in Article XXVI, Natural Resource Protection Standards; Open
Space and Buffers, of this chapter. In cases of conflict between this
section and Article XXVI, the stricter of the standards shall apply. The
forestry/logging plan shall further address and comply with the standards
set forth in Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development, § 440-406,
Stormwater Management. In cases of conflict between this section and
§ 440-406, the stricter of the standards shall apply.
(4) Forest practices. The following requirements shall apply to all forestry/timber
harvesting operations in the Township:
§ 500-402 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-402
500:30
(a) Felling or skidding on or across any public thoroughfare is prohibited
without the express written consent of the Township or the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, whichever is responsible for maintenance
of the thoroughfare;
(b) No tops or slash shall be left within 25 feet of any public thoroughfare or
private roadway providing access to adjoining residential property;
(c) All tops and slash between 25 and 50 feet from a public roadway or
private roadway providing access to adjoining residential property or
within 50 feet of adjoining residential property shall be chopped to a
maximum height of four feet above the surface of the ground;
(d) No tops or slash shall be left on or across the boundary of any property
adjoining the operation without the consent of the owner thereof;
(e) Litter resulting from a timber harvesting operation shall be removed from
the site before it is vacated by the operator;
(f) Any soil, stones and/or debris carried onto public roadways must be
removed immediately;
(g) No forestry/logging use shall be permitted within areas with slopes of
26% or greater;
(h) When the harvest is completed, both dirt roads used by the trucks and
skid roads used to drag the logs from the woods to the loading area must
be graded approximately to original contours, and be seeded and mulched
as necessary to establish stable ground cover;
(i) A no-logging buffer zone with a width of 25 feet shall be maintained
along any street abutting or running through a property on which the
forestry/logging operation is to be conducted. The buffer shall be
measured from the ultimate right-of-way of a public street and from the
easement boundary of a private street. No trees shall be cut, removed,
skidded or transported in a no-logging buffer zone except as necessary for
access to a site from the street;
(j) A no-logging buffer zone with a width of 50 feet shall be maintained
along all properties abutting a property on which the logging operation is
to be conducted. The buffer shall be measured from the property line. No
trees shall be cut, removed, skidded or transported in a no-logging buffer
zone except as necessary for access to a site from the street; and
(k) A no-logging riparian buffer zone with a width of 75 feet shall be
maintained along both sides of any watercourse or canal that abuts or runs
through a property on which the forestry, logging or timber harvest
operation is to be conducted. The buffer shall be measured from the highwater
mark of the watercourse or canal. No trees shall be cut, removed,
skidded or transported in a no-logging riparian buffer zone.
(5) Financial security shall be established in a manner acceptable to the Township
to guarantee repair of all damage that may occur to public streets due to the
§ 500-402 ZONING § 500-402
500:31
§ 500-403. Area and dimensional requirements.
Unless a greater area or dimensional regulation is stated in § 500-402, Use regulations,
for a specific use, all uses in the RA-1 District shall meet the following requirements:
forestry/logging operations, and to guarantee compliance with erosion and
sedimentation control plans, compliance with stormwater management plans,
and restoration of the site upon completion of logging operations. Pursuant
to Chapter 189 of Title 67 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Township may also
require the landowner or operator to furnish a bond to guarantee the repair of
such roads.
(6) Enforcement.
(a) Inspections. Any official or employee of the Township may go upon the
site of any timber harvesting operation before, during or after active
logging to: review the logging plan or any other required documents for
compliance with this chapter and inspect the operation for compliance
with the logging plan and other on-site requirements of this chapter.
(b) Violation notices; suspensions. Upon finding that a forestry or timber
harvesting operation is in violation of any provisions of this chapter, the
Township shall issue the operator and the landowner a written notice of
violation describing each violation and specifying a date by which
corrective action must be taken. The Township may order the immediate
suspension of any operation upon finding that: 1) corrective action has
not been taken by the date specified in a notice of violation; 2) the
operation is proceeding without a logging plan; or 3) the operation is
causing an environmental risk. Suspension orders shall be in writing,
shall be issued to the operator and the landowner, and shall remain in
effect until, as determined by the Township, the operation is brought into
compliance with this chapter or other applicable statutes or regulations.
The landowner or the operator may appeal an order or decision of an
official or employee of the Township in accordance with the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
(c) Penalties. Any landowner or operator who violates any provision of this
chapter or who fails to comply with a notice of violation or suspension
order issued under Subsection M(6)(b) shall be subject to a fine of not
less than $500 nor more than $1,000, plus costs and attorney's fees, in
accordance with Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. Each day
of continued violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. Minimum lot area: one acre.
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Maximum density: 0.8 dwelling units per acre.
D. Maximum building coverage: 15%.
§ 500-402 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-403
500:32
E. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
F. Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
G. Minimum side yard: 30 feet.
H. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
I. Maximum impervious surface ratio: 30%.
§ 500-403 ZONING § 500-403
500:33

ARTICLE V
RA-2 Residence Agricultural District
§ 500-501. Purpose and intent.
The RA-2 Residence Agricultural District is composed of low-density residential areas
of the Township and open areas where similar residential development is likely to
occur. The purposes of this district are to permit residential development at a low
density to provide a transition zone between agricultural areas and medium-density
residential development; to provide standards which will encourage the installation
of public facilities and the preservation of permanent public open space; to exclude
activities of a commercial or industrial nature and any activities not compatible with
residential development; and to otherwise create conditions conducive to carrying out
the purposes of this chapter as set forth in § 500-101.
§ 500-502. Use regulations. [Amended 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13; 5-20-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-05]
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any one of the
following principal uses and any of the following accessory uses and no other. Unless
specifically identified as an accessory use, the following are permitted principal uses:
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Building for public worship.
C. Cemetery.
D. Agricultural use, including tilling of the soil, nursery and the keeping or raising of
livestock, poultry, birds, horses and bees as an accessory use, provided that:
(1) The minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.
(2) Any building used for the keeping or raising of livestock, poultry, birds, horses
or bees shall be situated not less than 100 feet from any street line or property
line. For the keeping of bees, adequate shade and water shall be provided in
the immediate vicinity of the hives.
(3) The keeping or raising of horses shall be limited to one horse per two acres.
(4) The keeping or raising of all other livestock and poultry shall be limited to five
per acre.
E. Public or private educational institution when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board as a special exception, provided that the requirements of § 500-402E of this
chapter are met.
F. Hospital, convalescent home or nursing home when authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board as a special exception, provided that:
(1) A lot area of not less than five acres shall be provided for each such use.
(2) The maximum impervious surface ratio shall be 50%.
§ 500-501 ZONING § 500-502
500:35
§ 500-503. Area and dimensional requirements.
Unless a greater area or dimensional regulation is stated in § 500-502, Use regulations,
for a specific use, all uses in the RA-2 District shall meet the following requirements:
(3) Such use shall have direct access to either an arterial or a collector highway as
designated in this chapter.
(4) Such use shall be served by adequate public water supply and public sewage
disposal facilities.
(5) A fifty-foot-wide buffer yard shall be provided along all property lines. The
buffer yard shall meet the requirements of § 500-2605.
G. Telecommunications facility, telephone central office or electric substation when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception, provided that:
(1) Such use shall not include the transaction of business with the public; storage
of materials, rotating equipment or trucks; repair facilities or housing of repair
crews.
(2) A twenty-five-foot-wide buffer yard shall be provided along all property lines
and shall meet the requirements of § 500-2605.
H. Bed-and-breakfast in conformity with the provisions of § 500-402H.
I. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted use
in this district, subject to the applicable provisions of this article and Article XXIV.
J. Home occupations as an accessory use in accordance with § 500-402.
K. Signs as an accessory use when erected and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of Article XXVIII.
L. No-impact home-based business as an accessory use.
M. Forestry/timber harvesting, pursuant to the regulations set forth in Article IV,
§ 500-402M.
A. Minimum lot area: 30,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 125 feet.
C. Maximum density: 1.2 dwelling units per acre.
D. Maximum building coverage: 15%.
E. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
F. Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
G. Minimum side yard: 15 feet; 40 feet aggregate.
H. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
I. Maximum impervious surface ratio: 30%. [Added 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05].
§ 500-502 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-503
500:36
ARTICLE VI
RA-3 Residence Agricultural District
§ 500-601. Purpose and intent.
The RA-3 Residence Agricultural District is composed of low-density residential areas
of the Township and open areas where similar residential development is likely to occur.
The purposes of this district are to permit residential development at a moderate density;
to provide standards which will encourage the installation of public facilities and the
preservation of permanent public open space; to exclude activities of a commercial or
industrial nature and any activities not compatible with residential development; and to
otherwise create conditions conducive to carrying out the purposes of this chapter as set
forth in § 500-101.
§ 500-602. Use regulations. [Amended 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13; 5-20-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-05]
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any one of the
following principal uses and any of the following accessory uses and no other. Unless
specifically identified as an accessory use, the following are permitted principal uses:
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Building for public worship.
C. Cemetery.
D. Agricultural use, including tilling of the soil, nursery and the keeping or raising of
livestock, poultry, birds, horses and bees as an accessory use, provided that:
(1) The minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.
(2) Any building used for the keeping or raising of livestock, poultry, birds, horses
or bees shall be situated not less than 100 feet from any street line or property
line. For the keeping of bees, adequate shade and water shall be provided in
the immediate vicinity of the hives.
(3) The keeping or raising of horses shall be limited to one horse per two acres.
(4) The keeping or raising of all other livestock and poultry shall be limited to five
per acre.
E. Public building or public use.
F. Public or private educational institution when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board as a special exception, provided that the requirements of § 500-402E of this
chapter are met.
G. Hospital, convalescent home or nursing home when authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board as a special exception, provided that:
(1) A lot area of not less than five acres shall be provided for each such use.
(2) The maximum impervious surface ratio shall be 50%.
§ 500-601 ZONING § 500-602
500:37
§ 500-603. Area and dimensional requirements.
Unless a greater area or dimensional regulation is stated in § 500-602, Use regulations,
for a specific use, all uses in the RA-3 District shall meet the following requirements:
(3) Such use shall have direct access to either an arterial or a collector highway as
designated in this chapter.
(4) Such use shall be served by adequate public water supply and public sewage
disposal facilities.
(5) A fifty-foot-wide buffer yard shall be provided along all property lines. The
buffer yard shall meet the requirements of § 500-2605.
H. Telecommunications facility, telephone central office or electric substation when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception, provided that:
(1) Such use shall not include the transaction of business with the public; storage
of materials, rotating equipment or trucks, repair facilities or housing of repair
crews.
(2) A twenty-five-foot-wide buffer yard shall be provided along all property lines
and shall meet the requirements of § 500-2605.
I. Bed-and-breakfast, in conformity with the provisions of § 500-402H.
J. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted use
in this district, subject to the applicable provisions of this article and Article XXIV.
K. Home occupations as an accessory use in accordance with § 500-402J.
L. Signs as an accessory use when erected and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of Article XXVIII.
M. No-impact home-based business as an accessory use.
N. Forestry/timber harvesting, pursuant to the regulations set forth in Article IV,
§ 500-402M.
A. Minimum lot area: 22,500 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 125 feet.
C. Maximum density: 1.4 dwelling units per acre.
D. Maximum building coverage: 15%.
E. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
F. Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
G. Minimum side yard: 15 feet; 40 feet aggregate.
H. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
I. Maximum impervious surface ratio: 30%. [Added 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05]
§ 500-602 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-603
500:38
ARTICLE VII
OR Open Recreation District
§ 500-701. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of the OR Open Recreation District is to reinforce public commitment of
land to open spaces.
§ 500-702. Applicability.
The OR District is applicable only to those lands which have been committed by public
or private action to the conservation, open space, recreational and educational uses
permitted herein and is designed to ensure continuation of such uses for the benefit of
residents of the Township and County.
§ 500-703. Use regulations. [Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 93-09; 6-8-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-10; 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13]
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the
following purposes and no other:
A. Recreation uses, including parks, picnic areas, day and overnight camping, hiking,
equestrian trails, playfields, facilities for court games, swimming, boating, golf and
similar open space recreation activities.
B. Agricultural uses using existing facilities as a continuing interim use of land
pending development of other permitted uses or as a demonstration farm when part
of an overall recreation or educational area plan.
C. Nature and conservation educational uses such as arboretums, zoological gardens,
wildlife preserves, fish hatcheries, forest management areas and natural areas.
D. Accessory uses incidental to the operation and maintenance of the above permitted
uses, including parking facilities, shelters, rest rooms, administrative, maintenance
and storage buildings, and permanent housing for administrative or supervisory
personnel.
E. Emergency services uses, including fire, rescue and other emergency services of a
municipal or volunteer nature.
F. Middletown Township municipal buildings, including, but not limited to,
administration, police, recreation, library, municipal utilities and public works
buildings.
G. Educational uses, including educational tutoring, general education, public schools
and others of like kind.
H. Forestry/timber harvesting, pursuant to the regulations set forth in § 500-402M of
this chapter.
§ 500-701 ZONING § 500-704
500:39
§ 500-704. Area and dimensional requirements. [Amended 12-20-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-20; 6-7-2005 by Ord. No. 05-04; 5-2-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05]
Unless a greater area or dimensional regulation is stated in § 500-703, Use regulations,
for a specific use, all uses in the OR District shall meet the following requirements:
A. Minimum setbacks. Buildings or other permitted structures, except directional
signs, shall be set back a minimum of:
(1) One hundred feet from the ultimate right-of-way of any public road, except as
provided for in Subsection A(4) below.
(2) Twenty feet from the cartway of any internal road.
(3) Twenty feet from the paved surface of any parking area.
(4) Any existing structure or building which is to be replaced, reconstructed,
repaired, rehabilitated or substantially improved and which is accessory to an
athletic field must be set back a minimum of 15 feet from any ultimate rightof-
way of any public road.
B. Maximum building height. No building or other permitted structure shall exceed 35
feet in height, except that observation structures, water towers, or similar facilities
may extend to a maximum height of 100 feet.
§ 500-704 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-704
500:40
ARTICLE VIII
R-1 Residence District
§ 500-801. Purpose and intent.
The purposes of the R-1 Residence District are to provide for the orderly expansion of
urban-type residential development in areas which can feasibly be supplied with public
facilities; to protect the public health and to prevent overcrowding of the land through the
application of maximum housing densities; to provide standards which will encourage
the installation of public facilities and the preservation of public open space; to exclude
activities of a commercial or industrial nature and any activities not compatible with
residential development; to provide for the public convenience and to avoid undue
congestion on the roads; and to otherwise create conditions conducive to carrying out the
purposes of this chapter as set forth in § 500-101.
§ 500-802. Use regulations. [Amended 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13; 5-20-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-05]
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any one of the
following principal uses and any of the following accessory uses and no other. Unless
specifically identified as an accessory use, the following are permitted principal uses:
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Building for public worship.
C. Public or private educational institution when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board as a special exception; provided that the requirements of § 500-402E of this
chapter are met.
D. Telecommunications facility, telephone central office, electric substation,
distribution gas-pressure-regulation station, or water or sewer pump station when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception, provided that:
(1) Such use shall not include the transaction of business with the public; storage
of materials, rotating equipment or trucks; repair facilities or housing of repair
crews.
(2) A twenty-five-foot-wide buffer yard shall be provided along all property lines
and shall meet the requirements of § 500-2605.
E. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted use
in this district, subject to the applicable provisions of Article XXIV.
F. Home occupations as an accessory use in accordance with § 500-2408.
G. Signs as accessory uses when erected and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of Article XXVIII.
H. Forestry/timber harvesting, pursuant to the regulations set forth in Article IV,
§ 500-402M.
I. No-impact home-based business as an accessory use.
§ 500-801 ZONING § 500-803
500:41
§ 500-803. Area and dimensional requirements.
Unless a greater area or dimensional regulation is stated in § 500-802, Use regulations,
for a specific use, all uses in the R-1 District shall meet the following requirements:
§ 500-804. Modification of area and dimensional requirements.
If open space land is provided, a modification of the requirements of § 500-803 shall be
permitted, subject to the following:
A. Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
C. Maximum density: two dwelling units per acre. This density requirement shall
apply only to subdivisions where one or more new public streets are proposed as
part of the subdivision. Relief from this density requirement shall not relieve an
applicant for a subdivision from complying with the Middletown Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter 440) requirements
regarding street improvements.
D. Maximum building coverage: 20%.
E. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
F. Minimum front yard: 35 feet.
G. Minimum side yard: 10 feet; 30 feet aggregate.
H. Minimum rear yard: 35 feet.
I. Maximum impervious surface ratio: 30%. [Added 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05]
A. The amount of open space provided shall equal or exceed the total area by which
the lots in the subdivision are reduced below the standards of § 500-803, exclusive
of street and right-of-way dedication.
B. No single area of open space shall be less than one acre in size.
C. Minimum lot area: 12,000 square feet.
D. Minimum lot width: 90 feet.
E. Maximum density: 2.3 dwelling units per acre.
This density requirement shall apply only to subdivisions where one or more new
public streets are proposed as part of the subdivision. Relief from this density
requirement shall not relieve an applicant for a subdivision from complying with
the Middletown Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter
440) requirements regarding street improvements.
F. Maximum building coverage: 20%.
G. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
§ 500-803 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-804
500:42
H. Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
I. Minimum side yard: 10 feet; 25 feet aggregate.
J. Minimum rear yard: 35 feet.
§ 500-804 ZONING § 500-804
500:43

ARTICLE IX
R-2 Residence District
§ 500-901. Purpose and intent.
The purposes of the R-2 Residence District are to provide reasonable standards for the
orderly expansion of urban-type residential development; to prevent the overcrowding
of the land; to exclude activities not compatible with residential development; and to
otherwise create conditions conducive to carrying out the purposes of this chapter as set
forth in § 500-101.
§ 500-902. Use regulations. [Amended 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13; 5-20-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-05]
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any one of the
following principal uses and any of the following accessory uses and no other. Unless
specifically identified as an accessory use, the following are permitted principal uses:
§ 500-903. Area and dimensional requirements.
Unless a greater area or dimensional regulation is stated in § 500-902, Use regulations,
for a specific use, all uses in the R-2 District shall meet the following requirements:
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Building for public worship.
C. Public or private educational institution when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board as a special exception, provided that the requirements of § 500-402E of this
chapter are met.
D. Telecommunications facility, telephone central office, electric substation, or water
or sewer pump station when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special
exception, provided that:
(1) Such use shall not include the transaction of business with the public; storage
of materials, rotating equipment or trucks; repair facilities or housing of repair
crews.
(2) A twenty-five-foot-wide buffer yard shall be provided along all property lines
and shall meet the requirements of § 500-2605.
E. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted use
in this district, subject to the provisions of Article XXIV.
F. Home occupations as an accessory use in accordance with § 500-2408.
G. Signs as accessory uses when erected and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of Article XXVIII.
H. Forestry/timber harvesting, pursuant to the regulations set forth in Article IV,
§ 500-402M.
I. No-impact home-based business as an accessory use.
§ 500-901 ZONING § 500-903
500:45
A. Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 80 feet.
C. Maximum density: 2.8 dwelling units per acre.
This density requirement shall apply only to subdivisions where one or more new
public streets are proposed as part of the subdivision. Relief from this density
requirement shall not relieve an applicant for a subdivision from complying with
the Middletown Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter
440) requirements regarding street improvements.
D. Maximum building coverage: 20%.
E. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
F. Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
G. Minimum side yard: 10 feet; 25 feet aggregate.
H. Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
I. Maximum impervious surface ratio: 30%. [Added 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05]
§ 500-903 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-903
500:46
ARTICLE X
R-3 Residence District
§ 500-1001. Purpose and intent.
The purposes of the R-3 Residence District are to provide for clustered development
with large open space areas for resource protection and recreation; to exclude activities
not compatible with residential development; and to otherwise create conditions
conducive to carrying out the purposes of this chapter as set forth in § 500-101.
§ 500-1002. Use regulations. [Amended 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13; 5-20-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-05]
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any one of the
following principal uses and any of the following accessory uses and no other. Unless
specifically identified as an accessory use, the following are permitted principal uses:
§ 500-1003. Area and dimensional requirements.
Unless a greater area or dimensional regulation is stated in § 500-1002, Use regulations,
for a specific use, all uses in the R-3 District shall meet the following requirements:
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Building for public worship.
C. Public or private educational institution when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board as a special exception, provided that the requirements of § 500-402E of this
chapter are met.
D. Telecommunications facility, telephone central office, electric substation, or water
and sewer pump station when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special
exception, provided that:
(1) Such use shall not include the transaction of business with the public; storage
of materials, rotating equipment or trucks; repair facilities or housing of repair
crews.
(2) A twenty-five-foot-wide buffer yard shall be provided along all property lines
and shall meet the requirements of § 500-2605.
E. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted use
in this district, subject to the applicable provisions of Article XXIV.
F. Home occupations as an accessory use in accordance with § 500-2408.
G. Signs as accessory uses when erected and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of Article XXVIII.
H. Forestry/timber harvesting, pursuant to the regulations set forth in Article IV,
§ 500-402M.
I. No-impact home-based business as an accessory use.
§ 500-1001 ZONING § 500-1003
500:47
A. Minimum lot area: 7,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 70 feet.
C. Maximum building coverage: 25%.
D. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
E. Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
F. Minimum side yard: eight feet; 18 feet aggregate.
G. Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
H. Maximum impervious surface ratio: 35%. [Added 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05174]
174.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original § 1004, of the 2009 Code, Performance standards, which
immediately followed this subsection.
§ 500-1003 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1003
500:48
ARTICLE XI
A-O Apartment-Office District
§ 500-1101. Purpose and intent.
The purposes of the A-O Apartment-Office District are to provide reasonable standards
for the harmonious development of apartments, business and professional offices,
educational, philanthropic and religious uses, residential uses, accessory uses and other
uses which are compatible with high-density development; regulate the density of
population; provide for the public convenience and avoid undue congestion in the
streets; and to otherwise create conditions conducive to carrying out these and other
broad purposes of this chapter as set forth in § 500-101.
§ 500-1102. Use regulations. [Amended 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13; 5-20-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-05]
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the
following purposes and no other. Uses on a single lot shall be restricted to those of a
single use group.
A. Use Group 1 — Garden apartments. A grouping of dwelling units sharing common
elements, which may include common outside access. The dwelling units share a
common lot area, which is the sum of the required lot areas of all dwelling units
within the building. Garden apartments shall contain three or more dwellings in a
single structure.
B. Use Group 2 — Mid-rise apartments. A grouping of dwelling units sharing a
common outside access with elevators serving each floor. Such buildings are not
less than four nor more than seven stories high. The dwelling units share a common
lot area, which is the sum of the required lot areas of all dwelling units within the
building.
C. Use Group 3 — High-rise apartments. A grouping of dwelling units sharing a
common outside access with elevators serving each floor. Such buildings are eight
or more stories high. The dwelling units share a common lot area, which is the sum
of the required lot areas of all dwelling units within the building.
D. Use Group 4—Offices which do not involve the storage, exchange, sale or delivery
of merchandise on the premises, including:
(1) Professional offices.
(2) Administrative offices.
(3) Executive offices.
(4) Government or public offices and buildings.
(5) Telecommunications central office, telephone central office, electric
substation.
(6) Financial institution.
§ 500-1101 ZONING § 500-1102
500:49
§ 500-1103. Area, dimensional and design requirements for Use Groups 1, 2 and
3.
All uses in Use Groups 1, 2 and 3 shall meet the following requirements:
E. Use Group 5 — Educational, religious and philanthropic institutions, including:
(1) Public, parochial and private schools, colleges and universities, and other
institutions offering educational programs, and dormitories for students.
(2) Club, lodge or fraternal institutions.
(3) Orphanages.
(4) Houses of public worship.
(5) Philanthropic and other nonprofit institutions which are noncommercial in
nature.
(6) Libraries, public and private.
(7) Museums, public and private.
F. Use Group 6 — Duplex. A semidetached dwelling unit with one dwelling unit
located above the other dwelling unit. Duplex units may be attached side by side
but a row of attached duplexes shall not exceed six.
G. Use Group 7—Transient dwelling or tourist house. [Added 6-6-2016 by Ord. No.
16-01175]
H. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted use
in the district.
I. Forestry/timber harvesting, pursuant to the regulations set forth in Article IV,
§ 500-402M.
A. Minimum site area: five acres.
B. Minimum frontage at street line-site: 300 feet.
C. Maximum density:
(1) Use Group 1: 12 dwelling units per acre.
(2) Use Group 2: 20 dwelling units per acre.
(3) Use Group 3: 30 dwelling units per acre.
D. Minimum open space ratio.
(1) Use Group 1: 10% of the base site area.
(2) Use Group 2: 20% of the base site area.
175.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections G and H as Subsections H and
I, respectively.
§ 500-1102 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1103
500:50
(3) Use Group 3: 25% of the base site area.
E. Use Group 1 shall meet the area and dimensional requirements specified below:
Use Group 1 Area and Dimensional Requirements
Average Apartment Size
(square feet) 500
Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling
Unit Efficiency 1,300 sq. ft.
(1) Maximum floor area ratio (on lot): 45%.
(2) Maximum impervious surface ratio (on lot): 50%.
(3) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(4) Minimum street frontage: 100 feet.
(5) Maximum number of units per building: 16 dwelling units.
(6) Minimum building spacing: 50 feet.
(7) Minimum building setbacks.
(a) Street lines: 50 feet.
(b) Other property lines: 50 feet.
(c) Parking areas: 30 feet.
(d) Maximum building height: 40 feet.
1 bedroom 655 1,750
2 bedrooms 950 2,000
3 bedrooms 1,125 2,250
4 bedrooms 1,330 2,550
F. Use Group 2 shall meet the area and dimensional requirements specified below:
Use Group 2 Area and Dimensional Requirements
Average Apartment Size
(square feet) 500
Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling
Unit Efficiency   700 sq. ft.
(1) Maximum floor area ratio (on lot): 100%.
§ 500-1103 ZONING § 500-1103
500:51
(2) Maximum impervious surface ratio (on lot): 70%.
(3) Minimum multifamily lot area: two acres.
(4) Minimum street frontage: 200 feet.
(5) Maximum number of units per building: 16 dwelling units.
(6) Minimum building spacing: 100 feet.
(7) Minimum building setbacks.
(a) Street lines: 100 feet.
(b) Other property lines: 200 feet.
(c) Parking areas: 30 feet.
(8) Maximum horizontal dimension of building: 180 feet.
(9) Maximum number of stories: seven stories.
1 bedroom 655 825
2 bedrooms 950 1,030
3 bedrooms 1,125 1,210
4 bedrooms 1,330 1,510
G. Use Group 3 shall meet the area and dimensional requirements specified below:
Use Group 3 Area and Dimensional Requirements
Average Apartment Size
(square feet)
Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling
Unit
(square feet)
Efficiency 500 425
1 bedroom 655 600
2 bedrooms 950 675
3 bedrooms 1,125 825
4 bedrooms 1,330 900
(1) Maximum floor area ratio (on lot): 150%.
(2) Maximum impervious surface ratio (on lot): 70%.
(3) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(4) Minimum street frontage: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum building space: 150 feet.
(6) Minimum building setbacks.
(a) Street lines: 100 feet.
(b) Other property lines: 200 feet.
(c) Parking areas: 30 feet.
(7) Maximum horizontal dimension of building: 180 feet.
§ 500-1103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1103
500:52
§ 500-1104. Area, dimensional and design requirements for Use Groups 4 and 5.
All uses in Use Groups 4 and 5 shall meet the following requirements:
H. Buffer yard. A seventy-five-foot-wide buffer yard shall be provided along all
property lines of the site. The buffer yard shall be in accordance with the provisions
of § 500-2605.
I. Apartments under all use groups shall have the following:
(1) A minimum of 55% one-bedroom or efficiency units.
(2) A maximum of 45% two-bedroom units.
(3) A maximum of 5% three-bedroom units.
(4) The number of three-bedroom units would reduce the number of two-bedroom
units. Example: If a developer proposes a one-hundred unit apartment
complex, he may have 55 one-bedroom apartments, 40 two-bedroom
apartments, and five three-bedroom apartments, or may eliminate or reduce
the number of three-bedroom units entirely.
J. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with public water supply and public sewage
disposal at the time of development. Any waste material to be collected by a private
concern must be contained in adequate disposal units. Compliance with the
standards of the Health Code shall be maintained. No visible garbage, rubbish or
other disposable material shall be permitted on the land area of the building.
K. Parking requirements.
(1) Minimum number of spaces shall be in accordance with this chapter's parking
requirements. [Amended 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05]
(2) An additional 1/4 parking space per dwelling unit shall be provided for visitor
parking.
(3) A structure or planting material shall be provided of sufficient height and
density to screen off-street parking lots from public street view and from
adjoining residential districts. Such screening treatment shall conform to the
requirements of all applicable ordinances of the Township of Middletown and
to such reasonable conditions as may be required by the Middletown
Township Planning Commission.
A. Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 80 feet.
C. Maximum building coverage: 20%.
D. Maximum impervious surface ratio: 50%.
E. Maximum building height: 50 feet.
F. Minimum yards.
§ 500-1103 ZONING § 500-1104
500:53
§ 500-1105. Area, dimensional and design requirements for Use Group 6.
[Amended 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05]
All uses in Use Group 6 shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Front: 50 feet.
(2) Side: 20 feet.
(3) Rear: 25 feet.
G. Minimum building spacing: 30 feet.
H. Buffer yard. Along any adjacent land zoned for or in residential or agricultural use,
a buffer yard shall be provided which shall not be less than 75 feet in width
measured from the property line or the street line. The buffer yard shall be in
accordance with the provisions of § 500-2605.
I. Each proposed use shall be provided with public off-lot water supply and public
sewage disposal at the time of development. Any waste material to be collected by
a private concern must be contained in adequate disposal units. Compliance with
the standards of the Health Code shall be maintained. No visible garbage, rubbish
or other disposable material will be permitted on the land area of the building.
J. Any proposed development shall have access to either an arterial or collector
highway.
K. Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article XXVII.
A. Minimum site area: five acres.
B. Minimum frontage at street line-site: 200 feet.
C. Maximum density: 10.5 dwelling units per acre.
D. Maximum building coverage: 20%.
E. Setback requirements.
(1) No part of any duplex shall be closer than 100 feet from the street line of an
arterial or expressway.
(2) No building shall be closer than 50 feet from any other property line of the site
nor closer than 30 feet from the edge of the cartway of all interior streets.
F. Minimum building spacing: 10 feet.
G. Minimum lot area.
(1) Per duplex: 3,500 square feet.
H. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
I. Maximum horizontal dimension of any building: 180 feet.
§ 500-1104 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1105
500:54
J. Minimum floor area per duplex: 1,600 square feet (800 square feet per floor).
K. A fifty-foot-wide buffer yard shall be provided along all property lines of the site.
The buffer yard shall meet the requirements of § 500-2605.
L. All uses shall be provided with public water and public sewage disposal at the time
of development. Any waste material to be collected by a private concern must be
contained in adequate disposal units. Compliance with the standards of the Health
Code shall be maintained. No visible garbage, rubbish or other disposable material
shall be permitted on the land area of the building.
M. Parking.
(1) Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each duplex unit.
(2) Direct access for off-street parking areas for duplex units shall be to interior
streets within the site only.
§ 500-1105 ZONING § 500-1105
500:55

ARTICLE XII
MR Multi-Residential District
§ 500-1201. Purpose and intent. [Amended 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05]
It is the purpose and intent of this district to provide for multi-residential development to
meet the goals and objectives of the Middletown Township Comprehensive Plan and this
chapter. It provides for medium-intensity multi-residential development in areas of the
Township that in the past have been moderately or extensively developed. The standards
and criteria for this district are set up to provide a method for encouraging efficient and
attractive residential design and at the same time providing for the protection of natural
resources, open space for recreational and aesthetic purposes, a mix and intensity of
residential development which is compatible with existing uses and will also help to
meet the housing needs within the Township.
§ 500-1202. Use regulations. [Amended 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13]
The following uses shall be permitted in the MR District:
§ 500-1203. Performance standard subdivision.
The following housing types are permitted in a performance standard subdivision,
subject to the area and dimensional requirements indicated below.
A. Single-family detached dwelling, subject to the area and dimensional requirements
of the R-1 Residence District (§§ 500-803 and 500-804). Section 500-1203 shall
not be applicable to this use.
B. Performance standard subdivision.
C. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted use
in the district.
D. Forestry/timber harvesting, pursuant to the regulations set forth in § 500-402M of
this chapter.
A. Single-family detached dwelling. A single detached dwelling unit on an individual
lot with private yards on all sides of the house.
(1) Area and dimensional requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: 7,000 square feet.
(b) Average lot area: 8,000 square feet.
(c) Minimum lot width: 70 feet.
(d) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(e) Maximum floor area ratio: 60%.
(f) Minimum yards.
[1] Front: 30 feet.
§ 500-1201 ZONING § 500-1203
500:57
[2] Side: 10 feet.
[3] Rear: 40 feet.
(g) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(h) Maximum impervious surface ratio: 40%. [Added 5-20-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-05]
B. Twin. Semidetached dwelling unit having only one dwelling unit from ground to
roof and only one wall in common with another dwelling unit.
Area and Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet)
Average Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
1 bedroom 3,200 3,600 36
2 bedrooms 3,600 4,000 40
3 bedrooms 4,000 4,500 40
4 bedrooms 4,200 4,700 45
(1) Maximum floor ratio: 70%.
(2) Maximum impervious surface ratio (on lot): 40%. [Amended 5-20-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-05]
(3) Minimum yards.
(a) Front: 30 feet.
(b) Side: 10 feet.
(c) Rear: 20 feet.
(4) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
C. Patio house. A detached or semidetached dwelling unit, with one dwelling unit from
ground to roof, having individual outside access. Except for the street setback, the
lot shall be fully enclosed by a wall four to six feet in height. All living spaces, i.e.,
living room, den and bedrooms, shall open onto a private open area or patio.
Area and Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet)
Average Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
1 bedroom 2,800 3,000 40
2 bedrooms 3,400 3,600 40
3 bedrooms 3,800 4,000 40
4 bedrooms 4,000 4,200 45
§ 500-1203 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1203
500:58
(1) Maximum floor ratio: 60%.
(2) Maximum impervious surface ratio (on lot): 35%.
(3) Minimum patio area: 65% (ratio to lot area).
(4) Minimum patio dimension: 20 feet.
(5) Minimum yards.
(a) Front: 15 feet.
(b) Side: 10 feet.
(c) Rear: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum building spacing: 20 feet.
(7) Maximum building height: 24 feet.
D. Multiplex. An attached dwelling unit which may be arranged in a variety of
configurations: side by side, back to back, or vertically. The essential feature is the
small number of units attached. No more than five units shall be attached in any
structure, and structures shall average four units each.
Area and Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area Per
Dwelling Unit
(square feet)
Average Lot Area Per
Dwelling Unit
(square feet)
Efficiency 800 1,000
1 bedroom 1,500 1,700
2 bedrooms 2,200 2,400
3 bedrooms 2,500 2,800
4 bedrooms 2,700 3,000
(1) Maximum impervious surface ratio (on lot): 30%.
(2) Minimum lot area (per building): 8,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width (per building) at setback line: 80 feet.
(4) Minimum building spacing: 24 feet.
(5) Minimum building setbacks.
(a) Street lines: 30 feet.
(b) Other property lines: 20 feet.
(c) Parking areas: 20 feet.
(6) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
§ 500-1203 ZONING § 500-1203
500:59
E. Atrium house. An attached dwelling unit, one story in height, with individual
outside access. The lot shall be fully enclosed by a wall four to six feet in height. A
private yard, herein called an "atrium," shall be included on each lot. All living
spaces, i.e., living room, den and bedrooms, shall open onto the atrium.
Area and Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet)
Average Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
1 bedroom 1,200 1,375 35
2 bedrooms 1,700 1,850 35
3 bedrooms 1,950 2,100 40
4 bedrooms 2,150 2,300 40
(1) Maximum floor area ratio: 60%.
(2) Maximum impervious surface ratio (on lot): 60%.
(3) Minimum atrium area: 35% (ratio to lot area).
(4) Minimum atrium dimension: 16 feet.
(5) Minimum yards.
(a) Front: 10 feet.
(b) Rear: 16 feet.
(6) Minimum building spacing: 25 feet.
(7) Maximum building height: 12 feet.
F. Townhouse. An attached dwelling unit, with one dwelling unit from ground to roof,
having individual outside access. No more than eight townhouses shall be attached
in any group.
Area and Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet)
Average Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
1 bedroom 1,500 1,600 18
2 bedrooms 1,700 1,800 20
3 bedrooms 1,900 2,000 22
4 bedrooms 2,000 2,200 24
(1) Maximum floor area ratio: 75%.
(2) Maximum impervious surface ratio (on lot): 45%. [Amended 5-20-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-05]
§ 500-1203 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1203
500:60
(3) Minimum building spacing: 30 feet.
(4) Minimum building setbacks.
(a) Street lines: 30 feet.
(b) Other property lines: 20 feet.
(c) Paving areas: 20 feet.
(d) Pedestrian walks: 15 feet.
(e) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
G. Garden apartments. A grouping of dwelling units sharing common elements which
may include common outside access. The dwelling units share a common lot area,
which is the sum of the required lot areas of all dwelling units within the building.
Garden apartments shall contain three or more dwellings in a single structure.
Area and Dimensional Requirements
Average Apartment Size
(square feet)
Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling
Unit
(square feet)
Efficiency 500 1,300
1 bedroom 655 1,750
2 bedrooms 950 2,000
3 bedrooms 1,125 2,250
4 bedrooms 1,330 2,550
(1) Maximum floor area ratio (on lot): 45%.
(2) Maximum impervious surface ratio (on lot): 50%.
(3) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(4) Minimum street frontage: 100 feet.
(5) Maximum number of units per building: 16 dwelling units.
(6) Minimum building spacing: 50 feet.
(7) Minimum building setbacks.
(a) Street lines: 50 feet.
(b) Other property lines: 50 feet.
(c) Parking areas: 30 feet.
(8) Maximum building height: 40 feet.
§ 500-1203 ZONING § 500-1204
500:61
§ 500-1204. Requirements for performance standard subdivisions.
The following requirements apply to performance standard subdivisions:
A. Area; density; open space; impervious surface.
Minimum Site
Area
(acres)
Maximum Density
(dwelling units
per acre)
Minimum Open
Space
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
5 8 35% 40%
B. Buffer yard.
(1) A twenty-five-foot-wide buffer yard shall be provided along all property lines
of the site. The buffer yard shall meet the requirements of § 500-2605.
(2) The buffer yard shall not be part of the lot area assigned to a dwelling unit. In
addition, no more than 40% of the buffer yard may be counted towards
meeting the minimum required open space.
C. Dwelling unit mix. A mix of housing types is necessary to create a balanced
community. Therefore, a mix is required, based on the number of dwelling units as
set forth in the accompanying table.
Number of
Dwellings in
Development
Minimum
Required
Number of
Housing Types
Maximum
Percent Any
Housing Types
Minimum Percent
Any Housing Type
1 to 100 1 100% 20%
101 to 200 2 60% 15%
201 to 400 3 50% 10%
401 or more 4 50% 5%
D. Parking requirements.
(1) Minimum number of spaces.
(a) One (efficiency).
(b) Two (one bedroom, two bedrooms).
(c) Three (three bedrooms or more).
(2) An additional 1/4 parking space per dwelling unit shall be provided for visitor
parking.
§ 500-1204 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1204
500:62
ARTICLE XIII
RC Retirement Community District
§ 500-1301. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this district is to allow for the creation of a planned community for senior
citizens which would provide care, supervision, living accommodations, health care and
recreation. Reasonable standards for the size of structures, open space and permitted uses
are established for this district.
§ 500-1302. Use regulations. [Amended 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13]
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the
following purposes and no other:
§ 500-1303. Area, dimensional and design requirements. [Amended 5-20-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-05]
All uses in the RC District shall meet the following requirements:
A. Townhouse. An attached dwelling unit, with one dwelling unit from ground to roof,
having individual outside access. No more than eight townhouses shall be attached
in any group.
B. Garden apartments. A grouping of dwelling units sharing common elements which
may include common outside access. The dwelling units share a common lot area
which is the sum of the required lot areas of all dwelling units within the building.
Garden apartments shall contain three or more dwellings in a single structure.
C. Common facilities required to support the needs of retired, infirm or disabled
persons, such as: [Amended 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05]
(1) Dining facilities, including kitchens and accessory facilities, for residents and
their guests.
(2) Social rooms, meeting rooms and overnight guest rooms.
(3) Health care facilities, including clinic, rehabilitation services, nursing care,
convalescent care, intermediate care, extended care, personal care, laboratory,
and other similar facilities.
(4) Administrative offices used in the management of the retirement community
and health-care facilities.
(5) Activity rooms, craft and hobby shops, gifts shops, and similar type uses.
D. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted use
in the district.
E. Forestry/timber harvesting, pursuant to the regulations set forth in § 500-402M of
this chapter.
A. Minimum site area: 15 acres.
§ 500-1301 ZONING § 500-1303
500:63
B. Maximum density: 12 dwelling units per acre.
C. Maximum building coverage: 30%.
D. Minimum open space ratio: 40%.
E. Minimum building setback.
(1) Street lines: 100 feet.
(2) Other property lines: 50 feet.
F. Maximum building height: four stories or 50 feet, whichever is less.
G. Maximum impervious surface ratio: 50%.
H. Each dwelling unit shall have no more than two bedrooms. The minimum habitable
size of each dwelling unit shall be:
(1) Efficiency: 400 square feet.
(2) One-bedroom: 550 square feet.
(3) One-bedroom with den: 700 square feet.
(4) Two-bedroom: 800 square feet.
I. Buffer yard.
(1) A fifty-foot-wide buffer yard shall be provided along all property lines of the
site. The buffer yard shall meet the requirements of § 500-2605.
(2) The buffer yard may be counted towards meeting the minimum required open
space.
J. The retirement community shall have access to a public street either directly or by
means of a right-of-way at least 50 feet in width.
K. Utilities. Each retirement community shall be supplied with public sewer and water
facilities. All utilities shall be installed underground.
L. Off-street parking. There shall be one parking space per dwelling unit and one
parking space per health-care facility bed.
M. Each retirement community shall be built as a single legal entity and shall be
retained in single ownership. Fee sale of units shall be prohibited. In addition, all
common facilities to support the needs of the residents of the retirement community
shall remain under a single ownership.
§ 500-1303 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1303
500:64
ARTICLE XIV
MHP Mobile Home Park District
§ 500-1401. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this district is to allow for the creation of a planned community of mobile
homes or, where this use is not appropriate, for the orderly development of an office
campus. Reasonable standards for the size of structures, open space and permitted uses
are established for this district.
§ 500-1402. Use regulations. [Amended 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13; 5-20-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-05]
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any one of the
following principal uses and no other:
§ 500-1403. Mobile home park requirements.
The following requirements shall be applicable to mobile home parks and related
accessory uses:
A. Mobile home park.
B. Accessory buildings, which shall be used solely for facilities directly related to the
operation of the mobile home park. Such buildings may include a management
office, storage facilities for the residents of the mobile home park, laundry facilities,
maintenance buildings and storage for maintenance equipment, a community room
and recreational facilities for the use of residents of the mobile home park. Such
buildings shall not be commercial in nature.
C. An office campus development when authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use, subject to the requirements of the OC Office Campus District.
D. Transient dwelling. [Added 6-6-2016 by Ord. No. 16-01176]
E. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted use
in the district.
F. Forestry/timber harvesting, pursuant to the regulations set forth in Article IV,
§ 500-402M.
A. Performance standards.
(1) Minimum site area: 25 acres.
(2) Maximum density: 5.5 dwelling units per acre.
(3) Minimum open space ratio: 10%.
(4) Maximum impervious surface ratio: 40%.
176.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections D and E as Subsections E and
F, respectively.
§ 500-1401 ZONING § 500-1403
500:65
B. Area and dimensional requirements for mobile home lots.
Minimum Lot
Area
(square feet)
Minimum
Lot Width at
Building
Setback
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Surfaces on
Lot
(percent)
Minimum Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Distance
Between Units
(feet)
Front Side Rear
Single-wide
units,
51 feet long:
5,000 50 35% 20 8 15 30
Single-wide
units,
61 feet long:
5,450 50 35% 20 8 15 30
Double-wide
units:
7,000 60 35% 20 8 15 30
C. All mobile homes shall be set back from existing abutting public streets or roads
not less than the following distances. These setback lines shall be measured from
the street line.
(1) Arterial highway: 120 feet.
(2) Collector street: 80 feet.
(3) Primary street: 60 feet.
(4) Secondary street: 50 feet.
(5) Marginal access street: 40 feet.
D. No mobile home shall be erected on a mobile home lot except upon a mobile home
pad. Each mobile home unit shall have its own separate pad.
(1) Each mobile home pad shall be at least equal in length and width to the
dimensions of the mobile home to be placed thereon.
(2) The pad, at least six inches in thickness, shall be constructed from either
concrete, asphalt concrete or other material adequate to support the mobile
home and to prevent abnormal settling or heaving under the weight of the
home. The corners of the mobile home shall be secured to prevent wind
overturn and rocking with at least six tie-downs, such as concrete "dead men,"
screw augers, arrowhead anchors, or other devices suitable to withstand a
tension of at least 2,800 pounds.
(3) Each mobile home shall be set level on sturdy and substantial supports.
(4) The area between the ground level and the perimeter of the mobile home shall
be enclosed by means of a suitable skirting.
§ 500-1403 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1403
500:66
(5) The hitch which is employed for the normal movement of the unit shall be
removed.
E. Accessory buildings as defined in § 500-1402B shall be subject to the following
standards:
(1) A maximum of 25% of the base site area shall be used for accessory buildings
and uses. In computing this, all buildings, parking areas and required setbacks
shall be included.
(2) All buildings shall be set back at least 50 feet from adjacent mobile homes and
interior streets in the mobile home park.
(3) All buildings shall comply with the buffer yard requirements.
(4) Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for such buildings and uses
based on the required parking in Article XXVII for similar uses.
F. Buffer yard requirements. A fifty-foot-wide buffer yard shall be provided along the
perimeter of the mobile home park. The buffer yard shall be in compliance with the
provisions of § 500-2605 of this chapter. [Amended 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05]
G. Off-street parking. A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided
for each mobile home lot. An additional one parking space per 10 mobile home lots
shall be provided in a common parking area for visitors. Parking shall be prohibited
on internal roads. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator of the mobile home
park to enforce this provision.
§ 500-1403 ZONING § 500-1403
500:67

ARTICLE XV
C Commercial District
§ 500-1501. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of the Commercial District is to provide reasonable standards for the
orderly expansion of general retail and other commercial uses in areas where a nucleus
of such uses already exists or where, due to the character of the undeveloped land, the
application of shopping center standards is not feasible. The standards of this district are
designed to provide for the public convenience and to fulfill the other broad purposes of
the chapter as set forth in § 500-101.
§ 500-1502. Use regulations. [Amended 8-18-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8; 12-1-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-13; 3-1-1994 by Ord. No. 94-02; 9-20-1994 by Ord. No. 94-15;
10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13]
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the
following purposes and no other, provided that no use which is noxious or hazardous
shall be permitted except in accordance with Article XXV of this chapter.
A. Retail store, subject to the regulations set forth in Article XXIII, § 500-2316, of this
chapter. [Amended 7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05]
B. Bakery, confectionery or custom shop for articles to be sold at retail on the
premises.
C. Personal service shop, such as, but not limited to, the following: barbershop, beauty
parlor, shoe repair shop, dry-cleaning pickup store, tailor shop, automatic selfservice
laundry or dry-cleaning store.
D. Eating establishment.
(1) Restaurant, cafe or other similar place serving food and beverages without
drive-in service or takeout service.
(2) Restaurants having drive-in or takeout service when authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board as a special exception, provided that:
(a) No such establishment shall be located within 500 feet of an existing
residence.
(b) The owner shall agree to enforce no-loitering regulations outside the
premises.
(c) The hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight.
E. Amusement or recreational establishment such as bowling alley, swimming pool,
skating rink, dance hall, golf driving range and indoor theater when authorized by
the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use, provided that:
(1) No such establishment shall be located within 500 feet of an existing
residence.
(2) The minimum lot area shall be 40,000 square feet.
§ 500-1501 ZONING § 500-1502
500:69
(3) The owner shall agree to enforce no-loitering regulations outside of the
premises.
F. Professional, business or government office.
G. Bank or similar financial institution.
H. Mortuary or funeral home.
I. Parking lot, which use shall not include any on-site dispensing of motor vehicle
petroleum fuels and/or lubricants.
J. Electric substation, telephone or telegraph office.
K. General service shop such as upholsterer, electrician, plumber and repair shop for
items including, but not limited to, appliances, lawn mowers, watches, bicycles,
locks or small business machines.
L. Newspaper or job printing.
M. Apartment for one family in combination with a business use when occupied by the
owner or caretaker.
N. Shopping center. A group or groups of integrated buildings on a site of two acres or
more within which retail trade and related service activities are collected, subject to
the following requirements:
(1) All buildings shall take access from an internal drive or roadway.
(2) The shopping center shall be designed as a complex of related structures and
circulation patterns and shall include improvements for internal drives,
coordinated utilities, landscaping and buffering.
(3) The shopping center shall conform in all respects to the use regulations and
area, dimensional and design requirements of §§ 500-1602 and 500-1603 of
this chapter. Other allowable uses shall be limited to amusement or
recreational establishments, as set forth in § 500-1502E, and motor vehicle
service stations, as set forth in § 500-1502Q of this chapter. The requirements
of § 500-1502J of this chapter shall apply to all shopping center uses fronting
on Lincoln Highway.
O. Tourist house, hotel or motel when authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use in accordance with the following standards and criteria:
(1) Such establishment may furnish sleeping accommodations only for tourists or
short-term (10 days or less) transient guests.
(2) The minimum lot area shall be 40,000 square feet.
(3) Cooking and housekeeping units shall not be provided as a part of this land
use.
P. Motor vehicles sales establishments when authorized by the Board of Supervisors
as a conditional use in accordance with the following standards and criteria:
§ 500-1502 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1502
500:70
(1) The minimum lot area shall be 60,000 square feet.
(2) There shall be minimum frontage of 200 feet on the street.
(3) Buffer yard. Twenty feet or as specified in § 500-1503, whichever is greater.
The buffer yard shall be provided along the perimeter of the lot and shall be in
accordance with the provisions of § 500-2605 of this chapter.
(4) No motor vehicles offered for sale shall be displayed in the required yards set
forth in Subsection P(3) above or in § 500-1503.
(5) A motor vehicle sales establishment shall not include any on-site dispensing
of motor vehicle fuels to patrons or the general public, unless such fuels are
included as part of a single sale of a motor vehicle or are primarily intended
for use as lubricants and not as combustibles.
(6) No streamers or festoon lighting, comprising a group of incandescent light
bulbs, shall be hung or strung on a building or structure. In addition, light bulbs
not shielded, hooded or otherwise screened to prevent the direct rays of the
light from shining on an adjacent property or right-of-way are prohibited.
(7) Automobile painting, bodywork or automobile repairs shall be permitted on
the premises, provided all repair and paint work shall be performed within a
closed building. All automobile parts, refuse and similar articles shall be stored
within a building or fully enclosed area.
(8) All driveways and paving areas shall be constructed of asphalt or concrete.
(9) Outdoor storage of tires, machines, tools, automotive parts and equipment
shall be prohibited.
(10) Every motor vehicle sales establishment shall have a permanent building for
offices, show rooms and display which shall have a minimum of 900 square
feet of floor area.
(11) Sales shall be limited to new or used passenger vehicles. The sale of new or
used motorcycles, campers, trucks, busses, tractors, trailers and other similar
vehicles shall be prohibited.
Q. Motor vehicle service station when authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use, provided that:
(1) The motor vehicle service station is operated as a retail business for the sale
directly to consumer-vendees of the following products and services only:
(a) Gasoline or substitute fuels, as well as lubricants, solvents, detergents and
other liquids, solids, prefabricated equipment or parts which are
reasonable and necessary for the operation and function of motor
vehicles; limited, however, to the dispensing or application thereof
directly in, into or on the fuel tank, engine or other integral parts of a
motor vehicle of a consumer-vendee.
(b) Services and noncombustible merchandise directly related or accessory
to motor vehicles; limited, however, to such services and merchandise
§ 500-1502 ZONING § 500-1502
500:71
which are sold or incidentally provided to the consumer-vendee of such
motor vehicle.
(c) Consumer products dispensed by automatic vending machines and
intended for consumption, such as food, beverages and tobaccos.
(2) Except for access drives and curbing, the front yard to a depth of 15 feet shall
be planted and landscaped in accordance with the reasonable
recommendations of the Middletown Township Planning Commission. The
required side and rear yard setbacks shall be planted and landscaped in
accordance with the reasonable recommendations of the Middletown
Township Planning Commission. No paving or parking shall be permitted in
the required side or rear yards.
(3) Fuel pumps may be located no closer than 30 feet to any street line, except that
the appurtenant fuel tank supplying such pump may be located without regard
to such limitations but shall at all times be underground and protected against
leakage of any flammable and volatile liquids. Approval shall be secured from
the Pennsylvania State Police Fire Marshal for the underground storage of
fuel.
(4) In order to minimize the dangers and disturbances from flammable, noxious,
malodorous, noisome and/or hazardous activities and products to which the
community and general public may be exposed, the following limitations are
imposed on any proposed use in this district:
(a) All services, sales, merchandise and products shall be performed,
transacted, provided and stored within an enclosed building, except for
the following:
[1] Products dispensed by automatic vending machines.
[2] Fuel pump sales.
[3] Merchandise and products which may be provided at or incidental to
fuel pump sales.
(b) Services and sales, except for self-service pumping of fuel, shall be
performed only by the owners or tenants of the building or lot and their
employees.
(5) Access drives shall meet the following standards:
(a) The maximum width of an access drive shall be 30 feet, measured at the
curb.
(b) For one access drive to be located on a street, the minimum lot width
along such street shall be 150 feet. For two access drives to be located on
a street, the minimum lot width shall be 200 feet.
(c) No more than two access drives shall be located on any one street, and
such access drives shall be at least 105 feet apart, measured center line to
center line, and at least 40 feet from the point of intersection of any
§ 500-1502 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1502
500:72
intersecting street lines.
R. Retirement community, being a form of residential use for retiring and aging
persons containing certain support facilities for them which will offer a continuum
of care as they age. Uses permitted in a retirement community shall consist of the
following:
(1) Retirement living units which shall be grouped in order to share common
elements, which may include common outside access. Each building shall
contain at least three living units in a single structure.
(a) Each dwelling unit shall have no more than two bedrooms. The minimum
habitable size of each dwelling unit shall be as follows:
Type of Unit
Minimum Habitable Size of Each Dwelling
Unit
(square feet)
Efficiency 400
One-bedroom 500
One-bedroom with den 700
Two-bedroom 800
(2) Personal care facilities shall be permitted where persons may reside who have
previously lived independently but who have developed a need for
personalized care. A personal care facility is an establishment in which food,
shelter, personal assistance or supervision are provided for periods exceeding
24 hours for more than three adults who are not relatives of the operator and
who require assistance or supervision in matters such as dressing, bathing, diet
or medication prescribed for self-administration, but who do not require
hospitalization or care in a skilled nursing or intermediate care facility. Such
facility shall comply with the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare
regulations for personal care facilities.
(3) Day-care facilities for elderly, nonresidents of the retirement community may
be operated by the retirement community as a service to the community and as
an alternative form of care, whereby persons needing care may live with their
children or their guardian during aging years but may be left in the care of
qualified persons during working hours.
(4) Retail facilities, administrative and activity areas shall be permitted for the use
of residents and their guests. No outside advertising shall be permitted for the
retail facilities. The retail facilities may include the following:
(a) Barbershop and beauty shop.
(b) Pharmacy.
(c) Commissary.
(d) Newsstand.
§ 500-1502 ZONING § 500-1502
500:73
(e) Gift shop.
(f) Snack bar/coffee shop.
(5) Common facilities required to support the needs of retiring and aging persons,
such as dining facilities, kitchens and accessory facilities, as well as social
rooms, meeting rooms, overnight guest rooms, activity rooms, crafts and
hobby shops, library and similar type uses, shall be permitted.
(6) Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to retirement
community uses shall be permitted.
(7) Area and dimensional requirements. The retirement community use in a C
Commercial District shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Minimum site area: 10 acres.
(b) Maximum density: 12 units per acre.
(c) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(d) Minimum open space area: 40%.
(e) Minimum building setback.
[1] Street lines: 100 feet.
[2] Other property lines: 75 feet.
(f) Maximum building height: four stories or 50 feet, whichever is less.
(g) Buffer yard. Along any adjacent land in Middletown Township zoned for
or in residential use, a buffer yard of not less than 75 feet shall be
provided. However, where such adjacent land in a residential
development is designated open space, parking shall be permitted in the
interior 25 feet of the buffer yard.
(8) Utilities. Each retirement community shall be supplied with public sewer and
water facilities. All telephone and electric lines shall be installed underground.
(9) Off-street parking. There shall be 0.75 parking space per dwelling unit and
0.75 parking space per health-care facility bed.
S. Transient dwelling. [Added 6-6-2016 by Ord. No. 16-01177]
T. Medical marijuana dispensary when authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use in accordance with the following standards and criteria: [Added
1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-03178]
(1) The medical marijuana dispensary shall provide proof of registration with the
Department of Health or proof that registration has been sought and is pending
177.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections S through V as Subsections T
through W, respectively.
178.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection T through W as Subsections U through X,
respectively.
§ 500-1502 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1502
500:74
approval, and shall at all times maintain a valid, accurate, and up-to-date
registration with the Department of Health. Should such registration at any
time be revoked or denied, any Township approval of the use shall
immediately become null and void.
(2) A medical marijuana dispensary shall at all times operate in full and complete
compliance with all Department of Health regulations relating to such
facilities.
(3) A medical marijuana dispensary may not operate on the same lot or site as a
facility used for growing and/or processing medical marijuana.
(4) A medical marijuana dispensary shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a
residentially zoned lot or a lot containing a public, private or parochial school,
day-care center, place of worship, public park, library and/or community
center.
(5) A medical marijuana dispensary shall not be located within 2,000 feet of a
licensed residential substance abuse diagnostic and treatment facility and/or
any other licensed drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility.
(6) A medical marijuana dispensary must operate entirely within an indoor,
enclosed, and secure facility.
(7) No use of medical marijuana shall be permitted on the premises of a medical
marijuana dispensary.
(8) No one under the age of 18 shall be permitted in a medical marijuana
dispensary, unless accompanied by a caregiver as required under Section 506
of the Medical Marijuana Act.179
(9) The hours of operation shall not be earlier than 7:00 a.m. and shall not be later
than 10:00 p.m.
(10) No exterior sales or sidewalk displays shall be permitted.
(11) No drive-through services shall be permitted.
(12) No outdoor seating areas shall be permitted.
(13) The use cannot be advertised on radio or television.
(14) There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors and/or odors that can be
seen, smelled, or otherwise perceived from beyond the lot line for the property
where the medical marijuana dispensary is located.
(15) The secured storage area for medical marijuana at a medical marijuana
dispensary shall not exceed 1/3 of the total gross floor area.
(16) No outdoor storage is permitted.
(17) A medical marijuana dispensary shall submit a refuse disposal plan to be
179.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.506.
§ 500-1502 ZONING § 500-1502
500:75
reviewed and approved by the Township. Medical marijuana remnants and byproducts
shall be disposed of according to an approved plan and shall not be
placed within an exterior refuse container.
(18) A medical marijuana dispensary shall submit a security plan to the Township,
demonstrating how the plan will maintain effective security and control of the
facility. The security plan shall specify the type and manner of twenty-fourhour
security, tracking, recordkeeping, record retention, and surveillance
system to be utilized in the facility as required by Chapter 7 of the Medical
Marijuana Act and as supplemented by regulations promulgated by the
Department of Health pursuant to the Medical Marijuana Act. The medical
marijuana dispensary shall also provide to the Township copies of all reports
to be submitted to the Department of Health pursuant to the Medical Marijuana
Act and the regulations promulgated by the Department of Health pertaining
to the security and control of the facility and pertaining to the building and
structures associated with the medical marijuana dispensary.
U. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted use
in the district. [Amended 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-03]
V. Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Article
XXVIII.
W. Any use of the same general character as any of the above-permitted uses, when
approved and authorized as a conditional use by the Board of Supervisors.
X. Forestry/timber harvesting, pursuant to the regulations set forth in Article IV,
§ 500-402M. [Amended 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-03]
Y. Permanent facilities for sale of consumer fireworks by special exception. [Added
7-15-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05]
(1) "Consumer fireworks" and "display fireworks" shall have the same meanings
as the terms in Act 43 of 2017.
(2) Permanent facilities for sales of consumer fireworks may only be permitted in
accordance with the following conditions:
(a) The facility must be licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of
Agriculture.
(b) The facility must comply with the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act,
the Uniform Construction Code, and the Township's ordinances in effect
at the time of the application.
(c) The facility must be a stand-alone permanent structure.
(d) Storage areas shall be separated from wholesale or retail sales areas to
which a purchaser may be admitted by appropriately rated fire separation.
(e) The facility shall be located no closer than 250 feet to the property line of
a facility selling or dispensing gasoline, propane or other flammable
products.
§ 500-1502 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1502
500:76
(f) The facility shall be located at least 1,500 feet from the property line of
another facility licensed to sell consumer fireworks.
(g) The facility shall have a monitored burglar and fire alarm system.
(h) Quarterly fire drills and preplanning meetings shall be conducted as
required by the local volunteer fire department with jurisdiction over the
site of the proposed facility.
(i) This use must comply with the regulations for retail stores set forth in
Article XXIII, § 500-2316, of this chapter.
(j) The facility shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in accordance
with all Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture requirements and all
standards set forth in Act 43 of 2017, including, but not limited to, the
following:
[1] There shall be security personnel on the premises for the seven days
preceding and including July 4 and for the three days preceding and
including January 2.
[2] No smoking shall be permitted in the facility.
[3] No cigarettes or tobacco products, matches, lighters or any other
flame-producing devices shall be permitted to be taken into the
facility.
[4] No minors shall be permitted in the facility unless accompanied by
an adult, and each minor shall stay with the adult in the facility.
[5] All facilities shall carry at least $2,000,000 in public and product
liability insurance.
[6] A licensee shall provide its employees with documented training in
the area of operational safety of a facility. The licensee shall provide
proof to the Township that it has provided written documentation to
the Department of Agriculture that each employee has received the
training.
[7] No display fireworks shall be stored or located at a facility.
[8] No person who appears to be under the influence of intoxicating
liquor or drugs shall be admitted to the facility, and no liquor, beer
or wine shall be permitted in the facility.
[9] Emergency evacuation plans shall be conspicuously posted in
appropriate locations within the facility.
(3) The facility shall comply with the lot, dimensional, area, and parking
requirements of the C District, as applicable, including but not limited to
setbacks and buffers, with the exception of the following:
(a) The facility shall be no closer than 150 feet to any pipeline right-of-way.
§ 500-1502 ZONING § 500-1502
500:77
(b) The facility shall be located no closer than 600 feet to the property line of
schools, day-care centers, nursing homes, hospitals, civic buildings, or
dwellings.
(4) Application for permit. An applicant for a permanent facility for sales of
consumer fireworks shall submit an application for a special exception that
contains, at a minimum, the following:
(a) Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture license.
(b) Proof of at least $2,000,000 in public and product liability insurance.
(c) Emergency evacuation plans.
(d) A site plan demonstrating compliance with setback requirements.
(e) Evidence of procedures to ensure compliance with Pennsylvania
Department of Agriculture requirements, including, but not limited to,
prevention of smoking in the facility, security measures, and restriction
of unaccompanied minors in the facility.
Z. Temporary facilities for sale of consumer fireworks accessory to existing retail
uses, by special exception. [Added 7-15-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05]
(1) Definitions.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS — Shall have the same meaning as in Act 43 of
2017.
OUTDOOR STORAGE UNIT — A consumer fireworks building, trailer,
semitrailer, metal shipping container, or magazine meeting the specifications
of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act,180 the Uniform Construction
Code, and the Township's ordinances in effect at the time of the application.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A structure, other than a permanent facility
with fixed utility connections, which is in use or in place for a period of 20
consecutive calendar days or less and is dedicated to the storage and sale
of consumer fireworks and related items. The term includes temporary retail
stands, tents, canopies, and membrane structures meeting the specifications of
the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act,181 the Uniform Construction Code,
and the Township's Ordinances in effect at the time of the application. The
term excludes a facility that is not licensed to sell consumer fireworks under
federal and/or state law and that is required to be licensed.
(2) Temporary facilities for sales of consumer fireworks are only permitted as
accessory to existing retail uses.
(3) Temporary facilities for sales of consumer fireworks may only be permitted in
accordance with the following conditions:
(a) The facility must comply with the Pennsylvania Construction Code
180.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
181.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
§ 500-1502 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1502
500:78
Act,182 the Uniform Construction Code, and the Township's ordinances in
effect at the time of the application.
(b) The temporary structure is located no closer than 250 feet to the property
line of a facility storing, selling or dispensing gasoline, propane or other
flammable products.
(c) The outdoor storage unit, if any, is separated from the wholesale or retail
sales area to which a purchaser may be admitted by appropriately rated
fire separation.
(d) The temporary structure is secured at all times during which consumer
fireworks are displayed within the structure.
(e) The temporary structure has a minimum of $2,000,000 in public and
product liability insurance.
(f) The sales period is limited to June 15 through July 8 and December 21
through January 2 of each year.
(g) Consumer fireworks not on display for retail sale must be stored in an
outdoor storage unit.
(h) The facility must have a current evacuation plan that complies with the
specifications of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act,183 the Uniform
Construction Code, and the Township's ordinances in effect at the time of
the application, including all posting requirements.
(i) This use must comply with the regulations for retail stores set forth in
Article XXIII, § 500-2316, of this chapter.
(4) The facility shall comply with the lot, dimensional, area, and parking
requirements of the C District, including but not limited to setbacks and
buffers, with the exception of the following:
(a) The facility shall be no closer than 150 feet to any pipeline right-of-way.
(b) The facility shall be located no closer than 600 feet to the property line of
schools, day-care centers, nursing homes, hospitals, civic buildings, or
dwellings.
(5) No smoking, cigarettes, tobacco products, matches, lighters, or other flameproducing
devices shall be permitted within the temporary facility.
(6) No minor shall be permitted in the temporary facility unless accompanied by
an adult at all times.
(7) No person who appears to be under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
drugs shall be admitted to the facility, and no liquor, beer or wine shall be
permitted in the facility.
182.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
183.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
§ 500-1502 ZONING § 500-1502
500:79
§ 500-1503. Area, dimensional and design requirements. [Amended 12-1-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-13; 3-1-1994 by Ord. No. 94-02]
Unless a greater area or dimensional regulation is stated in § 500-1502, Use regulations,
for a specific use, all uses in the C District shall meet the following requirements:
(8) Application for permit. An applicant for a temporary facility for sales of
consumer fireworks shall submit an application for a special exception that
contains, at a minimum, the following:
(a) All federal, state, and local licenses required for the facility to operate.
(b) Proof of at least $2,000,000 in public and product liability insurance.
(c) Emergency evacuation plans.
(d) A site plan demonstrating compliance with setback requirements.
(e) All application materials and permit decisions from the Township's Code
Enforcement Officer and/or fire code official regarding the proposed
facility's compliance with the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act,184 the
Uniform Construction Code, and the Township's ordinances in effect at
the time of the application.
(f) Evidence of procedures to ensure compliance with the requirements set
forth above, including, but not limited to, prevention of smoking in the
facility, security measures and restriction of unaccompanied minors in the
facility.
A. Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
C. Maximum building coverage: 30%.
D. Maximum impervious surface ratio: 60%.
E. Maximum building height: 50 feet.
F. Minimum yards.
(1) Front: 50 feet.
(2) Side: 15 feet.
(3) Rear: 20 feet.
G. Minimum building spacing: 30 feet.
H. Buffer yard. Along any adjacent land zoned for or in residential or agricultural use,
a buffer yard shall be provided which shall be not less than 75 feet in width,
measured from the property line or from the street line. The buffer yard shall be in
accordance with the provisions of § 500-2605.
184.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
§ 500-1502 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1503
500:80
I. Parking and loading. Off-street parking and loading space, pedestrian walkway and
motor vehicle access shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article
XXVII and the regulations of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
(Chapter 440).
J. Special planting strip. For properties fronting on Lincoln Highway, a twelve-footwide
planting strip shall be provided along the road frontage. Additionally, the
rearmost five feet of this planting strip shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs in
a manner which is satisfactory to the Middletown Township Planning Commission.
K. A traffic and transportation impact study prepared in accordance with the
requirements set forth in Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development, may be
required depending upon applicability criteria.
L. Phasing of development and internal site improvements is permissible in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land
Development, provided that all off-site improvements shall be included and
completed within the first phase of development.
§ 500-1503 ZONING § 500-1503
500:81

ARTICLE XVI
CS Shopping Center District
§ 500-1601. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of the Shopping Center District is to provide for the appropriate
development of modern, well-designed, integrated retail shopping centers. The principal
use of land in this district shall be commercial and service uses to serve surrounding
residential areas. In order to preserve residential values and protect the general welfare,
design standards which will reduce traffic and parking congestion are incorporated
into the district. Among other things, the shopping center shall be comprised of a
group or groups of integrated buildings within which retail trade and related service
activities shall be conducted with convenient, safe and adequate vehicular and pedestrian
accessways and safe and adequate off-street parking and loading facilities.
§ 500-1602. Use regulations. [Amended 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13]
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the
following purposes and no other:
A. Retail store, subject to the regulations set forth in Article XXIII, § 500-2316, of this
chapter. [Amended 7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05]
B. Bakery, confectionery or custom shop for articles to be sold at retail on the
premises.
C. Personal service shop, such as, but not limited to, the following: barbershop, beauty
parlor, shoe repair shop, dry-cleaning pickup store, tailor shop, automatic selfservice
laundry or dry-cleaning store.
D. Restaurant, cafe, or other similar place serving food and beverages, without drivein
service.
E. Indoor amusement or recreational establishment, such as bowling alley, swimming
pool, skating rink, dance hall, golf driving range and indoor theater, but not
including outdoor motion-picture establishment.
F. Assembly hall or community building.
G. Library or museum.
H. Day-care center.
I. Professional, business or government offices.
J. Bank or similar financial institution.
K. Parking lot, which use shall not include any on-site dispensing of motor vehicle
petroleum fuels and/or lubricants.
L. Electric substation, telephone or telegraph office.
M. General service or repair shop, restricted to such uses as watch repair, television
repair, and upholstering when incidental to furniture sales.
§ 500-1601 ZONING § 500-1602
500:83
§ 500-1603. Area, dimensional and design standards. [Amended 5-27-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-10]
Unless a greater area or dimensional regulation is stated in § 500-1602, Use regulations,
for a specific use, all uses in the CS District shall meet the following requirements:
N. Apartment for one family in combination with a business use when occupied by the
owner or caretaker.
O. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted use
in this district.
P. Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Article
XXVIII.
Q. Forestry/timber harvesting, pursuant to the regulations set forth in § 500-402M of
this chapter.
A. Minimum lot area: two acres.
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Maximum building coverage: 30%.
D. Maximum impervious surface ratio: 60%.
E. Maximum building height: 50 feet.
F. Minimum yards.
(1) Front: 50 feet.
(2) Side: 25 feet.
(3) Rear: 50 feet.
G. Minimum building spacing: 20 feet.
H. Buffer yard. Along any adjacent land in existing residential or agricultural use, a
buffer yard shall be provided which shall be not less than 75 feet in width measured
from the property line or the street line. The buffer yard shall be in accordance with
the provisions of § 500-2605.
I. The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an overall plan
and shall be designed as a single architectural style with appropriate landscaping.
The proposed development shall initially provide for the construction of either a
minimum of 7,500 square feet of floor area or a minimum of six of the permitted
uses listed in § 500-1602.
J. All buildings shall be arranged in a group or groups.
K. Adequate areas shall be provided for loading and unloading of delivery trucks and
other vehicles; servicing of shops by refuse collection, fuel, fire and other service
vehicles; automobile accessways and pedestrian walks. All areas provided for use
by vehicles shall be constructed in accordance with Township specifications.
§ 500-1602 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1603
500:84
L. Parking, loading and service areas used by motor vehicles shall be located entirely
within the lot lines of the shopping center, shall be physically separated from public
streets, and shall have not more than two accessways to any one public street. The
center line of any accessway shall be located at least 200 feet from the point of
intersection of any intersecting street lines.
M. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article
XXVII.
N. The proposed shopping center shall be served by adequate public water and public
sewage disposal facilities.
O. Shopping centers shall take access from an arterial or collector highway.
P. Lighting facilities shall be provided and arranged in a manner which will protect
the highway and neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous interference
of any kind.
§ 500-1603 ZONING § 500-1603
500:85

ARTICLE XVII
GB General Business District
§ 500-1701. Purpose and intent. [Amended 3-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-16;
10-7-2019 by Ord. No. 19-07]
The purpose of the General Business District is to provide for major commercial,
multifamily, intensive office and light industrial uses in a concentrated area. Such
developments should be planned for adequate improvements, internal streets, suitable
open space and landscaping, and compatibility with adjacent uses. The design standards
for specific uses in this district are reflective of the Township's desire to encourage
appropriate high-quality, mixed-use development and to promote flexibility for
redevelopment in consideration of the changing nature of shopping centers, the demand
for a diversity of uses in a singular location, including, but not limited to, entertainment,
lodging, housing, hospitality, retail, office, cultural, and gathering space.
§ 500-1702. Use regulations. [Amended 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13]
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the
following purposes and no other:
A. Retail use and services, including the following:
(1) Retail store, subject to the regulations set forth in Article XXIII, § 500-2316,
of this chapter. [Amended 7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 5-20-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-05]
(2) Consumer service and personal service shops.
(3) Bank or similar financial institution.
(4) Restaurant.
(5) Indoor theater, radio and television studios.
(6) Hotel or motel which furnishes sleeping accommodations for tourists or shortterm
transient guests only. Such uses shall not include rental units equipped
with cooking or housekeeping facilities.
B. Professional, business or government offices.
C. Religious and educational uses, including churches, public schools and schools for
adult education.
D. Community buildings, such as a municipal building, post office or library.
E. Clinics of hospitals which are accessory and incidental to a medical office or a
group of medical offices in one building.
F. General service or repair shop.
G. Utility and public services, including electric substation, telephone central office,
and rail or bus passenger station.
§ 500-1701 ZONING § 500-1702
500:87
H. Laboratory uses (research, experimental and testing) which are not noxious or
hazardous.
I. Wholesale business, wholesale storage, warehousing, motor freight terminal, and
express office.
J. Light manufacturing activities which are not noxious or hazardous, as follows:
(1) Manufacture of clothing, hosiery and other textiles; fur or leather goods (not
including tanning or dyeing); jewelry, clocks and watches; musical,
professional and scientific instruments; optical goods and umbrellas.
(2) Manufacture or assembly of products from the following previously prepared
materials: bone, canvas, ceramics, cork, feathers, felt, fur, glass, hair, horn,
leather, paper, plastics, shells and rubber (excluding all rubber and synthetic
processing).
(3) Manufacture or assembly of light metal products, excluding foundries, drop
forge plants, smelting, refining, alloying or other basic metallurgical
processes.
(4) Manufacture, bottling and distribution of nonalcoholic beverages.
(5) Printing and publishing establishments.
K. Combining and processing of food products as an accessory or incidental use to the
main use, such as a retail store, excluding all processing of meat or fish products.
L. Heliport, subject to approval and authorization by the Federal Aviation
Administration and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of
Aviation, and compliance with all applicable federal and state requirements.
M. Apartment for one family in combination with a business use when operated by the
owner or caretaker.
N. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted use
in this district.
O. Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Article
XXVIII.
P. Any use of the same general character as any of the above permitted uses when
authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
Q. Forestry/timber harvesting, pursuant to the regulations set forth in § 500-402M of
this chapter.
R. Multifamily dwellings. A grouping of three or more dwelling units in a building or
a grouping of buildings each consisting of three or more dwelling units on a site
with shared amenities, subject to the additional design requirements in § 500-1705.
[Added 10-7-2019 by Ord. No. 19-07]
S. Recreational entertainment facility (An indoor and/or outdoor commercial facility
for the purposes of entertainment by recreation or organized sport-related events or
§ 500-1702 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1702
500:88
§ 500-1703. Area, dimensional and design requirements.
Unless a greater area or dimensional regulation is stated in § 500-1702, Use regulations,
for a specific use, all uses in the GB District shall meet the following requirements:
activities in which members of the public themselves participate). [Added
10-7-2019 by Ord. No. 19-07]
T. Fitness, spa and/or health club/center. [Added 10-7-2019 by Ord. No. 19-07]
U. Museum/gallery. [Added 10-7-2019 by Ord. No. 19-07]
V. Parking, including structured parking. [Added 10-7-2019 by Ord. No. 19-07]
A. Minimum site area: 50 acres.
B. Minimum frontage at street line: 300 feet.
C. Minimum building setback-site.
(1) Street lines: 100 feet.
(2) Other property lines: 75 feet.
D. A minimum lot area of five acres shall be provided for each business use; however,
up to nine lots within the site may have a minimum lot area of one acre.
E. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
F. Maximum building coverage (on lot): 30%.
G. Maximum impervious surface ratio (on lot): 65%.
H. Minimum building setbacks.
(1) Internal street lines: 50 feet.
(2) Other internal lot lines: 25 feet.
I. Minimum building spacing: 30 feet.
J. Minimum building height: 2 stories.
K. Maximum building height: 100 feet.
L. Buffer yard. Along any adjacent land zoned for or in residential or agricultural use,
a buffer yard shall be provided which shall be not less than 75 feet in width,
measured from the property line or the street line. The buffer yard shall be in
accordance with the provisions of § 500-2605.
M. Adequate areas shall be provided for loading and unloading of delivery trucks and
other vehicles; servicing of shops by refuse collection, fuel, fire and other service
vehicles; automobile accessways and pedestrian walks. All areas provided for use
by vehicles shall be constructed in accordance with Township specifications.
N. Parking, loading and service areas used by motor vehicles shall be located entirely
§ 500-1702 ZONING § 500-1703
500:89
§ 500-1704. Parking, loading, accessway and planting requirements applicable to
shopping centers in GB District. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13; 3-1-1994
by Ord. No. 94-02; 2-11-1997 by Ord. No. 97-01]
The following paving, loading, accessway and planting requirements shall be the
exclusive parking, loading, accessway and planting requirements of this chapter
applicable to that portion of a General Business District which is developed as a
shopping center. For purposes of this section, a "shopping center" shall be deemed to be
an area principally devoted to establishments used for the sale of goods and services at
retail, for office uses (including professional, business, administrative, finance, utility,
insurance or government office) and related and ancillary facilities, including all parking
and adjacent planted areas serving such establishments which are not separated
therefrom by a paved area other than pedestrian walks or automobile accessways
designed to carry traffic exclusively to and from such establishments.
within the General Business District.
O. Any proposed development shall be served by adequate public water and public
sewage disposal facilities.
P. Lighting facilities shall be provided and arranged in a manner which will protect
the highway and neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous interference
of any kind.
Q. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article
XXVII, except that shopping centers shall meet the requirements of § 500-1704.
R. Where the Board of Supervisors has approved development plans in the GB District
for a site meeting the requirements for the GB District, individual units, buildings,
or parcels of land within the approved GB District development may be subdivided,
leased, purchased, sold, mortgaged, and developed as individual units or lots
without meeting area, dimensional and design requirements for those individual lots
as provided in §§ 500-1703, 500-1704 and 500-1705; provided, however, that the
development plan for the entire site shall at all times remain compliant with the
requirements set forth in §§ 500-1703, 500-1704 and 500-1705. [Added 10-7-2019
by Ord. No. 19-07]
A. Off-street parking requirements. Shopping centers in the General Business District
shall provide 5.5 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area
(other than offices) in excess of the first 25,000 square feet; five parking spaces for
each 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area (other than offices) in excess of the
first 25,000 square feet up to 100,000 square feet; and 4.5 spaces for each 1,000
square feet of gross leasable area (other than offices) in excess of 100,000 square
feet. Offices shall provide 2.5 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable
area to the extent that such area exceeds 20% of the gross leasable area devoted to
uses other than offices. "Gross leasable area" is the total floor area designed for
tenant occupancy, including basement, mezzanines and upper floors, if any,
expressed in square feet and measured from center lines of joint partitions and
exteriors of outside walls. The gross leasable area does not include the area of any
common malls or walkways or public facilities. Uses not specifically mentioned in
these requirements shall be governed by the requirements set forth herein for a use
§ 500-1703 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1704
500:90
which is of the same general character to the proposed unmentioned use or to which
the proposed unmentioned uses are customarily incidental.
B. Parking and maneuvering areas. Parking spaces and loading spaces shall be
arranged so as to provide adequate space for parking maneuvers and circulation in
the access drives and aisles with a minimum danger of accidental collision.
(1) Off-street parking areas shall conform to the minimum dimensional standards
set forth in § 440-421 of the Middletown Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, as amended, and shall be subject to the requirements set forth in
§ 500-2704 herein.
(2) Striping shall be required as is set forth in § 500-2704F(1) and (2).
C. Automobile entrance and accessways. Shopping centers shall take access from an
arterial or collector highway. Paved entrance and accessways to the parking area of
a shopping center in a General Business District shall be a minimum of 30 feet and
a maximum of 50 feet in width, except that there shall be provided widened radii
where such accessways enter on streets and highways adjacent to the shopping
center, so that the width at the entrance to such streets and highways shall be a
minimum of 60 feet and a maximum of 100 feet. The locations of entrances and
accessways shall be designed, constructed and maintained to provide safe and
efficient ingress and egress for traffic without undue congestion or interference with
the normal traffic flow on the streets and highways adjacent to the shopping center.
The Township authorities reviewing proposed plans may require that adequate
acceleration and deceleration lanes be provided on the streets and highways
adjacent to the shopping center.
D. Off-street loading requirements.
(1) Paved areas for loading and unloading of delivery trucks, for refuse collection,
fuel and other service vehicles, and for customer parcel pickup shall be
provided on the land forming that portion of a General Business District which
is devoted to shopping center use. Such areas shall be adequate in size and
shall be so arranged that they may be used without blocking or interfering with
the safe use of access roads or lanes or required automobile parking spaces.
Off-street loading space shall be provided for the retail establishments in the
shopping center on the basis of the following minimum requirements:
Aggregate Gross Leasable Area in Shopping
Center
(square feet) Required No. of Berths
00 to 32,000 1
32,001 to 80,000 2
80,001 to 188,000 3
188,001 to 192,000 4
192,001 to 256,000 5
256,001 to 320,000 6
§ 500-1704 ZONING § 500-1704
500:91
Aggregate Gross Leasable Area in Shopping
Center
(square feet) Required No. of Berths
320,001 to 392,000 7
For each additional 72,000 1 additional
(2) An off-street truck loading or unloading berth shall be defined as an on-theproperty
space for the standing, loading and unloading of vehicles to avoid
undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys. Such space shall
be not less than 12 feet in width, 14 feet in height, and 55 feet in length,
exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space. In order to permit safe and
expeditious maneuvering of trucks and trailers, at least 100 feet of
unobstructed paved access area shall be provided adjacent to each off-street
truck loading or unloading berth. Loading areas shall be screened with walls
or dense planting screen at least nine feet high.
E. Pedestrian walkways traversing the parking areas shall be provided. Such walkways
shall be closed to automobile traffic except at points of intersection with automobile
access or maneuvering lanes. Walkways shall be at least 9.5 feet wide and shall be
delineated by painted markings on the paving and by planted areas or containers
spaced at reasonable distances.
F. Continuing character of obligation.
(1) Compliance with the schedule of requirements in this section for vehicle
parking and loading applicable to newly erected or substantially altered
structures shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of any building
affected by this chapter. It shall be unlawful for an owner to discontinue,
change or dispense with or cause the discontinuance or change of the required
vehicle parking or loading space, apart from the discontinuance, sale or
transfer of such structures, without establishing alternative vehicle parking or
loading space which meets the requirements of and is in compliance with this
chapter. No person, firm or corporation shall use such building without
acquiring such land for vehicle parking or loading space which meets the
requirements of and is in compliance with this chapter.
(2) All off-street parking facilities shall be provided and maintained so long as the
use exists which the facilities were designed to serve. No open area in an offstreet
parking area shall be encroached upon by buildings, storage or any other
use, nor shall the number of parking spaces be reduced in total extent after
their provision except upon the approval of the Zoning Hearing Board, and
then only after proof that, by reason of diminution in floor area, seating area,
the number of employees, or change in other factors controlling the regulation
of the number of parking spaces, such reduction is in conformity with the
requirements of this article.
G. Plan of off-street parking and/or loading areas. For the purpose of constructing or
converting parking and/or loading spaces into the required parking and/or loading
areas, such areas shall be shown on the land development plan which shall be
§ 500-1704 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1704
500:92
§ 500-1705. Design requirements for mixed-use developments including
multifamily dwellings in GB District. [Added 10-7-2019 by Ord. No. 19-07]
The following design requirements shall be applicable solely to mixed-use developments
including multifamily dwellings in the GB District, and such requirements shall
supersede all other requirements to the contrary contained in this chapter or Chapter 440
(Subdivision and Land Development):
submitted to the Zoning Officer. Such plan shall indicate that the arrangement and
number of parking and/or loading spaces and the aisles and accessways for parking
maneuvers and ingress and egress to the parking and/or loading areas meet the
requirements of this chapter.
H. Mixed uses. The total requirements for off-street parking and off-street loading
spaces shall be the sum of the requirements of the different uses computed
separately as specified above in this section. No part of an off-street parking area
required for any building or use for the purpose of complying with the provisions
of this section shall be included as a part of an off-street parking area required for
another building or use unless the type of structures indicate that the periods of
usage of such structures will not be simultaneous with each other.
I. Construction and maintenance of off-street parking places. All off-street parking
facilities required pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be paved, drained
and lighted; painted so as to indicate their location; periodically maintained by the
owner in accordance with Township specifications; and arranged for convenient
access and safety of pedestrians and vehicles. The off-street parking and loading
areas shall be physically separated from any adjacent highway or street by a
concrete cut and by a planting strip which shall be no less than 12 feet in width. The
applicant for a building permit requiring the installation of paved off-street parking
shall, at the same time that he installs off-street parking, extend the paving of any
street adjacent to the shopping center to the proposed curb. All planting strips shall
be landscaped with a combination of shrubs, flowers or trees which the property
owner shall choose and shall be maintained at all times in a neat and orderly
manner. All sidewalks installed in the off-street parking areas or in the
aforementioned planting strips shall be concrete and shall conform to Township
specifications.
J. Landscaping. There shall be incorporated within that portion of a General Business
District which is principally devoted to development as a shopping center
appropriate planting strips and other landscaped areas, which shall include any
combination of lawn, shrubs, flowers or trees which the property owner shall
choose after consultation with the Township Planning Commission and shall be
maintained at all times in a neat and orderly manner. Effective grouping of trees
and shrubs may be substituted for planted islands. Such groupings shall be used to
provide relief from massive, unbroken paved areas.
K. Nonapplicability of other provisions. The requirements of Article XXVII, Off-
Street Parking Regulations, shall not apply to that portion of a General Business
District which is developed as a shopping center.
A. All multifamily dwellings shall be part of a mixed-use development including at
§ 500-1704 ZONING § 500-1705
500:93
least one other permitted use in the GB District.
B. Maximum density for multifamily dwellings: five dwelling units per acre of site
area.
C. Area, dimensional and design requirements for mixed-use developments including
multifamily dwellings:
(1) Minimum site area, per § 500-1703A: 100 acres.
(2) Building coverage, per § 500-1703D: 30% based on site area.
(3) Setback from street lines, including internal street lines, per § 500-1703C(1)
and § 500-1703H(1): 10 feet.
(4) Maximum number of stories for multifamily dwellings: five stories.
(5) Maximum building height for multifamily dwellings: 75 feet.
(6) No buffer yard, per § 500-1703L, shall be required between residential and
nonresidential uses within a site containing multifamily dwellings and another
use in the GB District.
(7) Open space, as required by §§ 500-2604 and 440-424B(1), which may be
provided anywhere within the site: 250 square feet per residential dwelling
unit.
D. Parking for multifamily dwellings located in a mixed-use development shall be
calculated at a rate of 1.5 off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit and shall
not be counted in the otherwise-required shopping center parking required by
§ 500-1704A. Parking for multifamily dwellings in a mixed-use development may
be provided under buildings and/or in structured parking.
§ 500-1705 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1705
500:94
ARTICLE XVIII
P Professional District
§ 500-1801. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of the Professional District is to provide reasonable standards for the
harmonious development of offices, medical facilities and educational, religious and
philanthropic institutions and other related uses where, because of the nature of the
undeveloped land, intensive development is not appropriate. The construction of singlefamily
detached dwellings will not be precluded from this district.
§ 500-1802. Use regulations. [Amended 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13]
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the
following purposes and no other:
A. Professional, business or government offices other than medical offices. Such uses
shall not involve the actual storage, exchange or delivery of merchandise on the
premises.
B. Medical office or clinic for medical or dental examination or treatment of persons
as outpatients, including laboratories incidental thereto. Such uses shall have a
minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet.
C. Financial institutions on a minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet.
D. Mortuaries.
E. Government or public buildings.
F. Educational institutions, including dormitories, day-care centers and driving
schools.
G. Buildings for public worship.
H. Philanthropic and other nonprofit institutions which are noncommercial in nature.
I. Museums and libraries.
J. Club, lodge or fraternal institutions on a minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet.
K. Single-family detached dwelling, subject to the area and dimensional requirements
of the R-2 Residence District (§ 500-903). Section 500-1803 shall not be applicable
to this use.
L. Transient dwelling. [Added 6-6-2016 by Ord. No. 16-01185]
M. Telephone central office, electric substation.
N. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted use
in this district.
185.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections L through O as Subsections M
through P, respectively.
§ 500-1801 ZONING § 500-1802
500:95
§ 500-1803. Area, dimensional and design requirements.
Unless a greater area or dimensional regulation is stated in § 500-1802, Use regulations,
for a specific use, all uses in the P District shall meet the following requirements:
O. Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Article
XXVIII.
P. Forestry/timber harvesting, pursuant to the regulations set forth in § 500-402M of
this chapter.
A. Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 80 feet.
C. Maximum building coverage: 20%.
D. Maximum impervious surface ratio: 50%.
E. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
F. Minimum yards.
(1) Front: 50 feet.
(2) Side: 20 feet.
(3) Rear: 25 feet.
G. Buffer yard. Along any adjacent land zoned for or in residential or agricultural use,
a buffer yard shall be provided which shall be not less than 75 feet in width,
measured from the property line or the street line. The buffer yard shall be in
accordance with the provisions of § 500-2605.
H. Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article XXVII.
I. Each use shall be served by adequate public water and public sewage disposal
facilities.
§ 500-1802 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1803
500:96
ARTICLE XIX
M-1 Light Manufacturing District
§ 500-1901. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this district is to provide reasonable standards for the orderly
development of light manufacturing uses and such other uses as are related or accessory
thereto; to establish reasonable standards for buildings and other structures, including
lot areas and dimensions of yards and other open spaces; and to ensure that facilities
and industries operate in a manner which will minimize air pollution, noise, glare, heat,
vibration, and fire and safety hazards. The Light Manufacturing District is intended
to permit and encourage industrial development that will be so located and designed
as to constitute a harmonious and appropriate part of the physical development of the
Township and contribute to the soundness of the economic base of the Township.
§ 500-1902. Use regulations. [Amended 8-18-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8; 3-23-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-03; 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13; 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 01-17]
A. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the
following purposes and no other, provided that no use which is noxious or
hazardous shall be permitted except in accordance with Article XXV of this
chapter.
(1) Agriculture and horticulture on a minimum lot area of five acres.
(2) Municipal building or recreation facility.
(3) Dwelling quarters in combination with a permitted use for watchmen or
caretakers employed on the premises.
(4) Professional, business or government offices.
(5) Research, testing or experimental laboratory.
(6) Public utility operating facility, which may occupy no more than 10% of the
property upon which it is located.
(7) Manufacturing, including the production, processing, cleaning, testing and
distribution of materials, goods, foodstuffs and products.
(8) Wholesale storage, warehousing and wholesale businesses engaged in the sale
of commodities in quantity exclusively to retailers, other businesses or
industrial, institutional and commercial customers for resale or business use
only.
(9) Amusement and recreational establishments or athletic facilities, provided that
these uses are limited to indoors or within the confines of a fully enclosed
building.
(10) Industrial parks, which shall be a combination of lots for permitted light
manufacturing uses on a site of 10 or more acres. Such parks shall be planned
developments of light manufacturing uses and related uses, which shall
include improvements for internal streets, coordinated utilities, landscaping
§ 500-1901 ZONING § 500-1902
500:97
and buffering.
(11) General airport facilities, including accessory sales, services and rentals, when
authorized as a conditional use by the Board of Supervisors, subject to the
following:
(a) Such use shall only be permitted as part of an industrial park which is 50
acres or more in size.
(b) Such use shall be approved and authorized by the Federal Aviation
Administration and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation,
Bureau of Aviation, and shall comply with all applicable federal and state
requirements.
(12) Printing, publishing, binding.
(13) Contracting offices and shops, such as building, concrete, electrical, heating,
masonry, painting and roofing.
(14) Trucking yard or terminal; packing and crating; express, carting or hauling
station. Truck terminals shall be licensed by the Public Utilities Commission.
Such use shall be located no closer than 500 feet to a residential district.
Trucks with compressors running 24 hours a day shall be located within a
quadrangle of buildings or walls and surrounded by a landscaped earthen
berm.
(15) Lumberyard, where lumber products are sold or processed. This principal use
may be combined with a planing mill.
(16) Planing mill, where wood products are sold or processed to finish items such
as siding, trim, etc. This principal use may be combined with a lumberyard.
(17) Fuel storage and distribution, including the storage and distribution of fuel oil
or coal. Approval shall be secured from the Pennsylvania State Police Fire
Marshal for the underground storage of fuel.
(18) Mini warehouse when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special
exception, provided that the following requirements shall be met:
(a) No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
(b) The storage facilities complex shall be surrounded by a fence at least
eight feet in height of a type approved by the Township.
(c) Minimum aisle width between buildings shall be 26 feet.
(d) One office and one dwelling unit are permitted as accessory uses.
(e) Approval shall be obtained from the Township Police Chief and Fire
Marshal regarding security and fire protection.
(f) Each structure shall not exceed 6,000 square feet in size.
(g) Minimum requirements for lease restrictions:
§ 500-1902 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1902
500:98
[1] No business activities other than leasing of storage units shall be
permitted.
[2] No explosive, toxic, radioactive or highly flammable materials shall
be stored on the property.
(h) Parking. One off-street paving space for each 2,000 square feet of gross
floor area of storage. These parking spaces should be distributed equally
throughout the storage facility. In addition, one off-street paving space
for each 10,000 square feet of gross floor area of storage shall be provided
at the project office for use by prospective clients.
(19) Truck repair shop for vehicles with a gross weight of more than 14,000
pounds.
(20) Adult commercial use in a building or structure with more than 75 square feet
of floor area or 2% of the total floor area, whichever is less, devoted to
activities of the type which are prescribed by 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903. An adult
commercial use shall be permitted when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board as a special exception, provided that:
(a) The building or structure of such use shall be located no less than 500 feet
from any residential use or district, public or private school, church,
recreation facility or any other religious, institutional or educational use.
(b) No such use shall be located within 2,000 feet of a similar use.
(c) No materials sold within shall be visible from any window, door or
exterior of the building or structure.
(d) No person under the age of 17 years of age shall be permitted to patronize
an adult commercial use or be sold any pornographic material.
(21) Temporary or transient businesses which utilize outdoor display of any goods,
wares or merchandise offered for sale by said business; provided, however,
said use shall comply with the following regulations:
(a) Said business shall have a current Middletown Township temporary or
transient business license, and the conduct of said business shall be in
compliance with the applicable terms and conditions of the Middletown
Township Peddling and Solicitation Ordinance (Chapter 345).
(b) Said business shall not be permitted on premises fronting on or adjacent
to any expressways or arterial streets.
(c) Said business shall provide at least one off-street parking space for each
50 square feet of gross outdoor display area in addition to the off-street
parking space requirements pursuant to Article XXVII.
(d) No part of the outdoor display shall occupy any portion of the street rightof-
way, sidewalks or other areas intended or designed for pedestrian use,
required parking areas, or the required front, side or rear yards.
(e) The outdoor display area shall occupy an area of less than 1/3 of the
§ 500-1902 ZONING § 500-1902
500:99
existing building coverage.
(22) Emergency services, including fire, rescue and other emergency services of a
municipal or volunteer nature.
(23) Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of the
above permitted uses.
(24) Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions of
Article XXVIII.
(25) Any use of the same general character as any of the above permitted uses when
authorized as a conditional use by the Board of Supervisors.
(26) Automobile painting, bodywork or automobile repair. All repair and paint
work shall be performed within a closed building. All automobile parts, refuse
and similar articles shall be stored within a building or fully enclosed area.
(27) Personal service establishment, provided that:
(a) It shall be unlawful to establish a personal service establishment within
1,000 linear feet of:
[1] A church, synagogue or regular place of religious worship.
[2] A public or private elementary or secondary school.
[3] A boundary of any residential district.
[4] A public park.
[5] A licensed day-care center.
[6] Another personal service establishment.
(b) For purposes of this chapter, measurements shall be made in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
portion of the exterior wall of the building or structure used as a part of
the premises where a personal service establishment is conducted to the
nearest property or boundary line, whichever is closer, of the premises
enumerated in Subsection A(27)(a)[1] through [6] of this section.
(28) Forestry/timber harvesting, pursuant to the regulations set forth in § 500-402M
of this chapter.
(29) Quarry, including extractive operations for sand, clay, shale, gravel, topsoil,
stone and similar operations, including borrow pits (excavations for removing
material for filling operations), when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board
as a special exception, provided that the following requirements shall be met:
(a) No extraction shall be conducted on a lot area less than 25 acres. No
extraction shall be conducted closer than 200 feet to the boundary of any
district in which extraction is permitted, nor closer than 300 feet from the
center line of any street, nor closer than 400 feet to the point of
intersection of the center lines of two streets. The setback area shall not
§ 500-1902 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1902
500:100
be used for any other use in conjunction with extraction except access
streets, berms, screening, landscaping and signs. Except where a railroad
is a district boundary line, there shall be a berm of average height of
15 feet and maximum height of 50 feet. The slope of the sides of the
berm shall not exceed a 1:1 ratio. Berms shall be planted and seeded
and erosion control measures shall be taken as may be approved by
the United States Natural Resources Conservation Service. Planting and
berms shall begin at a point no closer to a street than the ultimate right-ofway
line. No berm shall be constructed closer than 50 feet to a district in
which extraction is not permitted. The Township may require additional
planting pursuant to the standards of § 500-2605 of this chapter.
(b) A chain-link fence at least 10 feet in height, surmounted by three strands
of barbed wire, shall be required within the setback area at a point no
closer than the ultimate right-of-way line, to be maintained in a constant
state of good repair. Appropriate warning sings shall be mounted or
posted along the fence at intervals of not more than 100 feet.
(c) An adequate internal circulation pattern of streets shall be maintained
between the excavation sites and processing areas. Use of public streets
shall not be permitted for hauling between extractive and processing areas
except where required in connection with such pattern or for access of
vehicular traffic originating from or destined to points beyond the limits
of such excavation sites and processing areas. Access shall be regulated
in accordance with the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance (Chapter 440).
(d) No slope shall be maintained exceeding the normal limiting angle of
slippage of the material in which the excavation or extraction is being
made. No undercutting shall be permitted within the setback area except
for tunnels to provide transportation of materials between extractive and
processing areas.
(e) All operations shall be conducted with sufficient lateral support to be safe
with respect to hazard to persons, physical damage to adjacent lands or
improvements, or damage to any street, sidewalk, parking area or utility
by reason of slide, sinking or collapse.
(f) Stockpiles shall not exceed 100 feet in height and shall not be located
closer than 200 feet to any district boundary line nor closer than 300 feet
to the center line of any street except where a railroad is the district
boundary line or where the contiguous district is a district in which
extraction is permitted. All reasonable precautions shall be taken to
prevent any materials or wastes deposited upon any stockpile from being
washed, blown or otherwise transferred off the site by normal causes or
forces.
(g) All drainage from the site of extractive operations shall be controlled by
dikes, barriers or drainage structures sufficient to prevent any silt, debris
or other loose materials from filling any existing drainagecourse or
encroaching on streets and adjacent properties.
§ 500-1902 ZONING § 500-1902
500:101
(h) No ground vibration caused by blasting or machinery shall exceed the
limits established by the Act of July 10, 1957, P.L. 685, as amended, 73
P.S. §§ 164 and 165, and the rules and regulations adopted thereunder,
with the exception that no blasting shall cause a peak particle velocity
greater than one inch per second, measured at any property line or at the
center line of any street.
(i) The operator shall, within six months of the effective date of this
Subsection A(29), obtain a use and occupancy permit as required by
§ 500-3007 of this chapter.
(j) Off-street parking spaces shall be provided as the Township Board of
Supervisors and Planning Commission shall determine as adequate to
serve customers, employees, visitors and vehicles normally parked on the
premises.
(k) Excavations shall be graded and backfilled to the grades indicated by the
site plan. Grading and backfilling shall be accomplished continually and
as soon as practical after excavation. Grading and backfilling may be
accomplished by the use of waste products of the operation or other clean
fill materials, providing such materials are composed of nonnoxious,
noncombustible solids.
[1] When excavations that provide for a body of water are part of the
final use of the tract, the bank of excavation shall be sloped to a
minimum ratio of seven feet horizontal to one foot vertical,
beginning at least 50 feet from the edge of the water and maintained
into the water to a depth of five feet.
[2] Drainage, either natural or artificial, shall be provided so that
disturbed areas do not collect water or allow stagnant water to
remain.
(l) Hours of operation. No blasting shall occur between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; no blasting shall occur on Saturday or Sunday.
(m) Rehabilitation and conservation requirements.
[1] The owner, operator, lessee of any extractive operation shall, at the
time of application for a zoning permit, submit to the Township its
reclamation plan as submitted to the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection. No permit shall be issued where said
reclamation plan provides for quarrying in areas of the site not
permitted by this subsection.
[2] Along with said plan, the applicant shall include a timetable for the
reclamation proposed for the site in general with an actual timetable
for reclamation of slopes as may be found reasonable by the Zoning
Hearing Board within the setback areas.
[3] Owner, lessee or operator of any extraction operation within the
municipality shall, within six months from the date of this
§ 500-1902 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1902
500:102
subsection or receipt of a zoning permit authorizing said extraction
operation, whichever is the later, submit a plan which shall include
descriptions and plans for suitable after-conditions or after-uses for
all the land affected.
[4] Plans for rehabilitation uses may include the following after-uses,
among others:
[a] Open areas suitably graded and covered with suitable shrubs,
grasses or trees.
[b] Recreation land, ponds and lakes.
[c] Agriculture of any type.
[d] Sites for residential use.
[5] Rehabilitation shall commence within one year following
completion or the discontinuance for a period of one year of any
extractive operation (or the completion of the excavation of a portion
of an entire operation which can feasibly be restored separately from
other portions of the operation and which is not necessary to the
operation). Such rehabilitation shall be completed within five years
from the date rehabilitation commenced, except where a longer
period of time is specifically authorized as part of the rehabilitation
program.
[6] Rehabilitation shall include removal of all debris, temporary
structures and stockpiles.
[7] A layer of arable soil of sufficient depth to sustain grass, shrubs and
trees shall be provided in those parts of the operation where feasible
to do so. Grass, shrubs and trees native to their area shall be planted
thereon within six months after the providing of arable soil.
[8] Where the extraction operations are to be filled as part of the
rehabilitation process, no material shall be used for fill purposes
other than earth, stone, sand, concrete or asphalt.
[9] Water accumulation upon the site may be retained after the
completion of such operations where the excavation cannot be
reasonably drained by gravity flow, provided that adequate
provision shall be made to avoid stagnation, pollution and the danger
of improperly controlled release of such waters from the site.
[10] Upon receipt of the rehabilitative plans, the Township shall review
the plans to ensure compliance with all provisions of this
performance standard. Upon approval thereof, the Township shall
issue a certificate indicating approval of the plans as submitted or
amended, and the approved plans should be permanently filed in the
official records of the Township.
[11] Plans may be amended from time to time by approval of the
§ 500-1902 ZONING § 500-1902
500:103
Township upon application of the owners.
[12] A performance bond may be required by the Township in an amount
determined by the Township to be sufficient to ensure the
rehabilitation of the affected site in accordance and compliance with
the standards for the issuance of any original permit or annual
renewal permit in accordance with the provisions of the plan of
rehabilitation as submitted pursuant to this subsection, if the bond
posted with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection or other agency is not kept in force or if
the Township is not named therein. The Township may require that
the bond posted with any state agency may not be withdrawn or
reclaimed without Township approval. With the approval of the
Township, and for such period or periods as may be specified, an
owner may be permitted to post his own bond without corporate
surety.
(30) Bituminous asphalt and ready-mix concrete use accessory to quarry use. A
bituminous asphalt plant shall be a plant or operation which has as its primary
function the mixing of rock materials with asphalt oils or other binders for road
building or construction purposes. A ready-mix concrete plant shall be a plant
or operation which has as its primary function the mixing of materials to make
concrete. Such uses shall be permitted when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board as a special exception, provided that:
(a) Bituminous asphalt and ready-mix concrete plants shall be permitted only
as accessory uses to use in Subsection A(29), Quarry.
(b) In addition to the requirements of use in § 500-1902A(29), bituminous
asphalt and ready-mix concrete plants shall be subject to the following
requirements:
[1] The use must comply with the front, rear and side yard, minimum
lot area, maximum building height and impervious surface area
requirements of the district in which the use is proposed.
[2] The applicant must demonstrate that the use proposed will comply
with all permit requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection or any other commonwealth or federal
governmental agency which regulates such use.
[3] A buffer area shall be established in accordance with the conditions
imposed upon the granting of special exception approval which is
sufficient to adequately screen the lawful permitted use from other
uses in the vicinity. The buffer area shall be in accordance with
§ 500-2605 of this chapter and shall be of sufficient width to protect
the surrounding area from the objectionable effects of the proposed
use, including, but not limited to, noise, dust, vibration, odor,
illumination, visual effects and the like.
[4] An applicant for a special exception for a bituminous asphalt and/or
ready-mix concrete plant accessory to a quarry use may be required
§ 500-1902 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1902
500:104
by the zoning hearing board of the township in which the application
is filed to submit an environmental impact assessment report.
(31) Adult business, subject to the following requirements: [Added 5-20-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-05]
(a) Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to address the negative impacts
associated with adult or sexually oriented businesses as identified in the
legislative findings made in connection with the adoption of Chapter 120,
Adult Businesses, of the Code of Middletown Township, to reduce or
prevent neighborhood blight, to protect and preserve the quality of the
Township's neighborhoods and commercial districts, to protect the
Township's retail trade, to maintain property values, to protect and
preserve the quality of Township life, to reduce the incidence of unlawful
activity and to promote the health, safety, moral and general welfare of
the citizens of the Township. The provisions of this subsection have
neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on
the content of any communicative materials, including adult-oriented
materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this section to
restrict or deny access by adults to adult-oriented materials protected by
the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or to deny access
by the distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent nor the effect of this section to
condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
(b) Definitions.
[1] For purposes of this subsection, unless the context clearly requires a
different meaning, the words, terms and phrases set forth herein shall
have the meanings given them in this section:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted
or invited wherein coin-operated or club-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled still- or motion-picture or
video machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at
any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished
or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein.
ADULT BOOKSTORE—An establishment having as a substantial
significant or preponderant portion of its stock in matter which is
distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on content depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, as defined herein.
ADULT BUSINESS — Any adult or sexually oriented business,
including any business establishment that regularly features live
performances which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure of the genitals or buttocks of any person
or the breasts of any female person or specified sexual activities that
involve the exposure of the genitals or buttocks of any person or
§ 500-1902 ZONING § 500-1902
500:105
the breasts of any female person, or any business whose primary
purpose is the sale or display of matter that, because of its sexually
explicit nature, may, pursuant to state law or other regulatory
authority, be offered only to persons over the age of 18 years.
"Adult business" may include an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult
cabaret, adult hotel/motel, adult motion-picture theater, adult visual
materials or video store, adult modeling studio or adult
entertainment enterprise, as defined herein.
ADULT BUSINESS OPERATOR — A person who supervises,
manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is
responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult business or
the conduct or activities occurring on the premises thereof.
ADULT BUSINESS OWNER — A person or persons who hold
a financial or other business interest, in whole or in part, either
singly or jointly, in an adult business. For purposes of this section,
indicia of ownership may be established by evidence, including,
but not limited to, business license information, fictitious business
name registration, utility billing information or by other competent
evidence. For purposes of this section, the person whose name
appears on the business license or permit application as the business
owner shall be deemed to be the adult business owner.
ADULT CABARET — A building or portion thereof or area
regularly featuring the presentation or exhibition of live performers
whose performances are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as hereinafter
defined, or whose performances are rendered in a state of dress so
as to expose the female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola, male or female genitals, pubic areas, buttocks or
the female breast with only the nipple and areola covered, or any
combination thereof, for observation by patrons or customers.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ENTERPRISE — Any business
activity wherein is furnished for a fee or charge or other like
consideration the opportunity to paint, feel, handle, touch, be in the
presence of, be entertained by, be painted by, felt by or touched
by the unclothed body or the unclothed portion of the body of
another person, or to observe, view or photograph such activity;
or a fee or charge or like consideration is paid or received for
goods sold or services rendered by or in the presence of one or
more persons with an unclothed body or an unclothed portion of
the body. "Adult entertainment enterprise" shall include, but not be
limited to, the following business activities: adult or nude encounter
studios, adult or nude dance studios, nude exhibitions, peep shows,
wrestling centers, adult or nude art or photography studios, and
business activities similar thereto. "Unclothed portion of the body"
shall mean state of dress so as to expose the female breast below
a point immediately above the top of the areola, male or female
genitals, pubic areas, buttocks or female breast with the nipple and
§ 500-1902 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1902
500:106
areola covered.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ROOM — Any room of an adult
entertainment establishment which constitutes an adult cabaret,
adult motion-picture theater, adult entertainment enterprise or adult
theater or adult visual materials store pursuant to this section.
ADULT HOTEL/MOTEL — A hotel or motel or similar business
establishment offering public accommodations for any form of
consideration, which provides patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, computer-generated images, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions, 30% or
more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, as hereinafter defined, and
rents, leases or lets any room for less than a six-hour period or rents,
leases or lets any single room more than twice in a twenty-four-hour
period.
ADULT MODELING STUDIO — A business which provides, for
any form of compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or
reward, figure models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of
patrons, display specified anatomical areas, as hereinafter defined, to
be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise
depicted by persons paying such consideration. "Modeling studio"
does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by
the State Board of Education. "Modeling studio" further does not
include a studio or similar facility owned, operated or maintained by
an individual artist or group of artists and which does not provide,
permit or make available specified sexual activities, as hereinafter
defined.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A building or portion
thereof or area, open or closed, used for the presentation on more
than 1/3 of the days in a calendar year, during which motion-picture
films, videocassettes, cable television or any other such visual media
are displayed or exhibited of films, videocassettes, cable television
or other visual media which are distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as hereinafter
defined, for observation by patrons or customers. "Adult motionpicture
theater" does not include any room or suite of rooms rented
for human occupancy in a hotel or motel which is equipped or
furnished with a videocassette-playing machine or cable television,
unless such hotel or motel is determined to be an adult hotel/motel
as defined herein.
ADULT VISUAL MATERIALS OR VIDEO STORE—A building
or portion thereof used by an establishment having not less than
30% of its actual display area devoted to or its stock-in-trade for
sale or rental to the public any segment thereof consisting of books,
magazines, other publications, films, videocassettes or any
§ 500-1902 ZONING § 500-1902
500:107
combination thereof which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined
hereinafter.
APPLICANT — A person who is required to file an application for
permit under this section, including an individual owner, managing
partner, officer of a corporation or any other operator, manager,
employee or agent of an adult business.
BAR—Any commercial establishment licensed by the State Liquor
Control Board to serve any alcoholic beverages on the premises.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The person responsible for
ordinance enforcement functions within the jurisdiction of the
Township, including, but not limited to, responsibility for
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this subsection.
DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS
UPON — The dominant or essential theme of the object described
by such phrase.
EMPLOYEE — Every owner, partner, manager, supervisor,
performer or other worker, whether paid or not, who renders services
of any nature in the conduct of an adult business establishment. For
purposes of this subsection, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that
every person who renders services of any nature in the conduct of an
adult business is an employee of the adult business.
ENTERTAINER—Any person who is an employee or independent
contractor of the adult business or any person who, with or without
any compensation or other form of consideration, performs live
entertainment for patrons of an adult business.
OPERATE AN ADULT BUSINESS—The supervising, managing,
inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling or in any way being
responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities of an adult
business or activities within an adult business.
PERMITTEE — The person to whom an adult business permit is
issued.
PERSON — Any individual, firm association, partnership, coparty,
corporation, limited liability corporation, joint-stock company, joint
venture or combination of the above in whatever form or character.
REGULARLY FEATURES — With respect to an adult business,
means a regular, substantial course of conduct. The presentation, in
or at any building or portion thereof, of live performances which
are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as
hereinafter defined, on two or more occasions within a thirty-day
period; three or more occasions within a sixty-day period; or four or
more occasions within a one-hundred-eighty-day period shall, to the
extent permitted by law, be deemed to be a regular and substantial
§ 500-1902 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1902
500:108
course of conduct.
SEMINUDE — A state of dress in which clothing covers no more
than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast,
as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or
devices, such as by "G" strings, pasties, thongs, bikinis or other
similar form of garments or devices.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Any of the following:
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following,
whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other
coverings:
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks and female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola;
[a]
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely opaquely covered;
[b]
Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body
parts included in subsections [a] and [b] above.
[c]
[a] Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
Sexual acts, actual or simulated, including sexual intercourse,
oral copulation or sodomy;
[b]
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or female breast;
[c]
[d] Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
other activities described in subsections [a] through [d] above.
[e]
[2] The foregoing definitions are generic. The uses and businesses
governed by this subsection include any other use or business,
regardless of how named or advertised, that is of a character like or
similar to the uses and businesses set forth in this subsection.
(c) Excluded activities. This subsection does not apply to any of the
following activities:
[1] Any activity conducted or sponsored by a school district or other
public agency, so long as such activity is being conducted as part of
and within the scope of an authorized and regular part of the
curriculum or is part of a training or instructional program being
conducted by a public agency.
[2] Any activity conducted by a person pursuant to any license issued
by the State of Pennsylvania or any agency thereof charged with the
responsibility of licensing, prescribing standards for and supervising
such activity or profession, in and to the extent that such activity is
§ 500-1902 ZONING § 500-1902
500:109
conducted within the course and scope of the exercise of the
privileges authorized by such license or the duties of such agency.
(d) Adult business permit required.
[1] It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry a
permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any
premises within the Township the operation of an adult business
unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force
and effect a permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer as
required by this subsection.
[2] A permit shall be issued to any applicant who has complied with all
of the following requirements:
[a] The applicant has paid the adult business application fee
required pursuant to Subsection A(31)(d)[3], below.
[b] The applicant has not made a material misstatement in the
application for a permit.
[c] The establishment, including the building and lot or portion
thereof where the adult business is or is proposed to be situated
and the physical facilities and maintenance related thereto,
complies with all building, fire, electrical, plumbing, health and
zoning requirements of the Code of the Township of
Middletown, all the requirements of this chapter, and all state
and federal requirements of a similar nature which are
customarily enforced by the Township, as determined pursuant
to one or more inspections conducted by investigating officials
of the Township.
[3] Each application for a permit under this subsection shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount established by
resolution of the Township Board of Supervisors. The application
fee shall be used to defray, in part, administrative costs incurred in
processing the application and is not made in lieu of any other fees
or taxes required under this chapter or the Code of the Township of
Middletown.
(e) Application for adult business permit.
[1] Any person who proposes to operate, maintain or conduct an adult
business in the Township shall first submit to the Code Enforcement
Officer a complete application for an adult business permit on a form
provided by the Township containing the information set forth in
this section and payment of the required Township nonrefundable
application fee as established by resolution and amended by the
Township Board of Supervisors from time to time. An application
that is not accompanied by the required application fee shall not be
deemed a complete application.
§ 500-1902 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1902
500:110
[2] If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his/her
complete name, including any aliases, and address and shall submit
satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least 18 years of age.
[3] If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall state the complete
name and address of the partner signing the application, as well as
the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or
limited, and shall attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.
[4] If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its
name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is
in good standing under the laws of Pennsylvania, the names and
capacity of all officers and directors, the name of the registered
corporate agent, and the address of the registered office for service
of process.
[5] If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the application.
If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the business
entity or an individual with a ten-percent or greater interest in the
business entity shall sign the application.
[6] If the applicant intends to operate the adult business under a name
other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall provide the
fictitious name of the adult business and show proof of registration
of the fictitious name.
[7] Each application shall contain:
[a] A narrative description of the proposed or existing adult
business for which the permit is requested, which shall include
hours of operation, number of employees and a description of
the title and/or position of each employee.
[b] A sketch or diagram showing the interior floor plan and
configuration of the premises, depicting all interior rooms,
including rest rooms, office space, storage areas and public
areas and dimensions. The sketch or diagram need not be
professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale
with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
[c] A site plan showing the lot or property on which the adult
business is or will be located, the location of the building or
portion thereof in which the adult business is or will be located,
the number of available parking spaces, the location and type
of available and proposed lighting, landscaping, trash
enclosures and all means of ingress and egress to and from the
property. The site plan need not be professionally prepared but
shall be drawn to scale with marked dimensions to an accuracy
of plus or minus one foot.
[d] The full name, address and telephone number of the property
§ 500-1902 ZONING § 500-1902
500:111
owner and/or property management company if different from
the applicant; a copy of the lease agreement in effect at the
time of the application, if applicable; and a copy of any other
agreement, easement, condition, covenant, restriction or other
such documents that contain evidence affecting the use or
operation of the lot, property, premises or structures which will
be subject to the permit for which the application has been
submitted.
[8] Each application shall also contain the following information about
the person signing the application:
[a] Full name, including any aliases, current residential address,
telephone number, date of birth, social security number and
driver's license number.
[b] The previous address of each such person for a period of three
years immediately prior to the date of application and the dates
of residence at each such address.
[c] Written proof that the person signing the application is at least
18 years of age.
[d] The height, weight, color of eyes and hair of the person signing
the application.
[e] Business, occupation or employment history of the person
signing the application for three years immediately preceding
the date of the application.
[f] Two recent passport-style color photographs of such person.
[9] Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the Code
Enforcement Officer to secure the foregoing information.
[10] An adult business establishment lawfully existing and operating on
the effective date of this subsection shall apply for a permit within
90 days therefrom and shall be allowed to continue operating during
the pendency of the application; provided, however, that such adult
business is otherwise in compliance with applicable provisions of
this chapter and the Code of the Township of Middletown.
[11] Upon application of any adult business establishment not lawfully
existing and operating on the effective date of this subsection, a
temporary permit not to exceed 30 days shall be issued immediately
upon receipt of a complete permit application. The said temporary
permit shall expire automatically at the end of the thirty-day period
unless extended by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(f) Application processing.
[1] Upon receipt of a complete application and payment of the
application and permit fees, the application shall be immediately
§ 500-1902 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1902
500:112
stamped as received by the Code Enforcement Officer.
[2] Within 30 days of receipt of a complete application, the Code
Enforcement Officer or his designated official shall conduct and
complete an investigation of the information contained in the
application to determine whether the applicant shall be issued an
adult business permit in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection and notify the applicant as follows:
[a] The Code Enforcement Officer shall write or stamp "granted"
or "denied" on the application and sign and date such notation.
[b] If the application is denied, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
provide a written statement of the reasons for denial.
[c] If the application is granted, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall issue an adult business permit.
[d] The application, as granted or denied, and the permit, if any,
shall be sent by United States mail, first class postage prepaid,
addressed to the applicant to the address stated in the
application.
[3] The Code Enforcement Officer shall grant the application and issue
a business permit upon finding that the proposed business meets the
locational and zoning requirements of the Township and that the
applicant has met all of the development and performance standards
and requirements of this subsection.
[4] Upon notification to the applicant that the application has been
granted by the Code Enforcement Officer, or if the Code
Enforcement Officer fails to either grant or deny the application
within 30 days of receipt of a complete application, the applicant
may begin operating as an adult business pursuant to the terms and
conditions of the permit. The permittee shall post the permit
conspicuously in the premises of the adult business establishment.
[5] Each adult business permit shall expire one year from the date of
issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the Code
Enforcement Officer a written request for renewal accompanied by
the annual permit fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The
request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the
expiration of the permit. When made less than 30 days before the
expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be stayed. Each
application for renewal shall be acted upon as provided herein for
action upon application for a permit.
(g) Denial of permit.
[1] Within 30 days of receipt of a complete application, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall deny an application for a permit if he or
she makes any of the following findings:
§ 500-1902 ZONING § 500-1902
500:113
[a] The lot or property on which the adult business is or is proposed
to be located does not comply with the locational or zoning
requirements of this chapter of the Code of the Township of
Middletown.
[b] The establishment, including the building or portion thereof,
where the adult business is or is proposed to be situated and the
physical facilities and maintenance related thereto fails to
comply with all applicable building, fire, electrical, plumbing
and health requirements of the Code of the Township of
Middletown, all applicable state and federal requirements of a
similar nature which are customarily enforced by the Township
and all applicable provisions of this subsection.
[c] The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director,
officer, shareholder or manager has knowingly made any false,
misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the
application for an adult business permit.
[d] The applicant or any of the following persons has had a license
or permit issued pursuant to this section revoked within one
year of the date of the application:
[i] If the applicant is a corporation, any officer or director of
the corporation or any stockholder holding more than 5%
of the corporate stock of the applicant.
[ii] If the applicant is a partnership, any general or limited
partner.
[iii] Any person currently employed by or in the adult business
establishment.
[2] Transmittal of decision. The decision to deny the application shall
be given to the applicant, in writing, setting forth specifically the
ground or grounds upon which the decision is based, the pertinent
section of this chapter pursuant to which the permit is denied and a
brief statement of the factual matters in support of the denial. The
decision shall be mailed by United States mail, postage prepaid,
addressed to the applicant at the last known address of the applicant,
or it may be personally delivered to the applicant.
(h) Appeal of denial.
[1] Appeal to the Board of Supervisors. Within 10 days from the deposit
of the denial in the mail as set forth in this subsection or from receipt
of the denial by the applicant by personal delivery, the applicant may
appeal, in writing, to the Board of Supervisors, setting forth with
particularity the ground or grounds for such appeal.
[2] Hearing on appeal. A panel of the Board of Supervisors, consisting
of at least three members thereof, shall set a time and place for a
§ 500-1902 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1902
500:114
hearing on the appeal not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days
from the date the appeal is received by the Board of Supervisors and
shall conduct a hearing at the time and place so specified.
[3] Disposition of appeal. Following the hearing on the appeal, the
Board of Supervisors may refer the matter to the Code Enforcement
Officer to conduct a new investigation and to issue a new decision,
may affirm the denial of the application, or may approve the
application. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be final.
Notice of the decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be mailed to
the applicant within 10 days of the date of the hearing.
(i) Reapplication after denial. An applicant whose application for a permit
has been denied may reapply for such permit after a period of not less
than one year has elapsed from the date such denial was deposited in the
mail, as specified herein, or received by the applicant, whichever occurs
first; provided, however, that an earlier reapplication may be made if
accompanied by evidence that the ground or grounds for denial of the
application no longer exist(s).
(j) Grounds for suspension or revocation of permit.
[1] A permit issued pursuant to this section may be subject to
suspension or revocation or other appropriate disciplinary action for
any of the following grounds arising from the acts of omissions of
the permittee or employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder or
manager of an adult business:
[a] The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for
permit or in any report or reports required to be filed with the
Township.
[b] The adult business, including the building and lot or portion
thereof on which the establishment is situated or is proposed to
be situated and the physical facilities and maintenance related
thereto, fails to comply with all applicable building, fire,
electrical, plumbing, health and zoning requirements set forth
in this chapter or in the Code of the Township of Middletown,
all applicable state and federal requirements of a similar nature
which are customarily enforced by the Township and all
provisions of this section.
[c] The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, shareholder
or manager of the adult business has knowingly allowed or
permitted and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent
the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the
adult business establishment:
[i] Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation or masturbation.
§ 500-1902 ZONING § 500-1902
500:115
[ii] The use of the establishment as a place where unlawful
solicitation of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation
or masturbation openly occurs.
[iii] The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation or
prostitution.
[iv] Any act constituting a violation of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903,
relating to the distribution of obscene and other sexual
materials and performances.
[v] Any act constituting a violation of provisions relating to
obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors.
[vi] Any conduct constituting a criminal offense of which an
essential element consists of the use of force or violence.
[vii] Any act constituting a felony involving the sale, use,
possession, or possession for sale of any controlled
substance.
[d] Failure to abide by any disciplinary action previously imposed
by the appropriate Township officer.
[e] Failure to comply with one or more of the facilities and
operations requirements set forth in Subsection A(31)(n)
hereof.
[f] The existence of the condition of the premises as hazardous or
unsafe for human occupancy.
(k) Notice of permit violations. Upon making a determination that grounds
for suspension or revocation of a permit exist(s), the Code Enforcement
Officer shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or
revocation to the permittee, setting forth the time and place for a hearing
on the proposed suspension or revocation and the ground or grounds upon
which the proposed suspension or revocation is based, the pertinent
section of this chapter, and a brief statement of the factual matters in
support thereof. The notice shall be mailed by United States first class
mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the
permittee and/or shall be delivered to the permittee personally. Such
notice shall be mailed and/or delivered at least 10 days prior to the
hearing date set forth in the notice.
(l) No refund of fee. No refund or rebate of a permit fee shall be permitted
by reason of discontinuance by the permittee of an activity for which a
permit is required pursuant to this subsection or by reason of suspension
or revocation of a permit.
(m) Return of permit. In the event that a permit is canceled, suspended,
revoked or invalidated for any reason, the permit shall be forwarded to
the Code Enforcement Officer not later than the end of the third business
day after notification of such cancellation, suspension, revocation or
§ 500-1902 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1902
500:116
invalidation.
(n) Facilities and operation requirements. All adult business establishments
subject to the provisions of this section shall comply with the following
facilities and operations requirements:
[1] Each adult business establishment shall comply with all building,
fire, electrical, plumbing and health requirements of the Code of the
Township of Middletown, all requirements of this chapter, all state
and federal requirements of a similar nature which are customarily
enforced by the Township, and all provisions of this subsection.
[2] No adult business shall be operated in any manner that permits the
observation of any material or activities depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas,
as herein defined, from any public way or from any location outside
the building or area of such establishment. This provision shall apply
to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. No
exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept
open at any time while the business is open, and any exterior
windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times.
[3] All off-street parking areas and premises entries of the adult business
shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a
lighting system providing an average maintained horizontal
illumination of one footcandle of lighting on the parking surface
and/or walkways. The required lighting level is established in order
to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways
servicing the adult business for the personal safety of patrons and
employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal
conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or
diagram of the premises.
[4] The premises within which the adult business is located shall
provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise
generated inside the premises shall not be audible anywhere on any
adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any other building
or other separate unit within the same building.
[5] With the exception of adult cabarets, each adult business subject to
this subsection shall close and remain closed from midnight to 9:00
a.m. the following day.
[6] The building entrance to an adult business shall be clearly and
legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under 18 years
of age are precluded from entering the premises. The notice shall be
constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police or
designee. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted
within the premises at any time. [Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord. No.
09-04]
[7] All indoor areas of the adult business shall be physically arranged in
§ 500-1902 ZONING § 500-1902
500:117
such a manner that the entire interior portion of the booths, rooms,
cubicles or stalls wherein an adult entertainment enterprise is
provided shall be clearly visible from the common areas of the
premises, excluding rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain videoreproduction
equipment.
[8] Visibility into booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls shall not be blocked
or obscured by doors, curtains, partitions, drapes or any other
obstruction whatsoever.
[9] No adult business shall contain partitions between subdivisions of a
room or portions or parts of a building, structure or premises with an
aperture which is designed or constructed to facilitate sexual activity
between persons on either side of the partitions.
[10] No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any
one time.
[11] Customers, patrons or visitors shall not be allowed to stand idly by
or in the vicinity of any such video booths or remain in the common
area of an adult business, other than the rest rooms, who are not
actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available
on display for purchaser viewing. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be
posted in prominent places in and near the video booths.
[12] The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all video booths
shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions.
Presence of human excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any such
booth shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate
sanitary controls; repeated instances of such conditions may justify
suspension or revocation of the permittee's permit to conduct the
adult business.
[13] All areas of the premises of an adult business shall be equipped with
overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every
place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not
less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. It shall be the
duty of the permittee and permittee's agents to ensure that the
illumination required by this subsection is maintained at all times
that a patron is present on the premises.
[14] The adult business shall provide and maintain separate rest room
facilities for male patrons and employees and female patrons and
employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from
using the rest room(s) for females and female patrons and employees
shall be prohibited from using the rest room(s) for males, except to
carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the rest room
facilities. The rest rooms shall be free from any adult material. Rest
rooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture
or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The
foregoing provisions of this subsection shall not apply to an adult
business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of adult material
§ 500-1902 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1902
500:118
which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult
bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide rest room
facilities to patrons or the general public.
[15] The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult
businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified
anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities:
[a] No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an
adult business except upon a stage at least 18 inches above the
level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least 10
feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons, and no patron
shall be permitted within 10 feet of the stage while the stage is
occupied by an entertainer.
[b] The adult business shall provide separate dressing room
facilities for entertainers, which are exclusively dedicated to the
entertainer's use. No cameras or other surveillance devices shall
be installed or maintained by the adult business owner or
operator in the dressing room facilities for the purpose of
broadcasting or projecting images for viewing by the patrons of
the establishment or for broadcasting or projecting images over
the Internet.
[c] The adult business shall provide an entrance/exit for
entertainers separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons.
[d] The adult business shall provide access for entertainers
between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely
separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not
physically feasible, the adult business shall provide a minimum
three-foot-wide walk aisle for entertainers between the dressing
room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier
separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of (and
which actually results in) preventing any physical contact
between patrons and entertainers.
[e] No entertainer, either before, during or after performances,
shall have physical contact with any other entertainer either
before, during or after performances by such other entertainer.
This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the
premises of the adult business.
[f] Fixed rail(s) at least 30 inches in height shall be maintained,
establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons
required by this subsection.
[16] Adult businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain
public peace and safety, based upon the following standards:
[a] Adult businesses featuring live entertainment shall provide at
least one security guard at all times while the adult business is
§ 500-1902 ZONING § 500-1902
500:119
open. If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than 35
persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty.
[b] Security guard(s) for other adult businesses may be required if
it is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer that their
presence is necessary in order to prevent any of the conduct
listed in Subsection A(31)(j) hereof from occurring on the
premises.
[c] Security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of
law and enforcing compliance by patrons with the requirements
of these regulations. Security guard(s) shall be uniformed in
such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as security guards
by the public and shall be duly licensed as security guards, as
required by the applicable provisions of state law. No security
guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a door
person, ticket taker, admitting person or sole occupant of the
manager's station while acting as a security guard.
[17] The requirements of this subsection shall be deemed conditions of
adult business regulatory permit approvals, and failure to comply
with every such requirement shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of the permit issued pursuant to these regulations.
(o) Inspection by public officials.
[1] The applicant shall authorize and allow entry by public officials of
the Township into the premises wherein the applicant operates or
proposes to operate an adult business establishment for the purpose
of conducting one or more inspections to determine whether the
establishment complies with all applicable building, fire, electrical,
plumbing, health and zoning requirements of the Code of the
Township of Middletown, all state and federal requirements of a
similar nature which are customarily enforced by the Township, and
the provisions of this chapter.
[2] Any and all investigating officials of the Township shall have the
right to enter adult business establishments, from time to time,
during regular business hours to make reasonable inspections to
observe and enforce compliance with the building, fire, plumbing
and health regulations of the Code of the Township of Middletown
or the provisions of this chapter. A warrant shall be obtained
whenever required by law.
[3] A person who operates an adult business, or his or her agent or
employee, is in violation of the provisions of this subsection if he or
she refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises at any time
it is occupied or open for business.
(p) Business name. It shall be unlawful to operate an adult business
establishment under any name or conduct business under any designation
not specified in the permit.
§ 500-1902 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1902
500:120
(q) Business location change. Before changing the location of an adult
business establishment, the permittee shall make an application to the
Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to Subsection A(31)(e) hereof.
(r) Transfer of interest. No permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall be assigned or transferred in any manner, nor shall any
person other than those identified in such permit engage in the enterprise
for which the permit is issued. As used herein, "transfer" shall include,
but shall not be limited to, any modification of a business entity operating
an adult business or otherwise required to be disclosed pursuant to
Subsection A(31)(e) hereof, including transfer of more than 10% of the
stock of any corporation.
(s) Display of permits. The owner or operator of an adult business
establishment shall display the permit in an open and conspicuous place
on the premises. Passport-size photographs of the permit shall be affixed
to the permit on display pursuant to this subsection.
(t) Application to existing establishments. Each operator of an establishment
subject to the provisions of this subsection and legally doing business on
the effective date of this chapter shall apply for a permit not later than 90
days therefrom and shall comply with all requirements which are
prerequisites for issuance of a permit before such permit will issue.
(u) Regulations nonexclusive. The provisions of this subsection regulating
adult businesses are not intended to be exclusive, and compliance
therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations
pertaining to the operation of businesses adopted by the Township.
(32) A medical marijuana grower/processor when authorized by the Board of
Supervisors as a conditional use in accordance with the following standards
and criteria: [Added 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-03]
(a) The medical marijuana grower/processor shall provide proof of
registration with the Department of Health or proof that registration has
been sought and is pending approval, and shall at all times maintain a
valid, accurate, and up-to-date registration with the Department of
Health. Should such registration at any time be revoked or denied, any
Township approval of the use shall immediately become null and void.
(b) A medical marijuana grower/processor shall at all times operate in full
and complete compliance with all Department of Health regulations
relating to such facilities.
(c) A medical marijuana grower/processor may not operate on the same lot
or site as a facility used for dispensing medical marijuana.
(d) A medical marijuana grower/processor shall not be located within 1,000
feet of a residentially zoned lot or a lot containing a public, private or
parochial school, day-care center, place of worship, public park, library
and/or community center.
§ 500-1902 ZONING § 500-1902
500:121
(e) A medical marijuana grower/processor shall not be located within 2,000
feet of a licensed residential substance abuse diagnostic and treatment
facility and/or any other licensed drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility.
(f) The total maximum floor area of a medical marijuana grower/processor
shall not exceed 8,400 square feet.
(g) A medical marijuana grower/processor must operate entirely within an
indoor, enclosed, and secure facility.
(h) No use of medical marijuana shall be permitted on the premises of a
medical marijuana grower/processor.
(i) No one under the age of 18 shall be permitted in a medical marijuana
grower/processor facility.
(j) The hours of operation shall not be earlier than 7:00 a.m. and shall not be
later than 10:00 p.m.
(k) No exterior sales or sidewalk displays shall be permitted.
(l) No drive-through services shall be permitted.
(m) No outdoor seating areas shall be permitted.
(n) The use cannot be advertised on radio or television.
(o) There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors and/or odors that can
be seen, smelled, or otherwise perceived from beyond the lot line for the
property where the medical marijuana grower/processor is located.
(p) No outdoor storage is permitted.
(q) A medical marijuana grower/processor shall submit a refuse disposal plan
to be reviewed and approved by the Township. Medical marijuana
remnants and by-products shall be disposed of according to an approved
plan and shall not be placed within an exterior refuse container.
(r) A medical marijuana grower/processor shall submit a security plan to the
Township, demonstrating how the plan will maintain effective security
and control of the facility. The security plan shall specify the type and
manner of twenty-four-hour security, tracking, recordkeeping, record
retention, and surveillance system to be utilized in the facility as required
by Chapter 7 of the Medical Marijuana Act and as supplemented by
regulations promulgated by the Department of Health pursuant to the
Medical Marijuana Act. The medical marijuana grower/processor shall
also provide to the Township copies of all reports to be submitted to the
Department of Health pursuant to the Medical Marijuana Act and the
regulations promulgated by the Department of Health pertaining to the
security and control of the facility and pertaining to the building and
structures associated with the medical marijuana grower/processor.
(s) Any building used for medical marijuana growing/processing shall be
completely surrounded by an eight-foot-high chain-link fence or any
§ 500-1902 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1902
500:122
§ 500-1903. General requirements.
§ 500-1904. Area, dimensional and design requirements.
other type of open-link fencing that allows the building to be seen from
outside the fence.
(33) Medical office or clinic for medical or dental examination or treatment of
persons as outpatients, including laboratories incidental thereto. Such uses
shall have a minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet. [Added 9-4-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-03]
A. No lot, parcel or tract of land shall be used and no building or structure shall be
erected, altered or remodeled for any of the following uses: the manufacture of
heavy chemicals, including, but not limited to, acids or other corrosives, ammonia,
caustic soda, and sulfuric detergents, fertilizers; the manufacture or production of
metals and alloys in ingot form; the manufacture or production of cement, plaster,
cork and other constituents, matches, paints, oils, varnishes, lacquer, basic raw
polymer manufacture of rubber; the curing and tanning of hides; and, except as
provided herein, the storage of fuels or explosive materials in bulk.
B. No activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or
products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted, except such as are
specifically licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or are used as
customarily incidental to the operation of a principal use in such quantities and in a
manner conforming with the applicable performance standards set forth in Article
XXV of this chapter. Such materials shall include, but shall not be limited to, all
primary explosives such as lead azide, lead stypnate, fulminates and tetracene; all
high explosives, including but not limited to TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN and picric
acid; propellants and components thereof, including, but not limited to,
nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides, hydrazone and its derivatives;
pyrotechnics and fireworks, including, but not limited to, magnesium powder,
potassium chlorate and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives, including, but not
limited to, acetylides, tetroles, perchloric acid, perchlorates, chlorates, hydrogen
peroxide in concentrations greater than 35%; and nuclear fuels, fissionable
materials and products, and reactor elements, including, but not limited to, uranium
235 and plutonium 239.
C. All activities involving the manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, disassembly,
repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing and testing of materials, goods or products
shall be operated in such a manner as to comply with applicable performance
standards in accordance with Article XXV of this chapter and other pertinent
ordinances governing noise, vibration, smoke, particulate matter, toxic or noxious
matter, odors, fire and explosive hazards, glare or heat; and no use already
established on the effective date of this chapter shall be so altered or modified as to
conflict with or further conflict with such applicable performance standards.
A. Unless a different area or dimensional regulation is stated in § 500-1902, Use
regulations, for a specific use, all uses in the M-1 District, except industrial parks,
shall meet the following requirements: [Amended 9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-03]
§ 500-1902 ZONING § 500-1904
500:123
(1) Area and dimensional requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 80,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(c) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(d) Maximum impervious surface ratio: 60%.
(e) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(f) Minimum yards:
[1] Front: 75 feet.
[2] Side: 50 feet.
[3] Rear: 75 feet.
(2) Buffer yard. Along any adjacent land zoned for or in residential or agricultural
use, a buffer yard shall be provided which shall be not less than 150 feet in
width, measured from the property line or from the street line. The buffer yard
shall be in accordance with the provisions of § 500-2605.
(3) The required front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be planted with vegetation
(i.e., grass, trees, shrubs, etc.) and shall not be used for paving or internal
driveways, except for driveways that give access to a property from the street.
(4) Outside storage of materials, goods or refuse may be permitted as an accessory
use subject to the provisions of § 500-2409 of this chapter. In addition, such
areas shall be buffered by an eight-foot-high stockade-type fence.
(5) All parking areas, loading facilities and outside storage areas shall be located
to the rear or side of buildings. However, parking shall be permitted in the
front of buildings when a buffer yard is required in this area.
(6) A tower or chimney shall be set back from all property lines a distance of at
least 1.5 times the height of the structure.
(7) All uses in this district shall be served by public water and public sewer
facilities.
(8) Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions
of Article XXVII.
(9) A traffic and transportation impact study prepared in accordance with the
requirements for said study set forth in Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land
Development, may be required, depending upon the applicability criteria.
(10) For sites containing 10 or more acres of land, the applicant for a proposed
subdivision or land development shall show the tract of land as a whole,
including planned or potential uses for each piece of property and the overall
design and improvements for the site. When two or more primary uses are
proposed, the requirements for industrial parks in Subsection B below shall be
§ 500-1904 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-1904
500:124
met.
B. Industrial parks shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Area and dimensional requirements:
(a) Minimum site area: 10 acres.
(b) Minimum frontage at street line-site: 200 feet.
(2) Each use in an industrial park shall meet the area, dimensional and design
requirements of § 500-1904A(1) through (10) above.
(3) Phasing of development and internal site improvements is permissible in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land
Development; however, all off-site improvements shall be included and
completed within the first phase of development.
(4) All uses within the industrial park shall take access from an internal roadway.
Access for the park shall be from arterial or collector highways.
(5) Interior roadways shall have street trees in accordance with the requirements
of Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development.
(6) All commonly owned elements, including streets, water and sewer lines,
basins, etc., shall be owned and maintained in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act and shall be dedicated to the
Township only upon the request of the Township.
(7) A traffic and transportation impact study prepared in accordance with the
requirements for said study set forth in the Middletown Township Subdivision
and Land Ordinance (Chapter 440) shall be required for the development of an
industrial park.
§ 500-1904 ZONING § 500-1904
500:125

ARTICLE XX
OC Office Campus District
§ 500-2001. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of the OC Office Campus District is to provide reasonable
standards for the orderly development of an office campus and such uses as are related or
accessory thereto, in those parts of the Township which have access to an arterial street.
§ 500-2002. Definition of office campus.
An office campus is a planned development designed as a complex of related structures,
circulation patterns, utilities, landscaping and buffering to create an integrated and
coordinated whole.
§ 500-2003. Use regulations. [Amended 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13]
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the
following purposes and no other:
A. Professional, business, medical and government offices.
B. Retail sales and commercial services.
C. Personal service shops.
D. Eating places, including restaurants, cafes and taverns which serve for the purpose
of on-premises consumption only.
E. Financial institutions.
F. (Reserved).
G. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of the above
permitted uses which is not detrimental to the neighborhood. Accessory uses may
include:
(1) Storage within a completely enclosed building in conjunction with a permitted
use.
(2) A cafeteria or other service facility located within the building and operated
for the exclusive use of occupants of the building.
(3) A recreational area for occupants.
(4) Living quarters for watchmen, caretakers or similar employees.
H. Accessory outside storage or display of materials, goods or refuse shall not be
permitted within an office campus.
I. Signs, when erected and maintained in accordance with Article XXVIII.
J. Forestry/timber harvesting, pursuant to the regulations set forth in § 500-402M of
this chapter.
§ 500-2001 ZONING § 500-2004
500:127
§ 500-2004. Area, dimensional and design requirements.
Unless a greater area or dimensional regulation is stated in § 500-2003, Use regulations,
for a specific use, all uses in the OC District shall meet the following requirements:
A. At least 70% of the total floor area of the office campus shall be utilized for offices.
B. Area and dimensional requirements.
(1) Minimum site area: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum frontage at street line-site: 150 feet.
(3) Minimum building setback-site:
(a) Street lines: 100 feet.
(b) Other property lines: 75 feet.
(4) Maximum floor area ratio: 28%.
(5) Maximum impervious surface ratio: 55%.
(6) Minimum building spacing: for adjacent buildings, a spacing equal to the taller
of the two buildings but in no case less than 20 feet.
(7) Minimum building setback, internal streets: 50 feet.
(8) Maximum building height: 50 feet.
C. Buffer yard. Along any adjacent land zoned for or in residential or agricultural use,
a buffer yard shall be provided which shall not be less than 75 feet in width,
measured from the site property line or site street line. The buffer yard shall be in
accordance with the provisions of § 500-2605 of this chapter.
D. Parking. One off-street parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area.
Parking areas must be adequately screened when situated within 50 feet of land
zoned for or in residential, agricultural or recreational use. All other parking,
loading, access facilities and service areas shall comply with the provisions of
Article XXVII.
E. All buildings shall be arranged in a group or groups. Individual uses may be located
in detached and attached structures.
F. Adequate areas shall be provided for loading and unloading of delivery trucks and
other vehicles; servicing of offices and shops by refuse collection, fuel, fire and
other service vehicles; automobile accessways and pedestrian walks.
G. All uses within an office campus shall take access from an internal roadway. Access
for the campus shall be from an arterial roadway except for office campuses located
on Swift Road between Woodbourne Road and Banks Road, where said access shall
be permitted from Swift Road.
H. Lighting facilities shall be provided and arranged in a manner which will protect
the highway and neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous interference
§ 500-2004 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2004
500:128
of any kind.
I. All commonly owned elements shall be owned and maintained in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act.186
J. A traffic and transportation impact study prepared in accordance with the
requirements for said study set forth in the Middletown Township Subdivision
Regulations (Chapter 440) shall be required for the development of an office
campus.
186.Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 500-2004 ZONING § 500-2004
500:129

ARTICLE XXI
AQC Age-Qualified Community District
[Added 11-30-1999 by Ord. No. 99-19]
§ 500-2101. Purpose and intent. [Amended 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 00-13]
The purpose of this district is to allow the creation of a planned community for persons
55 years of age and over which provides for a variety of residential housing types as well
as indoor and outdoor recreational facilities.
§ 500-2102. Use regulations. [Amended 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 00-13]
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the
following purposes and no other:
§ 500-2103. Area, dimensional and design requirements. [Amended 11-14-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-13; 8-16-2000 by Ord. No. 00-09; 10-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-16]
All uses in the AQC District shall meet the following requirements:
A. Single-family detached dwelling. A single detached dwelling unit on an individual
lot with private yards on all sides of the house.
B. Semidetached dwelling. A unit having only one dwelling unit from ground to roof
and only one wall in common with another dwelling unit.
C. Multiplex dwelling. An attached dwelling unit which may be arranged in a variety
of configurations: side by side, back to back or vertically.
D. Municipal uses. Township administration offices, police station and senior citizen
center.
E. Accessory uses, consisting of:
(1) Uses customarily incidental to any permitted use, subject to the applicable
provisions of this article and Article XXIV. [Amended 5-20-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-05]
(2) Outdoor recreational facilities, including but not limited to tennis courts,
swimming pools, walking paths, golf putting/chipping area and shuffleboard
courts.
(3) Clubhouse, consisting of auditorium, activity rooms, kitchen areas, craft
rooms, fitness, lounges or similar facilities, for members of the community and
invited guests.
(4) Guardhouse and/or entrance gates.
(5) Administrative offices used for the management of the community.
A. Minimum site area: 100 gross acres.
B. Maximum density: three dwelling units per gross acre. The provisions of
§ 500-2101 ZONING § 500-2103
500:131
§ 500-2104. Individual lot area and bulk requirements. [Amended 11-14-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-13]
Use
Requirement
Single-Family
Detached
Single-Family
Semidetached Multiplex
Minimum lot area 6,000 square feet 4,000 square feet N/A
Minimum lot
width
60 feet 40 feet N/A
Minimum front yard from edge of
cartway
1. With sidewalks,
30 feet
1. With sidewalks,
30 feet
30 feet, front-entry
garage
2. Without
sidewalks, 25
feet
2. Without
sidewalks, 25 feet
20 feet, side- or rearentry
garage
20 feet, parking lots
other than driveway
cover
Minimum side
yard
10-foot minimum 10 feet on 1 side N/A
§ 500-2603E of this chapter shall not be applicable in this district.
C. Maximum building coverage: 20%.
D. Maximum impervious coverage: 40%.
E. Unit mix requirements. On sites over 125 acres, at least three housing types shall be
provided within the proposed development, with no one housing type comprising
less than 15% of the total number of dwelling units; while on sites under 125 acres,
only one housing type needs to be provided.
F. Minimum open space. The minimum open space ratio shall be 35% of gross site
area, before deduction of any and all lands to be dedicated to the Township.
G. Minimum building setback from tract boundary: from off-site street cartway, 75
feet; from the property line, 50 feet. These restrictions shall not apply to any
property owned by the Township.
H. Maximum building height: three stories or 35 feet, whichever is less, except for
property for Township use.
I. Buffer yard. A twenty-five-foot buffer yard shall be provided along all property
lines of the tract. The buffer yard shall meet the requirements of § 500-2605 of this
chapter.
J. Off-street parking. There shall be 1 1/4 off-street parking spaces provided for each
dwelling unit.
§ 500-2103 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2104
500:132
Use
Requirement
Single-Family
Detached
Single-Family
Semidetached Multiplex
Minimum rear
yard
15 feet 15 feet N/A
Aggregate front
and rear yard
45 feet 45 feet N/A
Building
coverage
35% 35% N/A
Floor area ratio N/A N/A N/A
Impervious
coverage per lot
45% 55% N/A
Minimum
distance between
buildings
20 feet 20 feet 24 feet side to side
Maximum units
per structure
N/A 2 5
§ 500-2105. General requirements. [Amended 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 00-13]
A. Utilities. All units shall be served by public water and public sewer. All utilities
including water and sewer shall be in accordance with the provisions of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter 440). [Amended
5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05]
B. Common area and facilities. Designated open space shall be restricted from further
subdivision development by declaration and duly recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Bucks County. Required open space may be owned by a
homeowners' or condominium association, the Township, or may remain in private
ownership.
C. Roads. Roads within the proposed development shall be gated and private and shall
be owned and maintained by a homeowners' or condominium association. All roads
shall be constructed to Township standards for public residential streets, except that
all such streets within the proposed development shall have a minimum cartway
width of 24 feet. The Board of Supervisors may impose parking restrictions on one
or both sides of such streets. A utility easement area shall be provided along all
streets to provide suitable area for the location of utility lines.
D. A pedestrian circulation system shall be provided as an integral part of the proposed
development. The pedestrian circulation system shall include any one or a
combination of sidewalks, pathways and trails to provide reasonable access to all
neighborhoods, recreation, shopping or other destination within and adjacent to the
proposed development.
E. Unit occupancy. At least one occupant of each dwelling unit shall be 55 years of
age or older. No person under the age of 19 shall occupy a dwelling for more than
§ 500-2104 ZONING § 500-2105
500:133
two weeks in a calendar year.
F. Declaration of age qualification. Subsequent to the approval of the plan for the first
phase of the development, but prior to the recording of the plan, developers shall
each record a declaration against their respective portions of the tract, in a form
acceptable to the Township Solicitor, binding all properties and owners to the
restriction which shall require one occupant of an individual dwelling unit within
the proposed development to be 55 or older, and which shall require that any
residents of an individual dwelling unit within the proposed development under the
age of 19 years old shall not reside for more than two weeks in any calendar year.
G. The Township Police Department shall be given the right to enforce the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code on streets throughout the development.
H. No single-wide or double-wide mobile homes shall be permitted as part of this
development.
I. All units must have garages for the parking of at least one vehicle, which cannot be
used for storage or converted to additional living space. This restriction to be
included in the declaration of covenants, easements and restrictions.
§ 500-2105 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2105
500:134
ARTICLE XXII
Overlay Zoning Districts
§ 500-2201. Northeast Philadelphia Airport zoning district.187
A. Purpose and intent.
(1) This section, which may be cited as the "Northeast Philadelphia Airport
Zoning District," is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by the Airport
Zoning Act of 1984, P.L. 164, 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5911 et seq., as amended, and
Act 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code of 1968, P.L. 805, 53
P.S. § 10101 et seq., as amended. It is hereby found that an obstruction has the
potential for endangering the lives and property of users of Northeast
Philadelphia Airport and property or occupants of land in its vicinity; that an
obstruction may affect existing and future instrument approach minimums of
Northeast Philadelphia Airport; and that an obstruction may reduce the size
and areas available for the landing, takeoff and maneuvering of aircraft, thus
tending to destroy or impair the utility of Northeast Philadelphia Airport and
any public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared that:
(a) The creation or establishment of an obstruction has the potential of being
a public nuisance and may injure the region served by Northeast
Philadelphia Airport.
(b) It is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety and
general welfare that the creation or establishment of obstructions that are
a hazard to air navigation be prevented.
(c) The prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished, to the
extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without
compensation.
(2) It is further declared that the prevention of the creation or establishment of
hazards to air navigation; the elimination, removal, alteration or mitigation of
hazards to air navigation; or moving and lighting of obstructions are public
purposes for which a municipality may raise and expend public funds and
acquire land or interests in lands.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AIRPORT — Northeast Philadelphia Airport in the City of Philadelphia,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
AIRPORT ELEVATION — The highest point of the airport's usable landing area
measured in feet above sea level, which is 121 feet above mean sea level for
Northeast Philadelphia Airport.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure or object, natural or man-made, or use of
land which obstructs the airspace required for flight of aircraft in landing or taking
187.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). The ordinance removed all
references to Buehl Airport; the airfield has been closed and the property redeveloped.
§ 500-2201 ZONING § 500-2201
500:135
off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to the landing or taking off of aircraft.
APPROACH SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on the extended
runway center line, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary
surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth
in this section. In plan, the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the
perimeter of the approach zone.
APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL AND CONICAL ZONES —
These zones are set forth in Subsection C of this section.
CONICAL SURFACE — A surface extending outward and upward from the
periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal distance
of 4,000 feet.
HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION — An obstruction determined to have a
substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable
airspace.
HEIGHT — For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth
in this section and shown on the Zoning Map, the datum shall be the mean sea level
elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE — A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established
airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the
horizontal zone.
LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY — Any runway that is constructed for
and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than 12,500 pounds
maximum gross weight and by jet-powered aircraft.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any preexisting structure, object of natural growth,
or use of land covered by this airport district which is inconsistent with the
provisions of this section or an amendment thereto.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument-approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only
horizontal guidance or area-type navigation equipment for which a straight-in
nonprecision-instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth or other object, including a mobile
object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in this section.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint-stock association or government entity, including a trustee, receiver, assignee
or similar representative of any of them.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument-approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS) or a
precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision
approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan
or any other planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When
the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200
feet beyond each end of that runway; for military runways or when the runway has
§ 500-2201 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2201
500:136
no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface
ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in
Subsection C of this section. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is
the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway center line.
RUNWAY — A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE — An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed
by man, including, but without limitations, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks,
earth formations and overhead transmission lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACE — These surfaces extend outward at 90° angles
to the runway center line and the runway center line extended at a slope of
seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and
approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces.
Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces which
project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface extend a distance of
5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at 90°
angles to the extended runway center line.
TREE — Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used
by propeller-driven aircraft of up to 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight.
VISUAL RUNWAY — A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft
using visual approach procedures.
C. Airport zones. In order to carry out the provisions of this section, there is hereby
created and established an airport overlay district made up of the following zones
which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional
surfaces, horizontal surfaces and conical surfaces as they apply to Northeast
Philadelphia Airport. Such zones are shown on the Middletown Township, Bucks
County, Airport Zoning Maps attached to this chapter and made a part hereof.188 An
area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the
zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby
established and defined as follows:
(1) Utility runway visual approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone
coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 250 feet wide. The
approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center line is the
continuation of the center line of the runway.
(2) Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone. The inner edge of this
approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet
wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 2,000 feet
at a horizontal distance 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center line is
the continuation of the center line of the runway.
(3) Precision instrument runway approach zone. The inner edge of this zone
188.Editor's Note: The Airport Zoning Maps are on file in the Township offices.
§ 500-2201 ZONING § 500-2201
500:137
coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The
zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal
distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center line is the
continuation of the center line of the runway.
(4) Transitional zones. The transitional zones are the areas beneath the transitional
surfaces.
(5) Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of fivethousand-
feet radii for all runways designated utility or visual and 10,000 feet
for all others from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway
and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The
horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones.
(6) Conical zone. The conical zone is established as the area that commences at
the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a
horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
D. Airport height limitations. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no structure
shall be erected, altered or maintained and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any
zone created by this section to a height in excess of the applicable height herein
established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established
for each of the zones in question as follows:
(1) Utility runway visual approach zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot
upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary
surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended
runway center line.
(2) Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone. Slopes 20 feet outward
for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the
extended runway center line.
(3) Precision instrument runway approach zone. Slopes 50 feet outward for each
foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary
surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the
extended runway center line; thence slopes upward 40 feet horizontally for
each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along
the extended runway center line.
(4) Transitional zones. Slope seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning
at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the
approach surface and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport
elevation, which is 121 feet above mean sea level for Northeast Philadelphia
Airport. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping
seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and the same
elevation as the approach surface and extending to where they intersect the
conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone
projects beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping
seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and the same
elevation as the approach surface and extending a horizontal distance of 5,000
§ 500-2201 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2201
500:138
feet measured at 90° angles to the extended runway center line.
(5) Horizontal zone. Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation or at a
height of 271 feet above mean sea level for Northeast Philadelphia Airport.
(6) Conical zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the
periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and
extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation.
(7) Exceptions to height limitations. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure or growth of any
tree up to the height limits established by other applicable Township zoning
district limits or by this section, whichever is lower.
E. Use restrictions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no use may
be made of land or water within any zone established by this section in such a
manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to
distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots
using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike
hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff or
maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
F. Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming uses shall be governed by the following:
(1) Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed in this section shall not
be construed to require the removal, lowering or other change or alteration of
any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date
of this section or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a use made
nonconforming by the adoption of this section. Nothing contained herein shall
require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any
structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the
effective date of this section and which is diligently executed.
(2) Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section,
the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required
to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such markers
and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Township Zoning Officer or
Township Manager to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the
airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall
be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of Northeast Philadelphia
Airport.
G. Permits. Applications for zoning and building permits shall be governed by the
following:
(1) Future uses. Except as specifically provided in Subsection G(1)(a), (b) and (c)
hereunder, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure
shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any
zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and
granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the
permit is desired, with sufficient detail to determine whether the resulting use,
§ 500-2201 ZONING § 500-2201
500:139
structure or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such
determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted, subject to
the other requirements and conditions of this section. No permit for a use
inconsistent with the provisions of this section shall be granted unless a
variance has been granted in accordance with Subsection G(4).
(a) In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone,
no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of
vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land
contour or topographic features, such tree or structure would extend
above the height limits prescribed for such zones.
(b) In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal
distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the runway, no
permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of
vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure
would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones.
(c) In the areas lying within the limits of the transitional zones beyond the
perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree
or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except
when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour or
topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for
such transitional zones.
(d) Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed
as permitting or intending to permit any construction or alteration of any
structure or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits
established by this section except as set forth in Subsection D.
(2) Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment
or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use, structure or tree
to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date
of this section or any amendments thereto or when the application for a permit
is made.
(3) Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the Zoning Officer
determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more
than 80% torn down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall be
granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height
limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
(4) Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure
or permit the growth of any tree or use property not in accordance with the
regulations prescribed in this section may apply to the Zoning Hearing Board
for a variance from such regulations. The application for variance shall be
accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration
and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as to the effect of the
proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use
of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found
that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in
unnecessary hardship, and that the relief granted will not be contrary to the
§ 500-2201 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2201
500:140
§ 500-2202. SW Solid Waste Management District.
public interest or create a hazard to air navigation. Additionally, no application
for variance to the requirements of this chapter may be considered by the
Zoning Hearing Board unless a copy of the application has been furnished to
the owner or manager of Northeast Philadelphia Airport for comments as to
the aeronautical effect of the variance. If the owner or manager of Northeast
Philadelphia Airport does not respond to the application within 15 days after
receipt, the Zoning Hearing Board may act on its own to grant or deny said
application.
(5) Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such
action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this section and
reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of
the structure or tree in question to install, operate and maintain, at the owner's
expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed proper by
the Zoning Hearing Board, this condition may be modified to require the
owner to permit Northeast Philadelphia Airport, at its own expense, to install,
operate and maintain the necessary markings and lights.
(6) FAA regulations update. In the event any existing or future regulation of the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), its successor agency or the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation is inconsistent with any provision
of this section, then such FAA or state regulation shall prevail, and such
provision of this section shall automatically be modified thereby.
A. Purpose and intent. The purpose of the Solid Waste Management District is to
establish reasonable standards for the recycling, processing, transfer, collection,
storage, disposal and treatment of municipal waste within the Township. Further, it
is the intent of this district to encourage, whenever possible, the reduction, reuse
and recycling of waste through environmentally sound techniques.
B. Applicability. The Solid Waste Management District shall be an overlay to regulate
the use of land within the area designated SW on the Township Zoning Map.189 The
requirements of the overlay district shall supersede the requirements of the
underlying zoning district for municipal waste uses.
C. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional establishments and from community activities, and any sludge not
meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste
Management Act190 from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply
treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The
term does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
189.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
190.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 500-2201 ZONING § 500-2202
500:141
D. Use regulations.
(1) A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any
of the purposes listed below when authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use.
(a) Municipal waste facilities.
[1] Composting facility. A facility for the composting of the organic
matter in municipal waste.
[2] Incinerator. A facility designed to reduce the volume of municipal
waste by combustion. This use may or may not include heat
exchange equipment for energy recovery.
[3] Material separation and/or refuse-derived fuel (RDF) facility. The
extraction of materials from municipal waste for recycling or for use
as refuse-derived fuel (RDF).
[4] Recycling facility. A facility employing a technology that is a
process that separates or classifies municipal waste and creates or
recovers reusable materials that can be sold to or reused by a
manufacturer as a substitute for or a supplement to virgin raw
materials. The term "recycling facility" shall not mean transfer
stations or landfills for municipal waste nor composting facilities or
resource-recovery facilities.
[5] Transfer station. A facility where municipal waste is delivered for
the purpose of compacting the material into larger vehicles for
transport to a final disposal site or processing facility. (A transfer
station may include the separation and collection of material for the
purpose of recycling.)
(b) Municipal waste landfill. Any facility that is designed, operated or
maintained for the disposal of municipal waste, whether or not such
facility possesses a permit from the PA DEP under the Solid Waste
Management Act. The term shall not include any facility that is used
exclusively for disposal of construction/demolition waste or sludge from
sewage treatment plants or water supply treatment plants.
(2) A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied in
accordance with the provisions of the underlying zoning district.
E. Requirements for municipal waste facilities. The following uses are considered
types of municipal waste facilities: composting facility, incinerator, material
separation and/or refuse-derived fuel (RDF) facility, recycling facility and transfer
station. The following requirements shall be applicable to municipal waste
facilities.
(1) A minimum lot area of five acres and a minimum lot width at the street line of
200 feet shall be required.
(2) Any such use shall be set back at least 200 feet from any street line or property
§ 500-2202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2202
500:142
line. Additionally, an incinerator or transfer station shall be a minimum of 300
feet from any residential zoning district or occupied residential dwelling unit.
(3) The maximum impervious surface ratio shall be 60%.
(4) Operation of a municipal waste facility shall at all times be in full compliance
with the statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the rules and
regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP) and the
provisions of this chapter. In the event that any of the provisions of this chapter
are less restrictive than any present or future rules or regulations of PA DEP,
the more restrictive PA DEP regulations shall supersede and control.
(5) Municipal waste landfill operations, disposal and open burning of any
materials shall specifically be prohibited at municipal waste facilities.
(6) Access to the site shall be limited to those posted times when an attendant is
on duty. In order to protect against indiscriminate and unauthorized dumping,
every municipal waste facility shall be protected by locked barricades, fences,
gates or other positive means designed to deny access to the area at
unauthorized times or locations.
(7) Unloading of municipal waste shall be continuously supervised by a facility
operator.
(8) Hazardous materials (as defined in 40 CFR, Chapter 1, Part 261, dated July 1,
1984, or as amended) shall not be received or processed at a municipal waste
facility.
(9) Litter control shall be exercised to confine blowing litter to the work area, and
a working plan for cleanup of litter shall be submitted to the Township.
(10) All parts of the process, unloading, handling and storage of municipal waste
shall occur within a building. However, certain separated recyclable materials
like glass, aluminum, and other metals may be stored outdoors, provided that
they are properly screened so as not to be visible from any adjacent streets or
property.
(11) No municipal waste shall be processed or stored at a recycling facility. For all
other types of municipal waste facilities, municipal waste shall not be stored
on the site for more than 72 hours.
(12) A contingency plan for disposal of municipal waste during a plant shutdown
must be submitted to the Township and approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(13) Leachate from the municipal waste and water used to wash vehicles or any
part of the operation shall be disposed of in a manner in compliance with PA
DEP regulations. If the leachate is to be discharged to a municipal sewage
treatment plant appropriate permits shall be obtained from the applicable
agencies and authorities. In no event shall the leachate be disposed of in a
storm sewer, to the ground, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection' regulations.
(14) Waste from the municipal waste facility process (such as, but not limited to,
§ 500-2202 ZONING § 500-2202
500:143
ash from an incinerator) shall be stored in such a manner as to prevent it
from being carried from the site by wind or water. This process waste shall
be located at least 100 feet from any property line and stored in leakproof and
vectorproof containers. Such process waste shall be disposed of in a sanitary
landfill approved by PA DEP or in another manner approved by PA DEP.
(15) Buffer yard. A buffer yard of 100 feet in width shall be provided along all
property lines and street lines. The buffer yard shall be in accordance with the
provisions of § 500-2605.
F. Requirements for a municipal waste landfill. The following requirements shall be
applicable to a municipal waste landfill:
(1) A minimum lot area of 25 acres and a minimum lot width at the street line of
300 feet shall be required.
(2) The municipal waste landfill operation shall be set back at least 300 feet from
any street line or property line.
(3) The maximum impervious surface ratio shall be 60%.
(4) Operation of any municipal waste landfill shall at all times be in full
compliance with the statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the
rules and regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection and the
provisions of this chapter. In the event that any of the provisions of this chapter
are less restrictive than any present or future rules or regulations of the
Department, the more restrictive Department rules or regulations shall
supersede and control in the operation of such municipal waste landfill.
(5) Burning of municipal waste is prohibited at a municipal waste landfill.
(6) A municipal waste landfill operation shall be under the direction at all times of
a responsible individual who is qualified by experience or training to operate a
landfill.
(7) Access to the site shall be limited to those posted times when an attendant is
on duty. In order to protect against indiscriminate and unauthorized dumping,
every municipal waste landfill shall be protected by locked barricades, fences,
gates or other positive means designed to deny access to the area at
unauthorized times or locations.
(8) Unloading of waste shall be continuously supervised.
(9) Hazardous materials (as defined in 40 CFR, Chapter 1, Part 261, dated July 1,
1984, or as amended) shall not be disposed of in a municipal waste landfill.
(10) Litter control shall be exercised to confine blowing litter to the work area, and
a working plan of cleanup of litter shall be accomplished.
(11) Salvaging shall be conducted by the operator only and shall be organized so
that it will not interfere with prompt sanitary disposal of waste or create
unsightliness or health hazards. The storage of salvage shall be controlled in a
manner that will not permit the inhabitation or reproduction of deleterious
§ 500-2202 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2202
500:144
§ 500-2203. Neshaminy Creek Watershed Peak Rate Districts. [Added 12-1-1992
by Ord. No. 92-15; amended 8-16-2000 by Ord. No. 00-09]
vectors.
(12) The entire site, including the fill surface, shall be graded and provided with
drainage facilities to minimize runoff onto and into the fill, to prevent erosion
or washing of the fill, to drain off rainwater falling onto the fill, and to prevent
the collection of standing water. The operator shall comply with the
requirements of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and applicable Township
ordinances so that there is no adverse off-site impact from the drainage of
surface water.
(13) Operation of any municipal waste landfill shall at all times be in full
compliance with the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law, Act 157 of 1980, as
amended.191
(14) Buffer yard. A buffer yard of 200 feet in width shall be provided along all
property lines and street lines. The buffer yard shall be in accordance with the
provisions of § 500-2605.
(15) A final inspection of the entire site shall be made by the Department of
Environmental Protection and the Township and their authorized
representatives to determine compliance with approved plans and
specifications before the earthmoving equipment is removed from the site.
Any necessary corrective work shall be performed before the municipal waste
landfill project is accepted as completed. Arrangements shall be made for the
repair of all cracked, eroded and uneven areas in the final cover during the first
two years following completion of the municipal waste landfill. A bond shall
be posted to ensure that all corrective work is completed.
G. Impact statements. An applicant for a municipal waste facility or a municipal waste
landfill shall submit the following impact statements:
(1) Natural resource protection standards. The applicant shall submit an analysis
which evaluates his ability to meet the natural resource protection standards of
§ 500-2601 of this chapter.
(2) Nuisance standards. The applicant shall submit specifications and reports that
contain detailed information as to how the facility will be able to operate
within the limits of the nuisance standards of Article XXV of this chapter.
(3) Traffic impact study. The applicant shall submit a traffic impact study
prepared in accordance with the requirements for said study set forth in
Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development.
A. Purpose and intent. The stormwater runoff peak rate districts are those delineated
and defined in § 440-406H of Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development,
and are hereby make part of this chapter by reference. These stormwater
management districts act as overlay districts so that land development and
191.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 500-2202 ZONING § 500-2203
500:145
disturbance activities are controlled by the underlying zoning district regulations
and by the provisions of the stormwater runoff peak rate districts of the Neshaminy
Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan. Land development, and
disturbance activities shall also be subject to the water quality requirements
described in § 440-406G of Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development.
These districts and requirements are established to implement the Neshaminy Creek
Watershed Stormwater Management Plan.
B. Classes of zoning districts. In order to carry out the provisions of this section, there
is hereby created and established a stormwater runoff peak rate overlay district
made up of the following zones:
Stormwater Runoff Peak Rate Districts
RR-1 100% release rate
RR-3 75% release rate
DD Provisional direct discharge
LR Provisional lower reaches 100% release rate.
C. Use subject to other regulations. Uses permitted by right, as a special exception or
as a conditional use shall be subject to the use regulations and the stormwater
management regulations of § 440-406 of Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land
Development. All improvement activities for all parcels, including improvements
to existing activities or other facilities, including, but not limited to, parking areas,
are subject to the stormwater management regulations specified in § 440-406 of
Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development. No zoning permit shall be issued
until a stormwater management plan, if required, has been submitted and approved
by the Township.
D. Regulated activities.
(1) The following activities are considered as "regulated activities" which are
subject to the stormwater management provisions:
(a) Subdivision and/or land development.
(b) Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces (driveways,
parking lots, etc.).
(c) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(d) Diversion of piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
(e) Installation of stormwater systems or appurtenances thereto.
(2) Exemptions to regulated activities. All improvement activities for all parcels,
including improvements to existing activities or other facilities, including, but
not limited to, parking areas, are subject to the stormwater management
regulations specified in § 440-406 of Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land
Development. Due to the limited impact on stormwater runoff, the following
activities are exempt from stormwater plan preparation requirements;
however, stormwater associated with any activity must be managed in a
§ 500-2203 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2203
500:146
manner consistent with § 440-406 of Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land
Development. Any regulated activity which would create less than 2,500
square feet of additional impervious cover is exempt from the stormwater
management plan preparation provisions of this section. This criterion shall
apply to the total proposed development even if the development is to take
place in stages. Any area proposed for gravel or crushed stone, etc., shall be
considered to be impervious for purposes of this section. The Township may
require plan preparation and submission of the individual lot grading plans in
connection with zoning permit applications in order to promote the purposes
of the stormwater management provisions.
(a) Agricultural operations exclusion. Any land disturbance associated with
agricultural activities operated in accordance with a conservation plan or
erosion and sedimentation control plan approved by the Bucks County
Conservation District or the United States Department of Agriculture
Natural Resources Conservation Service is exempt from the stormwater
management plan preparation provisions of this section.
(b) Forest management operations exclusion. Any land disturbance
associated with forest management operations which are following the
DEP's management practices contained in its publication "Soil Erosion
and Sedimentation Control Guidelines for Forestry" and operating under
an adequate erosion and sedimentation control plan approved by an
applicable agency is exempt from the stormwater management plan
preparation provisions of this section.
(c) Mining operations exclusion. Any land disturbance associated with
mining operations approved and operated in accordance with all
applicable rules and regulations of the DEP and operating under an
erosion and sedimentation control plan approved by the applicable
agency.
(d) Use of land for garden for home consumption. [Amended 8-16-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-09]
E. Environmental performance standards.
(1) Stormwater. All land development and disturbance activities located in the
stormwater runoff peak rate districts delineated in Subsection B, Classes of
zoning districts, shall control the stormwater runoff generated in accordance
with the requirements of the stormwater management provisions contained in
the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, § 440-406, of this Code.
(2) Soil erosion and sedimentation. All land development and disturbance
activities located in the stormwater runoff peak rate districts delineated in
Subsection B, Classes of zoning districts, shall protect streams, lakes, ponds
and watercourses from sedimentation damage and control erosion in
accordance with the requirements of § 440-407 of this Code, and Pennsylvania
Code Chapter 102, Erosion Control, Title 25, Rules and Regulations,
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
F. Floodplain regulations. No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind
§ 500-2203 ZONING § 500-2203
500:147
§ 500-2204. Stormwater runoff districts for all areas except Neshaminy Creek
Watershed. [Added 8-16-2000 by Ord. No. 00-09]
shall be made to any watercourse channel located in the stormwater management
districts delineated in Subsection B, Classes of zoning districts, until all adjacent
municipalities which may be affected by such action have been notified by the
applicant, proof of notification is submitted to the Township, and until all required
permits or approvals have been obtained in accordance with the stormwater
management provisions of § 440-406 of Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land
Development, and the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Dams and Waterway Management.
G. Zoning Officer; duties and powers. Receive, examine and process stormwater
management plans along with required zoning permits in accordance with the
stormwater management provisions of § 440-406 of Chapter 440, Subdivision and
Land Development.
H. Application requirements for zoning permits. All applications for zoning permits
shall include stormwater management plans, if required, in accordance with the
Township's stormwater management provisions stated in § 440-406 of Chapter 440,
Subdivision and Land Development.
A. Purpose and intent. The stormwater runoff peak rate districts are those delineated
and defined in § 440-406H of Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development,
and are included in the Neshaminy Creek Watershed Stormwater Runoff Peak Rate
Districts, § 500-2203, of this article. The remainder of Middletown Township,
excluding the Neshaminy Creek Watershed, shall also be excluded in an overlay
district for stormwater runoff. The land development and disturbance activities are
controlled by the underlying zoning district regulations and by the provisions for
the stormwater runoff districts for all areas except Neshaminy Creek Watershed, as
defined in this section. Land development and disturbance activities shall also be
subject to the water quality requirements described in § 440-406G of Chapter 440,
Subdivision and Land Development.
B. Classes of zoning districts.
(1) In order to carry out the provisions of this section, there is hereby created and
established a stormwater runoff overlay district made up of the following
zones:
(a) Stormwater runoff district zones:
RR-1 100% release rate district
(2) All areas of the Township not included in the Neshaminy Creek Watershed are
in the RR-1 District.
C. Uses subject to other regulations. Uses permitted by right, as a special exception, or
as a conditional use shall be subject to the use regulations and the stormwater
management regulations of § 440-406 of Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land
Development. No zoning permit shall be issued until a stormwater management
plan, if required, has been submitted and approved by the Township.
§ 500-2203 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2204
500:148
D. Regulated activities.
(1) The following activities are considered as "regulated activities" which are
subject to the stormwater management provisions:
(a) Subdivision and/or land development.
(b) Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces (driveways,
parking lots, etc.).
(c) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(d) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
(e) Installation of stormwater systems or appurtenances thereto.
(2) Exemptions to regulated activities. All improvement activities for all parcels,
including improvements to existing activities or other facilities, including, but
not limited to, parking areas, are subject to the stormwater management
regulations specified in § 440-406 of Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land
Development. Due to limited impact on stormwater runoff, the following
activities are exempt from stormwater management plan preparation
requirements; however, stormwater associated with any activity must be
managed in a manner specified in § 440-406 of Chapter 440, Subdivision and
Land Development. Any regulated activity which would create less than 2,500
square feet of additional impervious cover is exempt from the stormwater
management plan preparation provisions of this section. This criterion shall
apply to the total proposed development even if the development is to take
place in stages. Any area proposed for gravel or crushed stone, etc., shall be
considered to be impervious for purposes of this section. The Township may
require plan preparation and submission of the individual lot grading plan in
connection with zoning permit applications in order to promote the purposes
of the stormwater management provisions.
(a) Agricultural operations exclusion. Any land disturbance associated with
agricultural activities operated in accordance with a conservation plan or
erosion and sedimentation control plan or erosion and sedimentation
control plan approved by the Bucks County Conservation District or the
United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation
Service is exempt from the stormwater management provision of this
section.
(b) Forest management operations exclusion. Any land disturbance
associated with forest management operations which are following the
Department of Environmental Protection's management practices
contained in its publication "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Guidelines for Forestry" and operating under an adequate erosion and
sedimentation control plan approved by an applicable agency is exempt
from the stormwater management plan preparation provision of this
section.
(c) Mining operations exclusion. Any land disturbance associated with
§ 500-2204 ZONING § 500-2204
500:149
mining operations approved and operated in accordance with all
applicable rules and regulations of the Department of Environmental
Protection and operating under an erosion and sedimentation control plan
approved by applicable agency.
(d) Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
E. Environmental performance standards.
(1) Stormwater. All land development and disturbance activities located in
stormwater runoff districts delineated in Subsection B, Classes of zoning
districts, shall control the stormwater runoff generated in accordance with the
requirements of the stormwater management provisions contained in Chapter
440, Subdivision and Land Development.
(2) Soil erosion and sedimentation. All land development and disturbance
activities located in the stormwater runoff districts delineated in Subsection B,
Classes of zoning districts, shall protect streams, lakes, ponds and
watercourses from sedimentation damage and control erosion in accordance
with the requirements of Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development,
§ 440-407, and Pennsylvania Code Chapter 102, Erosion Control, Title 25,
Rules and Regulations, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
F. Floodplain regulations. No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind
shall be made to any watercourse channel located in the stormwater management
districts delineated in Subsection B, Classes of zoning districts, until all adjacent
municipalities which may be affected by such action have been notified by the
applicant, approvals have been obtained in accordance with the stormwater
management provisions of § 440-406 of Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land
Development, and the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Dams and Waterway Management.
G. Zoning Officer; duties and powers. Receive, examine and process stormwater
management plans along with the stormwater management provisions of § 440-406
of Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development.
H. Application requirements for zoning permits. All applications for zoning permits
shall include stormwater management plans, if required, in accordance with the
Township's stormwater management provisions stated in § 440-406 of Chapter 440,
Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 500-2204 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2204
500:150
ARTICLE XXIII
General Regulations
§ 500-2301. Minimum area and dimensional requirements.
An existing lot that complies with the area and dimensional standards of this chapter
shall not be reduced in size so that the minimum lot area and/or dimensional
requirements of this chapter are no longer met. An existing lot that does not comply with
the minimum lot area standards of this chapter shall not be subdivided. A lot that does
not comply with the minimum dimensional standards shall not be subdivided so as to
further reduce the nonconforming standard or create a new nonconforming condition.
§ 500-2302. Yard requirements.
No portion of a building or structure shall be built within the minimum depth of front,
side or rear yards as specified in Articles IV through XXI, except where specifically
permitted by this chapter.
§ 500-2303. Front yard exceptions.
§ 500-2304. Projections into yards.
Apparatus needed for the operation of active and passive solar energy systems (including
but not limited to overhangs, movable insulating walls and roofs, detached solar
collectors, reflectors and piping), ground-story bays, porches and chimney flues may
project into required yard areas no more than four feet. Such projections into the required
minimum yard areas shall not occupy more than 1/3 the length of the building wall.
Cornices and gutters may project no more than two feet over a required yard. Fire
escapes may be permitted in accordance with this section in side or rear yards only.
§ 500-2305. Fences. [Amended 3-23-1999 by Ord. No. 99-03]
A. A front yard of not less than 50 feet shall be provided on all lots abutting an
officially designated state highway, subject to Subsection B below.
B. A proposed building may be constructed nearer to the street than the required
minimum front yard depth under the following conditions:
(1) There shall be existing buildings on the lots on either side of the lot which
would contain the proposed building.
(2) The proposed building would front on the same side of the same street in the
same block as the existing buildings on lots on either side.
(3) The existing buildings on the lots on either side would be no greater than 50
feet from the proposed building.
(4) The proposed building may be constructed at a front yard depth that is not less
than the average of the front yard setbacks of the existing buildings on the lots
on either side.
(5) In no case shall the front yard of the proposed building be less than 20 feet.
§ 500-2301 ZONING § 500-2305
500:151
A. Height. The height of fences for residential uses shall be no more than six feet, and
the height of fences for nonresidential uses shall be no more than eight feet, except
where this chapter or other ordinances, statutes or regulations require a greater
height.
B. Construction.
(1) Every fence shall be constructed in a neat and orderly manner, of materials
which are not intrinsically unsightly.
(2) No electrified or barbed wire fence shall be erected or maintained, with the
following exceptions:
(a) Electrified fences operating on no more than six volts of electricity.
(b) Barbed wire fences used on farms for the restraint of livestock or where
required by other ordinances, statutes and regulations.
C. Location.
(1) The distance between the wall of a building and a fence parallel to it shall not
be less than five feet.
(2) Fences shall meet the requirements of § 500-2308 regarding traffic visibility
across corners.
(3) In residential or commercial districts, stockade or board-on-board fences shall
be located in rear or side yards only. Where a property fronts on more than one
street, a fence otherwise satisfying the requirements of this chapter may be
erected in the front yard which is not the yard the front of the dwelling faces,
provided that it is not located within the required minimum front yard.
(4) All fences must be located eight feet from the physical cartway or, if there is a
sidewalk, eight feet from the inner edge of the sidewalk.
D. Where required.
(1) Pools. A fence shall be provided around swimming pools in accordance with
§ 500-2404.
(2) Ponds. Ornamental ponds for residential uses which are man-made and can
hold water of 24 inches or greater in depth shall be completely enclosed by a
fence at least four feet high and constructed so as to make climbing by children
difficult. Ponds used for agricultural, fire protection or municipal purposes
shall be exempt from this fence requirement.
(3) Excavations and quarries. Every quarry, gravel pit and similar permanent
excavation which is hazardous to children or to passersby shall be enclosed by
a sturdy fence of eight feet in height and constructed so as to make climbing
difficult.
§ 500-2305 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2306
500:152
§ 500-2306. Exceptions to building height. [Amended 3-23-1999 by Ord. No.
99-04]
The height of buildings is regulated to prevent loss of life or excessive property damage
through the inability of fire equipment to reach upper stories or roofs. Therefore, no
building shall exceed the maximum building heights specified in Articles IV through
XXI, except church spires, belfries, silos, water towers, solar energy systems, WECS,
antennas, television towers, masts, aerials, flagpoles or other structures necessary for
providing water, electricity, heat, cooling, radio or similar facilities, provided they are
not used for human occupancy and are set back 1.5 times their height (from ground level
to the top of the structure) from other buildings or property lines. However, this setback
requirement does not apply to a tower or antenna associated with a telecommunications
facility.
§ 500-2307. Access.
No dwelling shall hereafter be erected unless there is direct access to it through an open
space on the same lot. Such open space shall not be less than 25 feet in width and shall
extend from the dwelling to a public street, private street, road or way which has a rightof-
way width of not less than 50 feet and which has been offered to the Township for
dedication. This access requirement is in addition to, not in place of, the minimum lot
width requirement which is measured at the required building setback line.
§ 500-2308. Traffic visibility across corners.
§ 500-2306 ZONING § 500-2308
500:153
§ 500-2309. Street classifications.
Certain streets of the Township are classified as follows, and those streets and any future
extensions thereof shall have a minimum right-of-way as set forth hereinbelow:
A. In all districts, no structure, fence, planting or other obstruction shall be maintained
between a horizontal plane two feet above curb level and a plane seven feet above
curb level so as to interfere with traffic visibility across the corner within that part
of the required front or side yard which is within a horizontal clear sight triangle
bounded by the two street lines (rights-of-way) and a straight line drawn between
points on each such line 25 feet from the intersection of said lines or extension
thereof. When one or both streets which form the intersection are classified as
collector or arterial highways, the clear sight triangle bounded by the two street
lines and a straight line drawn between points on such line shall be 50 feet from the
intersection of said lines or extension thereof.
B. At each point where a private accessway intersects a public street or road, a clear
sight triangle of 10 feet, measured from the point of intersection of the street line
and the edge of the accessway, shall be maintained within which vegetation and
other visual obstructions shall be limited to a height of not more than two feet above
the street grade.
A. Expressways shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 120 feet. The following
roads shall be classified as an expressway:
(1) Interstate 95.
(2) U.S. 1 Expressway (Super Highway).
B. Arterials shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 100 feet. The following roads
shall be classified as arterials:
(1) East Lincoln Highway.
(2) Langhorne-Newtown Road (PA 413).
(3) New Rodgers Road (PA 413).
§ 500-2308 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2309
500:154
(4) Newportville-Fallsington Road.
(5) Old Lincoln Highway (from U.S. 1 Expressway east to East Lincoln
Highway).
(6) Township Line Road.
(7) Trenton Road.
(8) West Lincoln Highway.
C. Collectors shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 80 feet. The following roads
shall be classified as collectors:
(1) Bridgetown Road.
(2) Durham Road.
(3) Hulmeville Road.
(4) Langhorne-Yardley Road.
(5) North Flowers Mill Road.
(6) Old Lincoln Highway (from U.S. 1 Expressway east to West Maple Avenue).
(7) Oxford Valley Road.
(8) South Flowers Mill Road.
(9) West Maple Avenue (from Neshaminy Creek to U.S. 1 Expressway).
(10) Woodbourne Road.
D. Primary roads shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 60 feet. The following
roads shall be classified as primary roads:
(1) Big Oak Road.
(2) Brownsville Road.
(3) Chickenfoot Road.
(4) Ellis Road.
(5) Frosty Hollow Road.
(6) Fulling Mill Road.
(7) Neshaminy Street.
(8) Silver Lake Road.
(9) Tollgate Road.
(10) Village Road.
(11) Winchester Avenue.
§ 500-2309 ZONING § 500-2309
500:155
§ 500-2310. Public utility corporation.
This chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed building, or extension thereof,
used or to be used by a public utility corporation, if upon petition of the public utility
corporation the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission shall, after a public hearing,
decide that the present or proposed situation of the building in question is reasonably
necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public. It shall be the responsibility of the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission to ensure that both the public utility corporation
and the municipality in which the building or proposed building is located have notice of
the hearing and are granted an opportunity to appear, present witnesses, cross-examine
witnesses presented by other parties and otherwise exercise the rights of a party to the
proceedings.
§ 500-2311. Trucks, truck tractors and trailers prohibited.
(12) Zimmerman Lane.
E. Secondary streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 50 feet. Any road
which has not been classified above shall be considered a secondary street.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words or phrases shall
be defined as indicated.
COMBINATIONS — Two or more vehicles physically interconnected in tandem.
REGISTERED GROSS WEIGHT — The maximum gross weight at which a
vehicle or combination is registered in this commonwealth or any other
commonwealth or state to operate upon a highway.
TRAILER — A vehicle designed to be towed by a motor vehicle, used or
maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
TRUCK — A motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
TRUCK TRACTOR — A motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not constructed to carry a load other than a part of the weight of
the vehicle and load so drawn.
B. No land, whether public or private, including any street which is zoned primarily
for residential use, including, but not limited to, those districts designated RA-1,
RA-2, RA-3, R-1, R-2, R-3, A-O and MR, shall be used for the purpose of parking
or storing any truck, truck tractor or trailer which has one or more of the following
characteristics:
(1) A registered gross weight or a registered gross weight for a combination of
more than 14,000 pounds for a truck or truck tractor or more than 10,000
pounds for a trailer.
(2) More than two axles or more than one rear axle.
C. The foregoing regulations of this section shall not apply to vehicles being used for
agricultural purposes when the vehicles are located on the premises where the
agricultural activity is taking place or vehicles in the process of delivering a
§ 500-2309 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2311
500:156
§ 500-2312. Residential conversions.
A residential conversion is the conversion of an existing building into two or more
dwelling units. A residential conversion is permitted when authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board as a special exception, subject to the following provisions:
product, material or service.
A. A residential conversion shall only be permitted in the following zoning districts:
RA-1, RA-2, RA-3, R-1, R-2, R-3, MR and P Districts.
B. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall not be reduced below the minimum
lot area required for single-family detached dwellings for the district in which such
lot is located.
C. The maximum density for the district in which the lot is located shall not be
exceeded.
D. Floor area.
(1) The following minimum floor area requirements shall be met:
Type of Unit
Minimum Floor Area
(square feet)
Efficiency 400
1 bedroom 500
2 bedrooms 650
3 bedrooms 800
4 bedrooms 950
(2) A minimum 120 square feet of floor area for each additional bedroom, den,
family room or recreation room shall be required.
E. Detached dwellings which are converted must maintain the appearance of a
detached dwelling with a single front entrance. Additional entrances may be placed
on the side or rear of the structure. The dwelling units may share the single front
entrance. Exterior stairways and fire escapes shall be located on the rear wall in
preference to either side wall and in no case on a front or side wall facing a street.
F. Except as may be necessary for purposes of safety in accordance with the preceding
subsection, there shall be no major structural change in the exterior of the building
in connection with the conversion. After conversion, the building shall retain
substantially the same structural appearance it had before such conversion.
G. Each converted structure shall have a recreation/patio area of at least 200 square
feet per dwelling unit. The recreation/patio area shall not be located in the minimum
front or side yards.
H. Separate cooking and sanitary facilities shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
I. Trash receptacles shall not be visible from the street or abutting properties except
§ 500-2311 ZONING § 500-2312
500:157
§ 500-2313. Exceptions to building coverage and impervious surface ratio.
The maximum building coverage or maximum impervious surface ratio applicable to a
lot may be increased by 2% when a WECS or solar energy system is utilized on a lot.
§ 500-2314. Protection and preservation of historic buildings, structures and sites.
[Added 3-23-1999 by Ord. No. 99-03]
on scheduled pickup days.
J. Parking.
(1) Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for dwellings having three
bedrooms or less, and three off-street parking spaces shall be provided for
dwellings having four bedrooms or more.
(2) Off-street parking spaces shall be located to the side or rear of the converted
structure.
(3) Off-street parking lots with three or more spaces shall be buffered from
abutting residences by hedge material placed on three-foot centers.
Alternately, a four-foot to five-foot fence may be erected which provides a
visual screen.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the educational, cultural,
economic and general welfare of Middletown Township by:
(1) Identifying and preserving the distinctive historic, architectural,
archaeological and geological characteristics of Middletown Township which
represent elements of the Township's cultural, social, economic, political and
architectural history.
(2) Fostering civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past as
represented in Middletown Township's landmarks and historic sites.
(3) Conserving and improving the value of property designated as landmarks or
historic sites or designated as significant archaeological or geological sites.
(4) Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the Township to home buyers,
tourists and visitors and thereby supporting and promoting business,
commerce, industry and providing economic benefit to the Township.
(5) Fostering and encouraging preservation, restoration and rehabilitation of
structures, areas, sites and neighborhoods.
B. Criteria. The Board of Supervisors shall rely upon the recommendations of the
Historic Preservation Commission to make a determination as to whether a
building, structure or site should be preserved, based upon whether or not the
building, structure or site meets one of the following criteria:
(1) Its character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural
characteristics of the community, county, state or country.
(2) Its location as a site of a significant local, county, state or national event.
§ 500-2312 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2314
500:158
(3) Its identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the
development of the community, county, state or country.
(4) Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style
valuable of the study of a period, type, method of construction or use of
indigenous material.
(5) Its identification as the work of a master builder, designer architect or
landscape architect whose individual work has influenced the development of
the community, county, state or country.
(6) Its embodiment of elements of design, detailing, materials or craftsmanship
that render it architecturally significant.
(7) Its embodiment of design elements that made it structurally or architecturally
innovative.
(8) Its unique location or singular physical characteristics that make it an
established or familiar visual effect.
(9) Its suitability for preservation or restoration.
(10) Its inclusion in the list of structures identified as historic resources in the
Middletown Township Comprehensive Plan.
C. Identification of buildings, structures and sites. Any application and the
accompanying plans submitted to the Township for review for whatever reason
shall specifically identify any building, structure or site which meets any of the
criteria set forth above in Subsection B(1) through (10), inclusive.
D. Standards for review. The Township Board of Supervisors shall be guided by the
following general standards in the event that the Historic Preservation Commission
determines that a building, structure or site meets any of the criteria herein:
(1) Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use for a
property that requires minimal alteration of the building, structure or site and
its environment or to use a property for its originally intended purpose.
(2) The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure or site
and its environment shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any
historic material or distinctive architectural, archaeological or geological
features shall be avoided when possible.
(3) All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as products of their own
time. Alterations that have no historical basis and that seek to create an earlier
appearance shall be discouraged.
(4) Changes that may have taken place in the course of time or evidence of the
history and development of a building, structure or site and its environment.
These changes may have acquired significance in their own right, and this
significance shall be recognized and respected.
(5) Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship that
characterize a building's structure or site shall be treated with sensitivity.
§ 500-2314 ZONING § 500-2314
500:159
§ 500-2315. Cellular telecommunications facility. [Added 3-23-1999 by Ord. No.
99-04]
A cellular telecommunications facility (tower and associated telecommunications
equipment building) must meet the requirements listed below:
(6) Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced,
wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new materials
should match the materials being replaced in composition, design, color,
texture and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing
architectural features should be based on accurate duplication of features
substantiated by historic, physical or pictorial evidence, rather than on
conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements from
other buildings or structures.
(7) The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the gentlest means
possible. Sand blasting and other cleaning methods that will damage the
historic building materials shall not be undertaken.
(8) Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve archaeological
resources affected by or adjacent to any project.
(9) Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve the site of a
significant local, county, state or national event.
(10) Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve a site which has
historical significance, heritage or cultural characteristics embodied within the
community, county, state or country.
(11) Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve significant
geological sites affected by or adjacent to any project.
A. The location of the tower and equipment building shall comply with all natural
resource protection standards of this chapter.
B. An eight-foot-high security fence shall completely surround the tower (and guy
wires if used) and equipment building.
C. The following buffer plantings shall be located around the perimeter of the security
fence:
(1) An evergreen screen shall be planted that consists of either a hedge, planted
three feet on center maximum (four feet high, minimum), or a row of
evergreen trees planted 10 feet on center maximum (five feet high, minimum).
(2) Existing vegetation (trees and shrubs) shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible.
D. The tower shall be designed and constructed to all applicable standards of the
American National Standards Institute Manual, ANSI/EIA-222-E, as amended.
E. A soil report complying with the standards of Appendix I: Geotechnical
Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222-E, as amended, shall be submitted to the Township
§ 500-2314 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2315
500:160
to document and verify the design specifications of the foundation for the tower and
anchors for the guy wires, if used.
F. All plans and drawings for the tower and antenna shall contain a signature and seal
of a professional structural engineer.
G. The tower and antenna shall be designed to withstand wind gusts of at least 100
miles per hour.
H. An antenna may not be located on a historic building or structure, or within 500 feet
of a property containing a hospital, convalescent home, nursing home, personal care
facility, school or playground.
I. When a tower is no longer in use as a telecommunications facility, the owner shall
promptly remove the tower within six months. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit
for the construction of a tower, the applicant shall provide to the Township financial
security sufficient to guarantee the removal of the tower. Said financial security
shall remain in place until the tower is removed.
J. A cellular telecommunications facility is permitted by special exception in the
following zoning districts: C, CS, GB, M-1 and OC, subject to the following
conditions:
(1) The applicant shall demonstrate that the tower for the telecommunications
facility is the minimum height necessary for the service area. The applicant
shall also demonstrate that the facility must be located where it is proposed in
order to serve the company's system and service area.
(2) The applicant shall present documentation that the tower is designed in
accordance with the standards cited in this chapter for cellular
telecommunications towers.
(3) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed tower complies with all
local, state and federal laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(4) The need for additional buffer yard or other camouflage treatment (such as
camouflaging the tower to look like a tree) to help the proposed tower blend in
with the surrounding neighborhood shall be evaluated and implemented where
required by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(5) Where the telecommunications facility is proposed to be located on a property
with a principal use, the applicant shall present documentation that the owner
of the property has either granted an easement or has entered into a legal
agreement for the proposed facility and for vehicular access to the facility.
(6) The provisions of § 500-3108 of this chapter regarding special exceptions shall
also be met.
K. A cellular telecommunications facility is permitted in any of the following
arrangements:
(1) Sole use on a lot. A cellular telecommunications facility is permitted as the
principal and sole use on a lot, subject to the following:
§ 500-2315 ZONING § 500-2315
500:161
(a) Minimum lot size: minimum lot size required for applicable zoning
district.
(b) Minimum yard requirements: minimum setbacks for the district.
(c) Maximum height: tower, 150 feet; equipment building, maximum
building height permitted for the applicable district.
(d) Buffer yard. Along any adjacent land zoned for or in residential use, a
yard shall be provided which shall be not less than the height of the tower
in width, measured from the property line or the street line. A planted
buffer yard shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
§ 500-2605.
(2) Combined with another use. A cellular telecommunications facility is
permitted as an accessory use on a property with an existing principal use,
subject to the following conditions:
(a) The existing use on the property may be any permitted use in the district
or any lawful nonconforming use and need not be affiliated with the
cellular telecommunications provider.
(b) The cellular telecommunications facility shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for periodic
maintenance.
(c) Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be the area needed to
accommodate the tower (guy wires, if used), the equipment building,
security fence and buffer planting. If the title to the land on which the
cellular telecommunications facility is located is conveyed to the owner
of the facility, the land remaining with the principal lot shall continue to
comply with the minimum lot area for the applicable zoning district.
(d) Minimum setbacks. The tower and telecommunications equipment
building shall comply with the minimum setback requirements for the
host lot.
(e) Maximum height. Tower, 150 feet; equipment building, maximum
building height permitted for the applicable district.
(f) Access. The vehicular access to the equipment building shall, whenever
feasible, be provided along the circulation driveways of the existing use.
(g) Buffer yard. Along any adjacent land zoned for or in residential use, a
yard shall be provided which shall be not less than the height of the tower
in width, measured from the property line or the street line. A planted
buffer yard shall also be provided in accordance with the provisions of
§ 500-2605.
(3) Combined with an existing structure. An antenna for a cellular
telecommunications facility shall be permitted as an accessory use when
attached to an existing structure or building, subject to the following
conditions:
§ 500-2315 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2315
500:162
§ 500-2316. Retail store. [Added 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05; amended
12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 12-06]
A retail store, as defined in this chapter, shall, where permitted, be subject to the
following conditions:
(a) Maximum height: 50 feet above the existing building or structure.
(b) If the applicant proposes to locate the telecommunications equipment in
a separate building, the building shall comply with the following:
[1] The building shall comply with the minimum setback requirements
for the subject zoning district.
[2] An eight-foot-high security fences shall surround the building.
[3] A buffer yard shall be planted in accordance with Subsection C
above.
[4] Vehicular access to the building shall not interfere with the parking
or vehicular circulation on the site for the principal use.
(c) Elevations of existing and proposed structures, showing width, depth and
height; engineering data about the antenna and support structure, such as
antenna size and weight and load-bearing capacity of support structure,
shall be presented.
(d) Buffer yard. Along any adjacent land zoned for or in residential use, a
yard shall be provided which shall be not less than the height of the tower
in width, measured from the property line or the street line. A planted
buffer yard shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
§ 500-2605.
L. A cellular telecommunications facility is not permitted in any residential district.
However, notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a cellular
telecommunications facility shall be a permitted use on all property owned by
Middletown Township, without regard to the underlying zoning classification of
such property, provided that each such facility meets the provisions of Subsection
K above.
A. One off-street parking space shall be provided for every 200 square feet of gross
floor area used or intended to be used for servicing customers and/or patrons of a
retail store. When applied to a retail store, "gross floor area" shall include outdoor
retail areas and shall be measured in the aggregate for any and all buildings or
contiguous groups of buildings of the same single ownership or trading under the
same single name. Where other sections or provisions of this chapter and/or of the
Middletown Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Chapter
440 of the Township Code, may require a greater number of off-street parking
spaces for a retail store use, that section or provision of this chapter and/or of
Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development, shall apply.
B. Retail stores with a gross floor area of more than 20,000 square feet shall meet the
following additional requirements:
§ 500-2315 ZONING § 500-2316
500:163
(1) The use shall be located on an arterial road.
(2) Buildings shall be designed to reflect and enhance the visual, historic and
cultural character of Middletown Township. Exterior building materials shall
be brick, wood, stone, tile or other high quality materials. No concrete block
or tilt-up concrete walls shall be permitted. There shall be no uninterrupted
lengths of blank wall longer than 100 feet. Walls shall be differentiated with
recesses, windows, facade details, and changes in color and/or building
materials. All sides of a building shall be architecturally consistent with the
front facade, and all building faces visible from any street or abutting property
shall have the same architectural features and style as the front facade.
(3) The use shall include a public amenity, such as an outdoor plaza, patio seating
area, water feature, clock tower, or other similar amenity that will enhance the
overall character of the area and provide for additional public benefit to
pedestrian traffic. The scale of the public amenities shall be in proportion to
the size of the proposed retail store and shall not be less than one square foot
of public amenity for every 25 square feet of proposed retail store
development.
(4) Loading docks shall be shielded from view and shall not be visible from
adjacent residential districts or from public streets.
(5) Outdoor refuse collection stations shall be provided for garbage and trash
removal when indoor refuse storage is not provided. The stations shall be
located to the rear of the structure and shall be screened from view and
landscaped in accordance with the applicable provisions and requirements of
Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Township Code.
(6) Tractor-trailers, cargo boxes, or other vehicles or structures meant to be
transportable shall not be permitted to be used as accessory buildings or
structures for storage. Any such vehicles shall be loaded or unloaded within 48
hours and shall not remain on the property or premises beyond the forty-eighthour
period permitted hereunder.
(7) The use shall be designed to safely accommodate pedestrian and vehicular
traffic. Pedestrian circulation shall be provided throughout the site, and
pedestrian connections shall be provided to adjacent sidewalks.
(8) The plan shall provide for shopping cart corrals if shopping carts are to be
utilized in the retail store. Cart corrals shall be provided in addition to the
required parking spaces.
(9) Any application for approval of a retail store must be accompanied by a traffic
study demonstrating compliance with the applicable provisions and
requirements of this section, of this chapter, and of Chapter 440, Subdivision
and Land Development, of the Township Code.
C. The terms, conditions and provisions set forth hereinabove shall be deemed "use
requirements" and not "dimensional requirements" for purposes of any request for
variance from the terms, conditions or provisions of this section. The Township
hereby declares its intention that these provisions are incident to any permitted use
§ 500-2316 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2316
500:164
of and/or for such retail stores under this chapter, and that all such regulations
should therefore be deemed to be, and treated as, regulations restricting the use and
not mere dimensional requirements relating to the use.
§ 500-2316 ZONING § 500-2316
500:165

ARTICLE XXIV
Accessory Uses and Structures
§ 500-2401. Permitted; permit needed. [Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 93-07]
Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in all zoning districts, unless otherwise
indicated, subject to the specific requirements noted below and the obtainment of a
zoning permit.
§ 500-2402. Residential accessory buildings. [Amended 7-18-2000 by Ord. No.
00-08]
§ 500-2403. Parking for recreational vehicles and utility trailers.
Recreational vehicles and utility trailers shall be parked and/or stored in a driveway,
garage, side yard or rear yard. "Recreational vehicle" is defined as a piece of equipment,
whether self-powered or designed to be pulled or carried, intended primarily for leisuretime
or recreational use. Recreational vehicles include, but are not limited to, the
following: travel trailers, motor homes, folding tent campers, boats and boat trailers,
snowmobiles, and all-terrain vehicles. No zoning permit shall be required for this use,
provided the requirements of this section have been met.
A. A garage or storage shed which is not an integral structural part of a main building
shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) Storage sheds may be located in the required side and/or rear yards but not less
than three feet from any property line. Garages may be located in the required
side and/or rear yards but not less than five feet from any property line.
(2) Such structures shall be situated at least 10 feet farther back from the street
line than the rearmost portion of the main building.
(3) The square footage of residential accessory structures shall be limited to 3%
of the lot area up to a maximum of 500 square feet and a maximum building
height of 14 feet. Accessory garages shall be constructed of a material that is
compatible with the residential area, consisting of a wood or similar finish, and
shall not include metal pole-barn-type structures. Accessory structures shall
also comply with the building coverage and impervious surface ratios of the
district in which the structure is to be located. Accessory structures located on
through lots are not permitted access off the street on which the principal
dwelling does not take access. [Amended 1-9-2007 by Ord. No. 07-02]
B. A garage or storage shed which is connected to the main building by a breezeway
or similar structure shall be considered an integral structural part of the main
building and shall comply with all yard requirements specified for the district in
which it is located.
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the erection of a common or
joint garage which is not an integral structural part of a main building on adjoining
lots.
§ 500-2401 ZONING § 500-2404
500:167
§ 500-2404. Swimming pool. [Amended 7-18-2000 by Ord. No. 00-08]
A recreational facility designed to contain a water depth of 24 inches or more for use of
the residents and their guests. This includes both in-ground and aboveground pools and
hot tubs/spas, subject to the following:
A. A swimming pool shall not be located in a front yard, except where a lot fronts on
more than one street; in which case, a swimming pool may be located in a front
yard, provided that it is not the yard which the front of the dwelling faces and that
it is not located within the required minimum front yard.
B. No swimming pool shall be located within the required minimum side yards, nor
closer than six feet to the rear lot line and the rearmost portion of the main building.
C. An outdoor swimming pool, including an in-ground or aboveground pool or a hot
tub/spa, shall be provided with a barrier that completely surrounds the swimming
pool. The barrier shall comply with the following:
(1) The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches (four feet) above grade
measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool.
The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier
shall be two inches, measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from
the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, such
as an aboveground pool, the barrier may be at ground level or mounted on top
of the pool structure. Where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure,
the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the
bottom of the barrier shall be two inches.
(2) Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a four-inch diameter sphere.
(3) Solid barriers which do not have openings, such as a masonry or stone wall,
shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction
tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
(4) Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the
distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches, the
horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence.
Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 1 3/4 inches in width.
Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within
the cutouts shall not exceed 1 3/4 inches in width.
(5) Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the
distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches or more,
spacing between vertical members shall not exceed four inches. Where there
are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts
shall not exceed 1 3/4 inches in width.
(6) Maximum mesh size for chain-link fences shall be a 1 1/4 inch square unless
the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top or the bottom which reduce
the openings to no more than 1 3/4 inches.
(7) Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a lattice fence,
the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall be no more than
§ 500-2404 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2404
500:168
1 3/4 inches.
(8) Access gates shall comply with the requirements of Subsection C(1) through
(7) above and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian
access gates shall open outwards away from the pool and shall be self-closing
and have a self-latching device. Gates other than pedestrian access gates shall
have a self-latching device. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching
device is located less than 54 inches from the bottom of the gate:
(a) The release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate at
least three inches below the top of the gate; and
(b) The gate and barrier shall have no opening greater than 1/2 inch within
18 inches of the release mechanism.
(9) Where a wall of a dwelling serves as part of the barrier, direct access to the
pool through the wall shall be limited to doors and windows which meet the
following conditions:
(a) Windows leading to the pool area shall have a latching device at least 54
inches above the floor.
(b) Hinged doors leading to the pool area shall be self-closing and shall have
a self-latching device. The release mechanism of the self-latching device
shall be located at least 54 inches above the floor.
(c) Sliding doors or sliding screen doors leading to the pool area shall be selfclosing
and shall have a self-latching device. The release mechanism of
the self-latching device shall be located at least 54 inches above the floor.
(10) Barriers shall be located so as to prohibit permanent structures, equipment or
similar objects from being used to climb the barriers.
D. A swimming pool may be lighted by underwater or exterior lights, or both, provided
all exterior lights are located so that the light is neither directed nor reflected upon
adjacent properties in such a manner as to be a nuisance or an annoyance to
neighboring properties. Underwater lighting shall be in compliance with the
applicable national electrical code.
E. A swimming pool shall not be located under electrical wires.
F. There shall be no cross-connection with a public sewerage system.
G. The permanent inlet shall be above the overflow level of the pool.
H. A site plan showing the existing and proposed contours of the site and the proposed
drainage system for the swimming pool shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer,
subject to the approval of the Township Engineer.
I. In addition to the zoning permit fee, fees shall be required for the review of the site
plan by the Township Engineer and for inspection to ensure compliance with the
site plan.
§ 500-2404 ZONING § 500-2405
500:169
§ 500-2405. Temporary structures.
A temporary permit may be issued for structures necessary during construction or other
special circumstances of a nonrecurring nature, subject to the following requirements:
§ 500-2406. Wind energy conversion system (WECS).
A wind energy conversion system is a device which converts wind energy to mechanical
or electrical energy. A wind energy conversion system shall be permitted by special
exception, subject to the following requirements:
A. Temporary structures shall meet the area and dimensional requirements for the
district in which the structure is located. Temporary structures which will not
conform to the requirements of this chapter shall only be permitted by special
exception.
B. Temporary construction trailers for tracts under development shall be permitted for
the duration of the construction period. Such trailers shall be removed within 30
days after issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Township.
C. All temporary structures, except as noted in Subsection B above, shall be permitted
for a continuous period of up to 30 days. Such temporary structures shall not be
permitted for more than 30 days in any one year, unless the Zoning Hearing Board
authorizes an extension as a special exception. Such temporary structures shall be
removed promptly after the expiration of the permit without cost to the Township.
D. Temporary structures shall meet all applicable requirements of the Township
Building Code (Chapter 190, Article II).
A. Siting.
(1) A WECS shall be setback from any property line, aboveground utility line, or
other WECS a distance greater than either:
(a) Its overall height, including blades; or
(b) The minimum yard requirements, whichever is greater.
(2) In the case of clustered developments, such as a PRD and a performance
standard subdivision, a WECS shall be erected within the common open space
area and shall be set back from all residences at a distance greater than
Subsection A(1)(a) above.
(3) Contiguous property owners may construct a WECS for use in common,
provided that the required setback is maintained relative to all aboveground
utility lines and the property lines of nonparticipating owners.
B. Size.
(1) Maximum output: 100 kilowatts.
(2) Maximum blade diameter: 80 feet.
(3) Maximum height: none. A WECS shall not be limited by the maximum height
§ 500-2405 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2406
500:170
§ 500-2407. Satellite dish antenna. [Amended 3-23-1999 by Ord. No. 99-04]
A satellite dish antenna is a device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, pen
mesh or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn or cornucopia.
Such device shall be used to transmit and/or receive video or electromagnetic waves
between terrestrial and/or orbitally based uses. A satellite dish antenna that is one meter
or less in diameter shall be permitted in any area regardless of land use or zoning
category. A satellite dish antenna that is two meters or less in diameter shall be permitted
in a nonresidential district (A-O, C, CS, GB, P, M-1 or OC). These satellite dishes shall
be exempted from zoning requirements in compliance with Federal Communications
Commission regulations. However, any satellite dish antenna exceeding above-noted
diameter sizes (one meter in residential areas and two meters in nonresidential districts)
shall be permitted subject to the following requirements:
restrictions of this chapter, except in airport zones.
C. Safety and welfare.
(1) Minimum blade height: 15 feet from ground at the lowest point of the arc.
(2) Access control: minimum access height of 12 feet or minimum fence height of
six feet with locking portal.
(3) If hookup to the PECO system is proposed, electrical plans must be prepared
by a certified electrical engineer, at the applicant's expense, and submitted to
PECO for approval, which must be obtained.
(4) Subject to review and approval by the Township Engineer, the design of a
proposed WECS shall be such that it will operate safely, without loss of
structural integrity, under the following conditions:
(a) Loss of utility power (shall not backfeed dead utility line).
(b) Blade imbalance (shall support added blade weight of at least 10%).
(5) A minimum of one sign shall be posted near ground level of the tower
structure, warning of high voltage.
(6) The electrical and utility lines to and from a WECS shall be underground.
(7) The ground-level equipment and structures shall be adequately buffered from
adjacent properties and street rights-of-way with landscaping or fencing.
(8) A WECS shall primarily serve on-site generation needs.
A. A satellite dish antenna may be located in the required side or rear yard. The
applicant shall calculate the look angle of the reception window and place the
antenna far enough away from the adjoining property to ensure the protection of
proper antenna performance. However, in no case shall such accessory structure be
located less than five feet from any property line in a residential district or less than
the minimum setback required for accessory structures in the applicable
nonresidential district.
B. To help maintain the character of a residential neighborhood, a satellite dish
§ 500-2406 ZONING § 500-2407
500:171
§ 500-2408. Accessory home occupation.
An accessory home occupation is defined as a customary home occupation for gain. An
accessory home occupation is an accessory use that shall be clearly subordinate to the
existing residential use of the property. Such uses shall meet the general standards and
the specific standards related to the use as set forth below.
antenna shall not be located in the front yard of a residential structure. No more than
one satellite dish antenna shall be permitted on a residential lot.
C. For safety purposes, a satellite dish antenna shall be anchored to the ground in
accordance with applicable building code requirements.
D. The diameter of a satellite dish antenna shall not exceed nine feet when proposed
as an accessory use to a residential use or to any use in the RA-1, RA-2, RA-3, R-1,
R-2, R-3, MR, RC or MHP District. When separately supported, the total height of
the satellite dish antenna shall not exceed 12 feet.
E. The diameter of a satellite dish antenna shall not exceed 23 feet when proposed as
an accessory use to any use (except residential uses) in the A-O, C, CS, GB, P, M-1
or OC District.
F. In order to preserve the structural integrity of a building, roof mounting of a satellite
dish antenna shall not be permitted.
G. If it is demonstrated that an obstruction-free reception window cannot be achieved
within the above parameters for reasons beyond the control of the applicant, the
requirement(s) may be exceeded by special exception, subject to the following
criteria:
(1) Demonstration by the applicant that compliance with the applicable yard,
setback and height restrictions would result in the obstruction of the antenna's
reception window; furthermore, such obstruction involves factors beyond the
applicant's control. However, in no case shall the antenna be located in the
front yard of a residential structure.
(2) The height of the proposed installation does not exceed the maximum height
restriction imposed for primary uses within the district.
(3) All applicants must include certification by a registered engineer that the
proposed installation complies with the standards of the Township Building
Code.
(4) All installations must include appropriate screening treatments located along
the antenna's nonreception window axes as required by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
(5) The criteria relating to all special exceptions in § 500-3108 of this chapter shall
apply.
A. General standards. The following shall apply to all home occupations:
(1) A home occupation must be conducted within a single-family detached
§ 500-2407 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2408
500:172
dwelling which is the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner or in an
accessory building thereto which is normally associated with a residential use.
The home occupation shall be carried on entirely indoors.
(2) The maximum amount of floor area devoted to the home occupation shall not
be more than 25% of the ground floor area of the principal residential structure
or 400 square feet, whichever is less.
(3) In no way shall the appearance of the residential structure be altered or the
occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner which would cause
the premises to differ from its residential character by the use of colors,
materials, construction, lighting, show windows, signs or advertising visible
outside the premises to attract customers or clients, other than those signs
permitted by this chapter.
(4) One sign is permitted per home occupation, provided that it is no larger than
120 square inches per side. It shall bear only the name, occupation and office
hours of the practitioner and shall not be indirectly illuminated. All applicable
requirements of Article XXVIII, Sign Regulations, shall be met.
(5) All commercial vehicles shall be parked on lot. Only one commercial vehicle
may be parked outside of a garage or an enclosed structure.
(6) All off-street parking areas must be located at least 10 feet from any property
line. Off-street parking lots with three or more spaces shall be buffered from
abutting residences by evergreen hedge material as specified in
§ 500-2605F(5), which shall be placed on three-foot centers. Alternately, a
four-foot to five-foot fence may be erected which provides a visual screen.
(7) There shall be no exterior storage of materials or refuse resulting from the
operation of the home occupation.
(8) No equipment or process shall be used in a home occupation which creates
noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, dust or electrical interference detectable
to the normal senses off the lot. No equipment or process shall be used which
creates visible or audible interferences in any radio or television receivers off
the premises. All home occupations shall comply with the nuisance standards
in Article XXV.
(9) Home occupations shall not include the following: animal hospitals,
commercial stables or kennels, funeral parlors or undertaking establishments,
tourist homes, antique shops, restaurants, furniture stripping or rooming
houses, boardinghouses or lodging houses.
(10) All home occupation uses shall be located on an improved public street.
(11) No retail sales shall be permitted as part of any home occupation.
B. Specific use standards. The following shall apply to specific types of accessory
home occupations.
(1) Professional offices.
§ 500-2408 ZONING § 500-2408
500:173
(a) A professional office is a service-oriented business use conducted within
an enclosed area specifically designed for the functional needs of the use,
wherein the professional services of the practitioner is the saleable
commodity offered to the client.
(b) Professional offices include, but are not limited to, the following: office
facility of a salesman, sales representative or a manufacturer's
representative; office facility of an architect, engineer, broker, dentist,
physician, psychiatrist, insurance agent, land surveyor, lawyer, musician,
real estate agent or accountant; office facility of a minister, rabbi or other
religious leader, provided that the office is open to the public or
congregation.
[1] A professional office home occupation shall be permitted when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception.
However, for the office of a salesmen or sales representative which
does not involve deliveries to or from the home and does not involve
direct, personal contact with the public at the home, a special
exception shall not be required.
[2] A minimum lot area of one acre shall be required for a professional
office home occupation. However, for the office of a salesman or
sales representative which does not involve deliveries to or from the
home and does not involve direct, personal contact with the public
at the home, the minimum lot area shall be the same as required for
a single-family detached dwelling in the applicable district.
[3] No more than two persons, other than resident members of the
immediate family, may be employed or subcontracted at the
residence.
[4] In addition to the off-street parking spaces required in this chapter
for the single-family detached dwelling, a professional office shall
provide one off-street parking space for each employee, plus one
additional space for each 200 square feet of office space. A
maximum of six off-street parking spaces are permitted on one lot,
inclusive of the required residential parking.
(2) Personal services. A service business, including, but not limited to, barbers,
beauticians or photographers.
(a) A personal service home occupation shall be permitted when authorized
by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception.
(b) Beauty parlors and barbershops shall be located on a minimum lot area of
one acre, and no more than two beauty parlor or barber chairs shall be
provided.
(c) No more than one person, other than resident members of the immediate
family, may be employed.
(d) In addition to the off-street parking spaces required in this chapter for the
§ 500-2408 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2408
500:174
single-family detached dwelling, a personal services use shall provide
one off-street parking space for each 200 square feet of total floor area
used for the home occupation. A maximum of six off-street parking
spaces are permitted on one lot, inclusive of the required residential
parking.
(3) Instructional services. An instructional service is a home occupation in which
the practitioner provides the client with special instruction in a specific area of
study.
(a) An instructional services home occupation shall be permitted when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception.
(b) A minimum lot area of one acre shall be required for an instructional
services home occupation.
(c) Instructional services involving a maximum of four students at a time are
permitted. In the case of musical instructions, no more than two students
at a time shall be permitted.
(d) No persons shall be employed other than resident members of the
immediate family.
(e) In addition to the off-street parking spaces required in this chapter for the
single-family detached dwelling, an instructional service shall provide
one off-street parking space per two students being instructed at any one
time. A maximum of four off-street parking spaces are permitted on one
lot, inclusive of the required residential parking.
(4) Family day care. A family day-care use is a facility in which care is provided
for four to six children at any one time, who are not relatives of the caregiver,
where the child-care areas are being used as a family residence.
(a) A family day-care use shall be permitted when authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board as a special exception.
(b) Prior to the final approval of the use by the Zoning Hearing Board and
the issuing of a permit by the Zoning Officer, the applicant must obtain a
registration certificate from the Department of Public Welfare, Office of
Child Development and Early Learning.
(c) This use shall be conducted in a building designed for residential
occupancy and for the safety and well-being of the occupants.
(d) A minimum outdoor play area of 200 square feet of contiguous area shall
be provided for each child. This area shall not include any impervious
surface or parking areas.
(e) If a family day-care use is located adjacent to a nonresidential use, a
parking lot or on a street classified as an arterial or collector road, the
outdoor play area must be enclosed by a four-foot-high fence which is
deemed appropriate by the Township.
§ 500-2408 ZONING § 500-2408
500:175
(f) No more than one person other than resident members of the immediate
family may be employed.
(g) Parking standards. In addition to the off-street parking required for a
single-family home, at least one additional off-street parking space is
required for each employee, plus one space for the loading/unloading of
children.
(5) Group day-care home. A group day-care home is a facility in which care is
provided for more than six but no more than 11 children, who are not relatives
of the caregiver, where the child-care areas are being used as a family
residence.
(a) A group day-care home shall be permitted when authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board as a special exception.
(b) A minimum lot area of one acre shall be required for a group day-care
home.
(c) All standards noted above for family day care shall be met.
(d) The regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Welfare and all
statutes and ordinances of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the
Township shall be met.
(e) Prior to final approval of the use by the Zoning Hearing Board and the
granting of a permit by the Zoning Officer, the applicant must obtain a
license from the Department of Public Welfare, Office of Child
Development and Early Learning. Licensure is certification of
compliance with Chapter H, Section 8C, of the Department of Public
Welfare's Social Services Manual by this Department to the applicant
subject to licensure under Article X of the Public Welfare Code.
(6) Repair services. A repair shop for appliances, lawn mowers, watches, guns,
bicycles, locks, small business machines and other goods, but not including
automobile, truck and motorcycle repairs.
(a) A repair shop shall be permitted when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board as a special exception.
(b) A minimum lot area of one acre shall be required for a repair shop.
(c) No additional people other than resident members of the immediate
family may be employed.
(d) In addition to the off-street parking spaces required in this chapter for the
single-family detached dwelling, this accessory use shall provide one offstreet
space per 200 square feet of total floor area used for the home
occupation.
(7) Home crafts.
(a) Home crafts are business activities whereby the commodity for sale is
completely manufactured but shall not be sold on the site by the resident
§ 500-2408 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2408
500:176
§ 500-2409. Outdoor storage and display.
Outdoor storage and display necessary but incidental to the normal operation of a
primary nonresidential use shall be permitted, subject to the following additional
provisions:
craftsman.
(b) Home crafts may include, but are not limited to, the following: artists,
sculptors, dressmaking, seamstresses and tailors, and include such
activities as model making, rug weaving, lapidary work and furniture
making.
[1] No more than one person other than resident members of the
immediate family may be employed.
[2] In addition to the off-street parking spaces required in this chapter
for the single-family detached dwelling, a home crafts business shall
provide one off-street parking space for each employee and one offstreet
parking space for each business vehicle. A maximum of four
off-street parking spaces are permitted on one lot, inclusive of the
required residential parking.
(8) Trades. The use of a residence as a base of operation for the business. Trades
for this home occupation include, but are not limited to: electrician, plumber,
carpenter, mason, painter, roofer and similar occupations.
(a) The area of the office and indoor storage for materials and equipment
(excluding vehicles) shall not exceed the limitations of Subsection A(2)
above.
(b) No manufacturing, processing or sales shall be conducted on the property.
(c) In addition to the off-street parking spaces required in this chapter for the
single-family detached dwelling, a trades business shall provide one offstreet
space for each employee and one off-street parking space for each
business vehicle. A maximum of six off-street parking spaces are
permitted on one lot, inclusive of the required residential parking.
A. These requirements shall not apply to nonresidential uses for which storage and
display is the primary use of the land, such as motor vehicle sales establishments
and nurseries.
B. Outside storage and display areas for lumberyards, lawn and garden centers, truck
terminals, flower shops, and agricultural retail uses may occupy an area of up to
10% of the existing building coverage.
C. Other primary nonresidential uses shall be permitted outside storage and display
areas when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception, subject
to the limitations of Subsection B above.
D. No part of the street right-of-way, no sidewalks or other areas intended or designed
for pedestrian use, no parking areas, and no part of the front yard shall be occupied
§ 500-2408 ZONING § 500-2409
500:177
§ 500-2410. Garage and yard sales.
The temporary display and sale of goods, including personal vehicles titled to the
legal owners of the property, and craft items on a residentially used property shall be
permitted, subject to the following requirements:
§ 500-2411. Temporary community event. [Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No.
93-07]
A temporary activity, including, but not limited to, flea markets, public exhibitions,
auctions, carnivals, circuses, air shows, tent meetings and similar events, shall be
permitted, subject to the following provisions:
by outside storage or display.
E. Outside storage areas shall be shielded from view from public streets.
A. Except for the sale of personal vehicles, such temporary uses shall be limited to
occurrences of not more than three days. Such occurrences shall be limited to not
more than two occurrences in a calendar year. There shall be at least a six-monthperiod
between such occurrences.
B. No goods or craft items shall be displayed within the right-of-way of roads.
C. Vehicles offered for sale shall be displayed in a garage, driveway or the cartway of
a street only. No more than five vehicles shall be offered for sale in any one
calendar year in accordance with state law.
D. Signs advertising garage or yard sales shall meet the requirements of Article
XXVIII.
E. No zoning permit shall be required for this use, provided the requirements of this
section shall be met.
A. Such temporary uses shall be limited to occurrences of not more than seven days.
Such occurrences shall be limited to not more than four occurrences in a calendar
year. There shall be at least a thirty-day-period between such occurrences.
B. Signs advertising a temporary community event shall meet the requirements of
Article XXVIII of this chapter.
C. The applicant shall provide the Zoning Officer with plans indicating the expected
number of participants, proposed parking facilities, emergency access, road access,
sanitary facilities, refuse collection, lighting facilities, noise control and cleanup
after the event.
D. Health licenses from the Bucks County Department of Health shall be obtained, if
applicable.
E. All other applicable ordinances of the Township shall be met, including Ordinance
No. 87-12 (Chapter 141, Article II).192
192.Editor's Note: See Ch. 141, Amusements, Art. II, Traveling Shows, Circuses and Carnivals.
§ 500-2409 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2411
500:178
F. Block parties are exempt from the requirements of this section.
G. In addition to the above regulations, the following shall be complied with for
carnivals and circuses only:
(1) Carnivals and circuses shall be permitted by conditional use only in the GB
General Business and OC Office Campus Districts.
(2) The minimum lot area must be sufficient to accommodate the required yards
(setbacks), parking and other selected activities. A minimum lot size of 10
acres is required. However, if approved by the Board of Supervisors, smaller
attractions may be permitted on smaller lot sizes, but in no case shall lots be
less than two acres. This required area must be contiguous, vacant land without
permanent buildings. The carnival or circus use may be accessory to a
permitted use, provided that the minimum lot size is met in addition to the
required lot area for the principal use.
(3) The location of temporary structures (such as tents, booths, mechanical rides
or amusements) shall meet the following setbacks.
(a) Public street line: 100 feet.
(b) Other property lines: 75 feet.
(c) Internal street line: 50 feet.
(d) Along any adjacent property line zoned for or in residential or agricultural
use, a one-hundred-fifty-foot setback shall be provided.
(4) Parking.
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided with at least one off-street parking
space for every three persons projected to attend the carnival or circus.
(b) To determine the adequacy of the above parking provision, the applicant
shall provide the Board of Supervisors with plans indicating the number
of expected participants, number and location of proposed parking
spaces, the circulation pattern and emergency access. The Board shall
determine whether the parking is sufficient.
(5) Hours of operation shall be as follows:
(a) Monday through Thursday: 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(b) Friday and Saturday: 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
(c) Sunday: 1:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m.
(6) The Township may impose any other conditions reasonable to protect the
health, safety, welfare and property of the attendants or citizens of Middletown
Township.
(7) Permits required. A two-step permit procedure is required prior to the
operation of a carnival or circus open to the general public.
§ 500-2411 ZONING § 500-2411
500:179
§ 500-2412. Bus shelters. [Added 3-23-1999 by Ord. No. 99-03]
Structures for utilization of persons waiting for a bus shall be permitted, subject to the
following requirements:
(a) After conditional use approval is granted by the Board of Supervisors, a
zoning permit shall be obtained for the initial set up of the carnival or
circus. The applicant shall provide the Zoning Officer with plans
indicating compliance with Subsections A through G above and any other
conditions imposed by the Board of Supervisors.
(b) A second permit, for occupancy, shall be obtained from the Zoning
Officer prior to the actual operation of the carnival or circus open to the
general public. The Zoning Officer/Building Inspector shall inspect the
facilities to ensure compliance with the plans and any conditions attached
by the Board of Supervisors prior to issuing an occupancy permit for
operation.
A. Consummation of an agreement with Middletown Township setting forth the
respective responsibilities and duties of the bus shelter provider and Middletown
Township. Said agreement shall contain a list of approved bus shelter sites and may
be amended from time to time by the bus shelter provider and Middletown
Township so as to delete certain bus shelter locations or increase the number of bus
shelter locations throughout the Township.
B. An approved bus shelter provider shall coordinate the location of all bus shelters
with the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority (SEPTA) and the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT). Applicable PennDOT
permits and/or authorizations shall be supplied to the Township prior to installation
of any bus shelter.
C. Prior to installation of any bus shelter, the property owner(s) of the proposed site
shall be notified by the bus shelter provider of the proposed bus shelter. The bus
shelter provider shall also be required to obtain the written permission and/or
consent of the property owner(s) of the proposed site and provide written
notification to all adjacent property owner(s) within 150 feet of the proposed site.
Said written permission and/or consent forms from each property owner shall be
provided to the Township prior to the installation of any bus shelter.
D. All applications for installation of bus shelters in accordance with this section shall
include renderings and schematics of the proposed bus shelter, including such
structural details as shall be required to demonstrate compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and all other ordinances of Middletown Township and
all state and federal statutes, including, but not limited to, the construction codes
which have been adopted by Middletown Township. No fees shall be charged for
any applicable Township permits which are required prior to the installation of a
bus shelter within Middletown Township.
E. All bus shelters erected pursuant to this section shall be permitted to include a twofaced
sign on one side wall only. Signs erected in accordance with this section may
not exceed 24 square feet per side for a total of 48 square feet. Signs erected in
§ 500-2411 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2412
500:180
accordance with this section may be illuminated in accordance with the regulations
set forth in Article XXVIII of this chapter of the Code of the Township of
Middletown. All signs erected in accordance with this section shall comply in full
with the regulations set forth in Article XXVIII, except with respect to location.
F. All bus shelters shall be suitable in design for the community where such shelter
shall be installed. Bus shelters shall be designed, constructed, operated and
maintained so as to be in harmony with and appropriate in appearance to the
community as determined by Middletown Township.
G. Bus shelters shall be adequately lighted in such a manner as to provide visibility
during darkness for patrons of the public transportation system. All artificial
lighting used to illuminate any bus shelter shall be so designed that no direct rays
shall fall upon any neighboring property or street. A minimum level of one
footcandle light shall be maintained.
H. All bus shelters shall not interfere with the clear sight distances at intersections of
roads as required by the zoning ordinances of Middletown Township or as may be
required by PennDOT or other governmental entities having jurisdiction over such
matters.
I. All bus shelters shall be located at least three feet from any paved cartway and/or
curb edge.
J. All bus shelters constructed on public sidewalks shall be located so that no less than
a five-foot unobstructed walkway remains, either in front or behind the bus shelter.
K. No bus shelter shall exceed a maximum floor area of 64 square feet, unless prior
written permission is received from the Township to exceed a floor area of 64
square feet.
L. Installation of bus shelters pursuant to this section shall be exempt from all setback
requirements found in this chapter and may be installed within the public rights-ofway,
provided all of the requirements of this section are satisfied.
§ 500-2412 ZONING § 500-2412
500:181

ARTICLE XXV
Nuisance Standards
§ 500-2501. Smoke.
No smoke shall be emitted from any chimney or other source of visible gray opacity
greater than No. 1 on the Ringlemann Smoke Chart as published by the United States
Bureau of Mines, except that smoke of a shade not darker than No. 2 on the Ringlemann
Chart may be emitted for not more than four minutes in any thirty-minute period.
§ 500-2502. Dust, fumes, vapors and gases.
§ 500-2503. Heat.
No use shall produce heat perceptible beyond its lot lines.
§ 500-2504. Odor.
§ 500-2505. Glare.
No use shall produce a strong, dazzling light or a reflection of a strong, dazzling light
beyond its lot lines. In general, lighting fixtures that shield the reflector or lens or any
high brightness surface from viewing angles above 60° from horizontal shall be utilized.
§ 500-2506. Vibrations.
No use shall cause earth vibrations or concussions in excess of the standards outlined
below, with the exception of vibration produced as a result of construction activity. The
standards below are set forth in the Table of Frequency Amplitude Relations. Vibration
shall be expressed as displacement in inches and shall be measured with a standard
A. The emission of dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors or gases which can cause any
damage to human health, to animals, to vegetation or to property, or which can
cause any soiling or staining of persons or property at any point beyond the lot line
of the use creating the emission, is herewith prohibited.
B. No emission of liquid or solid particles from any chimney or other source shall
exceed 0.3 grains per cubic foot of the carrying gas at any point beyond the lot line
of the use creating the emission. For measurement of the amount of particles in
gases resulting from combustion, standard correction shall be applied to a stack
temperature of 500° F. and 50% excess air in stack at full load.
A. No use shall emit odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be
offensive at any point on or beyond its lot lines. The guide for determining such
quantities of offensive odors shall be the fifty-percent response level of Table I
(Odor Thresholds in Air), "Research on Chemical Odors: Part I - Odor Thresholds
for 53 Commercial Chemicals," October, 1, 1968, Manufacturing Chemists
Association, Inc., Washington, D.C.
B. Subsection A above shall not apply to odors normally created as part of an
agricultural or horticultural use, except that no animal waste produced off the
property shall be stockpiled unless processed to eliminate all offensive odors.
§ 500-2501 ZONING § 500-2506
500:183
three-component measuring system, which is a device for recording the intensity of any
vibration in three mutually perpendicular directions.
Frequency of Ground Motion in Cycles
per Second
Maximum Amplitude of Ground
Motion in Inches, Not More Than
Up to 10 0.0305
20 0.0153
30 0.0102
40 0.0076
50 0.0061
60 0.0051
§ 500-2507. Storage and waste disposal. [Amended 3-23-1999 by Ord. No. 99-04]
The following requirements shall apply to all land uses:
A. No highly flammable or explosive or toxic liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in
bulk above ground, except tanks or drums of fuel directly connected with energy
devices, heating devices or appliances located and operated on the same lot as the
tank or drums of fuel. This provision shall not apply to fuel storage and distribution
uses permitted in the M-1 District.
B. Storage of flammable or combustible materials and fuels shall meet the standards
of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 58), Pennsylvania State Police,
Fire Marshal Division (Chapters 11 and 13 of Title 37 of the Pennsylvania Code),
applicable Building Officials and Code Administrators (BOCA) standards, as
adopted by the Township,193 and if stored below ground, the standards of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. Prior to the issuance of a
zoning permit, approval from the Township Fire Marshal must be obtained.
(1) Residential land uses. No tank or drum of fuel oil or compressed gases (other
than those directly connected with energy and heating devices or appliances)
shall be located closer than 25 feet to any building or lot line or 50 feet from
any street line. Outdoor storage facilities shall be enclosed by an approved
safety fence which is adequate to provide security for either the storage tank
or property. Such fence shall not exceed six feet in height. The storage tank
shall be shielded from view of adjoining residences by either plant material,
fencing, building walls or other such materials as may be acceptable to the
Zoning Officer. Hedge and shrub plant materials permitted by § 500-2605F of
this chapter, which are acceptable to the Fire Marshal with regard to location
and type of plant, shall be used to create a visual screen when determined to
be necessary by the Zoning Officer to carry out the screening intent of this
chapter.
(2) Nonresidential land uses. All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials
and products, and all fuel, raw materials and products stored outdoors, shall be
193.Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Construction Standards, Art. I, Fire Prevention Code, and Art. II, Uniform Construction
Code.
§ 500-2506 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2507
500:184
protected from encroachment and enclosed by an approved safety fence with
a minimum height of seven feet. The storage facility must comply with all
applicable yard setbacks and buffer requirements specified for the district.
Storage facilities which are located adjacent to residential uses shall be
required to shield the storage tanks from view by a planted screen or other
materials that are acceptable to the Zoning Officer and Fire Marshal to form
a visual screen. Fuel storage and distribution uses shall also comply with all
requirements of the M-1 District.
C. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that
they may be transported off the lot by natural causes or forces, nor shall any
substance which can contaminate a stream or watercourse or otherwise render such
stream or watercourse undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation or
which will destroy aquatic life be allowed to enter any stream or watercourse.
D. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire
hazard, or which may be edible or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects, shall
be stored outdoors only if enclosed in containers adequate to eliminate such
hazards.
E. Radioactivity and electrical disturbance. There shall be no activity which emits
dangerous or harmful radioactivity. There shall be no electrical disturbance
adversely affecting the operation of any equipment beyond the property line of the
creator of such disturbance.
§ 500-2507 ZONING § 500-2507
500:185

ARTICLE XXVI
Natural Resource Protection Standards; Open Space and Buffers
§ 500-2601. Natural resource protection standards. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-13; 3-1-1994 by Ord. No. 94-02]
All uses and activities established after the effective date of this chapter shall comply
with the following standards. Site alterations, regrading, filling or clearing of any natural
resources prior to the submission of applications for zoning or building permits or the
submission of plans for subdivision or land development shall be a violation of this
chapter. In the event that two or more resources overlap, the resource with the greatest
protection standard (the least amount of alteration, regrading, clearing or building) shall
apply to the area of overlap. The following natural resources shall be protected:
A. Floodplain. Areas identified as within the floodplain of the one-hundred-year
recurrence interval flood shall not be altered, regraded, filled or built upon except
in conformance with § 500-2603, Floodplain regulations, of this chapter. For areas
designated as "approximate one-hundred-year floodplain" along streams and
watercourses where the one-hundred-year floodplain (with a floodway and floodfringe)
has not been delineated, the requirements of floodplain soils shall be met.
Minor road crossings may be permitted in the floodplain where design approval is
obtained from the Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and where no other reasonable access is available.
B. Floodplain soils. All such areas shall not be altered, regraded, filled or built upon
except in conformance with § 500-2603, Floodplain regulations, of this chapter.
Minor road crossings may be permitted in floodplain soils where design approval is
obtained from the Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and where no other reasonable access is available. Floodplain soils shall
not be used where the one-hundred-year floodplain (with a floodway and floodfringe)
has been delineated.
(1) Studies prepared by a registered engineer or expert in the preparation of
hydrological studies may be used to delineate the one-hundred-year floodplain
with a floodway and flood-fringe in place of areas designated as "floodplain
soils" and "approximate one-hundred-year floodplain." Such hydrological
studies shall be subject to the review and approval of the Board of Supervisors
on the recommendation of the Township Engineer.
C. Steep slopes. In areas of steep slopes, the following standards shall apply:
(1) Eight percent to 15%: No more than 50% of such areas shall be altered,
regraded, cleared or built upon.
(2) Fifteen percent to 25%: No more than 30% of such areas shall be altered,
regraded, cleared or built upon.
(3) Twenty-five percent or steeper: No more than 15% of such areas shall be
altered, regraded, cleared or built upon.
(4) Areas of steep slope that are less than 3,000 square feet shall be exempted from
these standards.
§ 500-2601 ZONING § 500-2601
500:187
D. Woodlands. The following standards shall apply to woodlands:
(1) Woodlands in environmentally sensitive areas. No more than 20% of
woodlands located in environmentally sensitive areas shall be altered,
regraded, cleared or built upon. Environmentally sensitive areas shall include
floodplains, floodplain soils, steep slopes, wetlands, wetland margins and lake
or pond shorelines.
(2) Other woodland areas. No more than 50% of woodlands which are not located
in environmentally sensitive areas [as defined in Subsection D(1) above] shall
be altered, regraded, cleared or built upon. However, where more than 20% of
such woodlands are altered, regraded, cleared or built upon, the following
requirements shall be met:
(a) The woodland area removed in excess of 20% shall be replaced at a rate
of 100 trees per acre.
(b) Several species of trees shall be utilized and all trees shall be 2.5 inches
in caliper minimum. The replanted trees shall be similar in species to the
trees that were removed.
(c) Trees shall be planted in a random pattern forming continuous canopies;
at least 1/2 of the required replacement trees shall be planted in one
continuous canopy.
(d) Replanting shall be done in accordance with a plan prepared by a licensed
landscape architect. The replanting plan shall be approved by the
Middletown Township Planning Commission and the Board of
Supervisors.
(e) Replanting shall occur on site. However, the Board of Supervisors may
permit trees to be replanted off site on another property within
Middletown Township where on-site replanting is deemed impractical.
(f) All tree replanting areas shall be deed-restricted from future tree removal.
(g) Buffer plantings and landscaping required by this chapter or Chapter 440,
Subdivision and Land Development, shall not be counted towards
meeting this replanting requirement; however, replacement trees may be
planted in buffer yards to supplement the required buffer plantings.
E. Tree protection zone. Such areas shall not be altered, regraded, compacted or built
upon, nor used for storage or parking of vehicles.
F. Watercourses. Such areas shall not be altered, regraded, filled, piped, diverted or
built upon except where design approval is obtained from the Township and, if
required, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
G. Wetlands. Such areas shall not be altered, regraded, filled, piped, diverted or built
upon except where state and federal permits have been obtained.
(1) Delineation.
(a) Wetlands boundaries shall be delineated through an on-site assessment,
§ 500-2601 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2601
500:188
§ 500-2602. Application of natural resource protection standards.
which shall be conducted by a professional soil scientist or others of
demonstrated qualifications. Such a person shall certify that the methods
used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts, including
the presence of wetlands vegetation, hydric soils and/or hydrologic
indicators. A study shall be submitted with sufficient detail to allow a
thorough review by the Township. The study must be approved by the
Board of Supervisors on the recommendation of the Township Engineer.
(b) In the event that a wetlands delineation validated by the United States
Army Corps of Engineers is shown to vary from the wetlands boundary
derived from Subsection G(1)(a) above, the Corps' delineation will
govern.
(2) Federal and state regulations. In addition to the requirements above, any
applicant proposing a use, activity or improvement which would entail the
regrading or placement of fill in wetlands shall provide the Township with
proof that the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (Bureau
of Dams and Waterway Safety and Bureau of Water Quality Management) and
the United States Army Corps of Engineers have been contacted to determine
the applicability of state and federal wetland regulations.
H. Wetlands margin. No more than 20% of such areas shall be altered, regraded, filled
or built upon. In addition, any Department of Environmental Protection' regulations
under Chapter 105, concerning activities in wetlands margins, shall be met.194
(1) For the purposes of this chapter, the wetlands margin shall extend 100 feet
from the wetland boundary or to the limit of the hydric soils, whichever is less.
The limit of hydric soils shall be as mapped in the Soil Survey of Bucks and
Philadelphia Counties, Pennsylvania, United States Department of
Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, July 1975, unless
reclassified by a certified soil scientist.
I. Lakes and ponds. Such areas shall not be altered, regraded, filled, piped, diverted
or built upon.
J. Lake and pond shorelines. For the purposes of this chapter, lake and pond
shorelines shall be measured 100 feet from the spillway crest elevation. No more
than 20% of such areas shall be altered, regraded, filled or built upon.
A. Plan information. In order to meet the natural resource protection standards of
§ 500-2601 of this chapter, the following information is required to be provided
with an application for a subdivision or land development plan:
(1) A site plan which illustrates all natural resources on the site and the proposed
use on the site.
(2) All encroachments and disturbances necessary to establish the proposed use
194.Editor's Note: See Chapter 105 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq., the Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act.
§ 500-2601 ZONING § 500-2602
500:189
§ 500-2603. Floodplain regulations. [Amended 8-16-2000 by Ord. No. 00-09]
No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located, relocated,
constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, substantially improved or structurally altered
except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this chapter and any other
applicable ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this
chapter and all other applicable codes and ordinances such as the Middletown Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter 440) and the Middletown
Township Building Code (Chapter 190, Article II). Zoning and building permits shall
be required before any construction or development is undertaken within any area of
the Township. In addition, all such uses, activities and development shall be undertaken
on the site.
(3) Calculations which indicate the area of the site with natural resources and the
area of natural resources that would be disturbed or encroached upon.
B. Building envelopes. The building envelope is that area of a lot that has no
development restrictions. The building envelope shall not include the area of any
required setbacks (except for driveways which would cross yards), buffer yards,
natural features with one-hundred-percent protection standard and the portion of
those natural features that may not be developed or intruded upon as specified in
§ 500-2601 of this chapter. The purpose of the identification of a building envelope
is to provide sufficient area for the general location of the building, driveway, patio,
other improvements and site alterations while meeting the natural resources
protection standards and minimum setback requirements of this chapter.
(1) Within any proposed subdivision, all residential lots shall have a contiguous
building envelope of at least an area as indicated below:
Zoning District
Minimum Building Envelope
(square feet)
RA-1 7,000
RA-2 6,000
RA-3 5,000
R-1 3,500
R-2 3,500
R-3 2,800
C. Deed restrictions. For subdivision and land development plans, restrictions meeting
Township specifications must be placed in the deed for each site or lot that has
natural resource protection areas within its boundaries. The restrictions shall
provide for the continuance of the resource protection areas in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. Natural resource protection areas may be held as
common open space in accordance with the requirements of § 440-423D of Chapter
440, Subdivision and Land Development, or in the ownership of individual property
owners. For this latter form of ownership, it shall be clearly stated in the individual
deeds that the maintenance responsibility lies with the individual property owner.
§ 500-2602 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2603
500:190
only in compliance with federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334. Under no circumstances
shall any use, activity and/or development adversely affect the capacity of the channels
or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to prevent the loss of property and life,
the creation of health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and
governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public
funds for flood protection and relief, and to protect the tax base by:
(1) Regulating uses, activities and development which, acting alone or in
combination with other existing or future uses, activities and development,
will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities and frequencies.
(2) Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and development from
locating within areas subject to flooding.
(3) Requiring all those uses, activities and development that do occur in floodprone
areas to be protected and/or floodproofed against flooding and flood
damage.
(4) Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are unsuited for
intended purposes because of flood hazards.
B. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
(1) The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable
engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions.
Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter
does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts or that land uses
permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages.
(2) This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township or any officer
or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
C. Floodplain classification.
(1) Establishment of floodplain. The floodplain shall include those areas subject
to inundation by water of the one-hundred-year flood. The basis for this
delineation shall be the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Middletown
Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, prepared by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance
Administration, dated June 1979, and the accompanying Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map, dated May 18, 1999, for areas designated floodway and floodfringe
or as delineated in the most recently adopted Flood Insurance Rate Map
Study.
(2) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words shall have
the meanings indicated herewith:
MANUFACTURED HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling
§ 500-2603 ZONING § 500-2603
500:191
intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two units
designed to be joined into one integral unit, capable of again being separated
for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy
except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and
constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation. The term
includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles
which are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single
ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of two or
more manufactured homes for nontransient use.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either before the
improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is
being restored, before the damage occurred.
(3) Boundary definition.
(a) Responsibility for boundary definition. Any applicant for a building
permit, preliminary subdivision plan approval or land development plan
approval on land in Middletown Township which lies within or partially
within the floodplain shall be required to have the area of the floodplain
on the subject land defined by a registered professional engineer or land
surveyor and shall show such floodplain areas on plans submitted with
his application.
(b) Approximate one-hundred-year floodplain areas and floodplain soil
areas. The applicant for a proposed use, development or activity in
approximate one-hundred-year floodplain areas and floodplain soils areas
shall have the opportunity to determine flood profiles and elevations,
thereby identifying the floodway and flood-fringe areas, in accordance
with hydrologic engineering techniques, as follows:
[1] For all areas within 100 feet of a watercourse, including its bed and
banks, the applicant shall provide sufficient documentation to
demonstrate that the proposed activity, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, uses and activities, will not
increase the water surface elevation of the one-hundred-year flood at
any point. The method of determination of increase in flood heights
shall be at the discretion of the Township Engineer.
[2] Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect
currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses,
computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
thorough technical review by the Township. The study must be
approved by the Board of Supervisors upon the advice of the
Township Engineer.
§ 500-2603 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2603
500:192
(c) District boundary changes. The delineation of the floodplain may be
revised by the Board of Supervisors where natural or man-made changes
have occurred and/or more detailed studies conducted or undertaken by
the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the Delaware River Basin
Commission, or other qualified agency or individual document the need
for such change. However, prior to such change, approval must be
obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration.
D. Use regulations.
(1) The following uses and no others shall be permitted on land in the floodplain
where such uses are permitted in the zoning district applicable to such lands:
(a) Tilling of the soil, grazing, pasturing.
(b) Forestry and wood production, excluding storage and mill structures.
(c) Flower and vegetable gardening, outdoor plant nurseries.
(d) Parks, playgrounds and golf courses, exclusive of buildings.
(e) Outlet installations for public sewage treatment plants.
(f) Utility easements.
(g) Water intakes, subject to pertinent regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
(h) Outlet installations for private and industrial wastewater treatment plants.
(i) Quarrying, sand pit, gravel pit.
(2) Applications for any of the above-listed uses or any other development shall
be submitted to the Township for its approval.
(3) None of the uses or development activity listed above shall be permitted in the
floodway portion of the floodplain district unless the effect of the proposed
activity or development on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying
stream improvements.
E. Area and design requirements.
(1) Lot area. For purposes of application of regulations for minimum lot area,
maximum building coverage, maximum impervious surface ratio and other
area and dimensional requirements of this chapter, land in the floodplain shall
be excluded from lot area.
(2) Site area. For purposes of application of regulations for minimum site area,
maximum density, maximum impervious surface ratio and other area and
design requirements of this chapter, land in the floodplain shall be excluded
from base site area.
F. Existing structures.
(1) Any existing structure which is to undergo substantial improvement and which
§ 500-2603 ZONING § 500-2603
500:193
is located in the floodplain shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the W1 or W2 floodproofing classes contained in the publication "Flood-
Proofing Regulations," United States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972.
Said structure shall also be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and
lateral movement.
(2) No expansion or improvement of an existing structure shall be allowed in the
floodway portion of the floodplain district unless the effect of the proposed
development on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying stream
improvements.
G. Development which may endanger human life. Any new or substantially improved
structure which will be used for the production or storage of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances or which will be used for any activity requiring
the maintenance of a supply (more than 550 gallons or other comparable volume or
any amount of radioactive substances) of any of the following dangerous materials
or substances on the premises shall not be permitted in the floodplain:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel, oil, etc.)
Phosphorous
Potassium
Sodium
Sulphur and sulphur products
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides)
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated
H. Prohibited activities in the floodplain. The construction, placement, enlargement or
expansion of any structure used or intended to be used for any of the following
activities shall be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
§ 500-2603 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2603
500:194
(4) Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks.
I. General floodplain regulations.
(1) Installation of fill materials. Fill may be placed within the limits of the
floodplain, subject to the following conditions:
(a) Fill shall consist of soil or rock materials only.
(b) Satisfactory evidence shall be submitted indicating that the crosssectional
area of the floodplain will not be reduced.
(c) Satisfactory evidence shall be submitted indicating that there will be no
increase in the potential flood height or increase in flood velocity at,
above or below the site due to the proposed fill.
(d) Permission has been obtained for the proposed fill from the Division of
Dams and Encroachments of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to the state regulations of water
obstructions and from the Township Engineer.
(2) Obstructions. The following shall not be placed in any stream channel or
floodplain:
(a) Fences, except two-wire fences.
(b) Other structures or other matter which may impede, retard or change the
direction of the flow of water in such stream channel or floodplain, or that
will catch or collect debris carried by such water, or that is placed where
the natural flow of the stream or floodwaters would carry the same
downstream to the damage or detriment of property adjacent to the stream
or floodplain.
(3) State regulations. No encroachment into or alteration or relocation of any
watercourse shall take place unless a permit has been secured from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Dam
Safety, Obstructions and Stormwater Management, and notification of the
proposed alteration, encroachment or relocation has been given to all adjacent
communities, and copies of the notification(s) have been sent to the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development and the
Federal Insurance Administration.
(4) For any new structure or substantially improved structure located on a parcel,
if that parcel is located in part or in whole within the floodplain, then, upon
completion of construction, there shall be filed with the Township Zoning
Officer a flood elevation certificate, prepared by a licensed engineer and/or
licensed surveyor, and an as-built plan showing the structure on the parcel,
with vertical datum and elevations.195
J. Disposition.
195.Editor's Note: Original Subsection 10 of this chapter of the 2009 Code, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 8-16-2000 by Ord. No. 00-09.
§ 500-2603 ZONING § 500-2603
500:195
(1) Land in the floodplain classification may be:
(a) Included in the property area of any lot or site held in or proposed for
private ownership, provided the lot area of any land not in such
classification shall equal or exceed the minimum lot area or site area
requirements set forth by this chapter for such lot or site, unless the
subject land has been reclaimed in accordance with Subsection H above.
(b) Offered for dedication to the Township, county or other public entity or
agency thereof for uses permitted by this chapter on such land.
(c) Placed in ownership of nonprofit homeowners' or property owners'
associations, condominium or cooperative corporation or other such
agency as may be approved by the Supervisors under the provisions of
this chapter.
(2) Restrictions on nonpublic ownership. Covenants shall be recorded with the
deeds to land in the floodplain classification to be held in other than public
ownership permitting the municipality, after proper legal notice, to enter on
such land to perform maintenance or rehabilitation work on any drainage or
erosion control facility thereon which the owner of such land has failed to
perform and to lien the property for the cost of such work.
K. Variances. If compliance with any of the requirements of this section would result
in an exceptional hardship for a prospective builder, developer or landowner, the
Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of
the requirements. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing
Board in accordance with the following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use or activity
within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the one-hundredyear
flood elevation.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any of the requirements pertaining to
§ 500-2603G, Development which may endanger human life, or § 500-2603H,
Prohibited activities.
(3) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to
provide relief.
(4) In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect
the public health, safety and welfare and to achieve the objectives of this
chapter.
(5) Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board shall notify the
applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks of life and property.
§ 500-2603 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2603
500:196
§ 500-2604. Open space and recreation space requirements. [Amended 5-29-2007
by Ord. No. 07-07]
Residential developments shall provide areas of open space and recreation space as
required by this chapter and as required by § 440-424, Recreation areas and community
facilities, of Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development, of this Code. This
required open space and recreation space shall meet the following standards:
(6) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will not result in an unacceptable or
prohibited increase in flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimize the public, or conflict with any other applicable state statute or
regulation, or local ordinance or regulation.
(7) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be
maintained by the Zoning Hearing Board. In addition, a report of all variances
granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to the Federal
Insurance Administration.
(8) Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed
and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the one-hundred-year
flood.
A. Open space and recreation space shall not include land occupied by nonrecreational
buildings or structures, roads or road rights-of-way, easements, parking lots for
nonrecreational uses, land reserved for future parking lots for nonrecreational uses,
or stormwater detention basins or retention basins, nor shall it include the yards or
lots of dwelling units.
B. The open space and recreation space shall be laid out in accordance with the best
principles of site design. It is intended that the open space and recreation space shall
be as close to all residences as possible, with greenways and paths leading to major
recreation spaces. Major recreation areas shall be located to serve all residents. The
open space and recreation space is most needed in areas of highest density. The
intent is to provide open areas as close to the individual unit as possible.
C. Active recreation land. While some of the open space and recreation space may be
required for resource protection, it is intended that a portion of the open space be
usable for active recreation. Therefore, at least 1/2 of the required open space or
recreation space shall not be restricted by natural resources, as defined in
§ 500-2601. The following standards shall apply to the design of the active
recreation land:
(1) Areas set aside for active recreation shall be of adequate size and configuration
§ 500-2603 ZONING § 500-2604
500:197
§ 500-2605. Buffer yards. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13; 3-1-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-02]
Buffering serves to soften the outline of buildings, to screen glare and to create a visual
and/or physical barrier between conflicting land uses. Where a buffer yard is required by
the terms of this chapter, it shall comply with the following standards.
to accommodate the intended use. The active recreation land shall not include
narrow or irregular pieces of land which are remnants from lotting or the
layout of streets and parking areas.
(2) If the amount of required active recreation land is 25,000 square feet or less,
the active recreation land shall be provided as one contiguous area. If the
amount of required active recreation land is greater than 25,000 square feet,
the active recreation land may be divided into several areas; however, each
such area shall be at least 25,000 square feet in size and shall be contiguous.
(3) In general, the depth of the active recreation land shall not be less than one nor
more than 2.5 times its width.
(4) The slope of the active recreation land shall not exceed 2%. Compliance with
this slope requirement may be achieved through regrading, in keeping with
applicable natural resource protection standards.
(5) At least one side of the active recreation land shall abut a street for a minimum
distance of 50 feet.
(6) Active recreation land shall not be traversed by utility easements unless said
utilities are placed underground and no part of them or their supportive
equipment protrudes above ground level.
D. A method of physically delineating private lots from common open space and
recreation space areas shall be provided. Such method may include shrubbery,
trees, markers or other method acceptable to the Township.
E. The type of facilities to be provided and the extent of proposed improvements shall
be noted on the plans, including a planting plan and schedule.
F. Each developer shall provide a plan or other material as required to establish the
method by which open space shall be perpetuated, maintained and administered.
Such plan or other material shall meet the requirements of § 440-423, Open space
in subdivisions, residential developments and mobile home parks, of Chapter 440,
Subdivision and Land Development. The plan and other materials shall be
construed as a contract between the landowner(s) and the municipality and shall be
noted on all deeds.
G. All impervious surfaces within open space and recreation areas shall be countable
as part of the total impervious surface ratio for the development.
H. The open space and recreation space shall be consistent with the recommendations
of the Middletown Township Recreation, Parks and Open Space Plan, as amended.
A. Required buffers.
§ 500-2604 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2605
500:198
(1) Residential uses. New residential developments which abut existing
nonresidential uses or districts shall be required to provide a seventy-five-footwide
buffer yard.
(2) OR Open Recreation District. Any lot or parcel which abuts an OR Open
Recreation District shall provide a minimum one-hundred-foot-wide buffer
yard measured from the property line or the street line.
(3) A-O Apartment-Office District. For purposes of meeting the buffer yard
requirements of the chapter, vacant land zoned A-O Apartment-Office District
shall be considered zoned for residential use.
B. Existing buffer. All existing deciduous and coniferous trees larger than two inches
in caliper and/or six feet in height may be considered to contribute to the definition
of an existing buffer on the property. In all cases, existing plant material of the
above caliper and height shall be preserved in any buffer yard except where
clearance is required to ensure adequate sight distance. Any removal shall, where
feasible, involve relocation rather than clearing.
C. Plant material. All buffer yards shall include a dense screen planting of trees, shrubs
and hedges. Such screen planting shall be in accordance with the following:
(1) Buffer yards required for the C, CS, GB and M-1 Zoning Districts shall meet
one of the following planting options.
(a) Option 1: one canopy tree per 40 feet; plus one evergreen tree per 20 feet;
plus one shrub per four feet.
(b) Option 2: one flowering tree per 40 feet; plus one evergreen tree per 20
feet; plus one evergreen hedge on lot line (three-foot centers except as
noted in § 500-2605F).
(c) Option 3: one flowering tree per 40 feet plus; one evergreen tree per 20
feet; plus one berm four feet high.
(2) Buffer yards required for zoning districts or uses other than as specified in
Subsection C(1) above shall meet one of the following planting options:
(a) Option 1: one canopy tree per 40 feet; plus one flowering tree per 60 feet;
plus one evergreen tree per 60 feet.
(b) Option 2: one canopy tree per 40 feet; plus one flowering tree per 60 feet;
plus one evergreen hedge on lot line (three-foot centers except as noted
in § 500-2605F).
(c) Option 3: one flowering tree per 40 feet; plus one evergreen tree per 25
feet.
(3) For each planting option, any of the plant materials outlined in § 500-2605F
may be utilized. Minimum plant size, given either in height or in caliper, is
indicated in this section. The Middletown Township Planning Commission
may permit other plant types if they are hardy to the area, are not subject to
blight or disease and are of the same general character and growth habit as
§ 500-2605 ZONING § 500-2605
500:199
those listed in § 500-2605F. All plant material shall meet the standards of the
American Association of Nurserymen.
(4) The screen planting shall provide an effective barrier to noise, visibility,
airborne particles and glare and shall be approved by the Middletown
Township Planning Commission.
(5) The screen planting shall be maintained permanently (and any plant material
which does not live shall be replaced within one year).
(6) The screen planting shall be so placed that at maturity it will not be closer than
five feet to any street or property line.
(7) The screen planting shall comply with § 500-2308, Traffic visibility across
corners.
(8) All berms shall have slopes less than four horizontal to one vertical.
(9) The screen planting shall be broken only at points of vehicular or pedestrian
access.
(10) Planting design. It is encouraged that plant materials in buffer yards be planted
in natural clusters that will give privacy but do not block views or vistas. The
exception shall be commercial or industrial uses bordering residential uses.
Here a dense, visual screen is required.
D. General requirements.
(1) The buffer yard may overlap the required front, side or rear yards and, in case
of conflict, the larger yard requirements shall apply.
(2) All buffer yards shall be maintained and kept clean of all debris, rubbish,
weeds and tall grass.
(3) No structure, manufacturing or processing activity, parking or storage of
materials shall be permitted in the buffer yard.
E. Exemptions. No screen shall be required along arterial streets and railroad rightsof-
way which form district boundary lines, provided that:
(1) The front of the building faces the boundary line.
(2) No outdoor manufacturing or processing activity (other than delivery and
shipment of materials) and no outdoor storage of materials shall be so located
as to be visible from the adjacent agricultural, residential or recreational uses
or districts.
F. Plant materials list.
(1) Canopy trees two-inch caliper minimum.
Acer ginnala — Amur maple
Acer platanoides - Norway maple
Acer rubrum - Red maple
§ 500-2605 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2605
500:200
Acer saccharum - Sugar maple
Betula alba - European white birch
Fagus grandifolia - American beech
Fagus sylvatica - European beech
Fraxinus americana - White ash
Fraxinus pennsylvania lanceolata - Green ash
Ginkgo biloba - Ginkgo (male only)
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis - Thornless honey locust
Liquidambar styraciflua - Sweet gum
Liriodendron tulipifera - Tulip poplartree
Phellodendron amurense - Amur corktree
Platanus acerifolia - London planetree
Quercus alba - White oak
Quercus rubra - Red oak
Qercus coccinea - Scarlet oak
Quercus palustris - Pin oak
Quercus phellos - Willow oak
Robinia pseudoacacia (inermis) - Thornless black locust
Sophora japonica - Japanese pagoda tree
Tilia - Linden, all species hardy to the area
Zelkova serrata - Japanese zelkova
(2) Flowering trees two-inch caliper minimum.
Amerlanchier canadensis - Shadblow serviceberry
Cornus florida - Flowering dogwood
Cornus kousa - Kousa dogwood
Cornus mas - Cornelian-cherry dogwood
Crataegus phaenopyrum - Washington hawthorn
Koelreuteria paniculata - Golden rain tree
Laburnum vossi - Golden chain tree
Magnolia x soulangiana - Saucer magnolia
Magnolia virginiana - Sweetbay magnolia
Malus baccata - Siberian crabapple
Malus floribunda - Japanese flowering crabapple
Malus hopa - Hopa flowering crabapple
Oxydendrum arboreum - Sourwood
Pyrus calleryana bradford - Callery pear
§ 500-2605 ZONING § 500-2605
500:201
Prunus serrulata - Kwanzan cherry
Prunus x yedoensis - Yoshino cherry
(3) Evergreen trees four feet high minimum.
Ilex opaca - American holly
Picea abies - Norway spruce
Picea omorika - Serbian spruce
Picea pungens - Colorado spruce
Pinus nigra - Austrian pine
Pinus strobus - White pine
Pseudotsuga menziesii - Douglas fir
Tsuga canadensis - Canada hemlock
(4) Hedge four feet high minimum.
Crataegus intricata - Thicket hawthorn
Forsythia x intermedia - Border forsythia
Rhamnus frazula columnaris - Tallhedge buckthorn
Syringa x chinensis - Chinese lilac
Syringa vulgaris - Common lilac
(5) Evergreen hedge four feet high minimum.
Juniperus virginiana - Upright juniper
Pinus strobus - White pine (one per five feet)
Pyracantha lalandi - Laland firethorn
Taxus cuspidata - Upright yew
Taxus hicksi - Hicks yew
Tsuga canadensis - Canadian hemlock (one per five feet)
(6) Shrubs three feet high minimum.
Juniperus virginiana-Upright juniper
Pyracantha lalandi - Laland firethorn
Taxus capitata - Upright yew
Taxus hicksi - Hicks yew
Thuja occidentalis - American arborvitae
(7) Shrubs four feet high minimum.
Euonymus alatus - Winged euonymus
Hamamelis vernalis - Vernal witchhazel
Hamamelis virginiana - Common witchhazel
§ 500-2605 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2605
500:202
Ilex verticillata - Winterberrry
Rhamnus frangula - Glossy buckthorn
Viburnum dentatum - Arrowwood viburnum
Viburnum lantana - Wayfaringtree viburnum
§ 500-2605 ZONING § 500-2605
500:203

ARTICLE XXVII
Off-Street Parking Regulations
§ 500-2701. Definitions.
Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following words and phrases shall have,
for the purposes of this chapter, the meanings given below:
DWELLING UNIT—A room or group of rooms located within a building and forming
a single, habitable unit with facilities used or intended to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking and eating, but shall not include tourist homes, cabins, lodging houses, hotels,
motels or other similar places offering overnight accommodations for transients.
EXTENSION, MAJOR REPAIRS OR SUBSTANTIAL ALTERATIONS —
Reconstruction activities which increase the intensity of use of a structure by an addition
or additions of employees, dwelling units, floor area, seating capacity or any other unit
of measurement.
OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE — An on-the-property space for the standing,
loading and unloading of vehicles to avoid undue interference with the public use of
streets and alleys.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE — An area on a lot used for parking a vehicle, to
which there is access from a street.
SEATS — The seating capacity of a particular building as determined by the
specifications and plans and filed with the Zoning Officer. In the event individual seats
are not provided, each 20 inches of benches or similar seating accommodations shall be
considered as one seat for the purpose of this chapter.
TOWNSHIP SPECIFICATIONS — Specifications duly adopted by the Board of
Supervisors by formal resolution for a specific purpose, copies of which are available to
the general public at the office of the Township Manager.
§ 500-2702. Off-street parking required. [Amended 8-18-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8;
2-11-1997 by Ord. No. 97-01; 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05]
In the use of land for residential, commercial, industrial or any other purpose, no
residential, commercial, industrial or any other building or structure shall be erected
and no major repairs made to an existing residential, commercial, industrial or any
other building or structure unless there already is in existence upon the lot or unless
provision is made for the location on the lot concurrently with such erection or major
repairs off-street parking spaces on the basis of the following minimum requirements.
These requirements shall not apply where another part of this chapter specifies a greater
parking requirement for a particular use. All driveways shall be constructed of a durable
material with a finished surface such as asphalt, concrete or brick.
A. Dwellings, including single-family, two-family and multifamily residences,
townhouses, apartments and all other similar structures devoted to habitation: at
least two off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit. All off-street parking
areas in the RA-1, RA-2, RA-3, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts shall be located at least
12 feet from the side-yard property line or shall meet the required side-yard setback,
whichever is less, or shall meet the requirements of Chapter 440, Subdivision and
§ 500-2701 ZONING § 500-2702
500:205
Land Development. In the RA-1, RA-2, RA-3, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts, and
for any single-family residence, two-family residence, multifamily residence,
townhouse, apartment or other similar structure devoted to habitation, garage areas
shall not be counted as and/or otherwise considered as off-street parking spaces.
B. Hotels, including clubs, lodging houses, tourist homes and cabins, motels, camps
and parks, boardinghouses and rooming houses: at least one off-street parking space
for each guest room. If, in addition to those spaces provided for guests, patrons or
residents of the above-named places, assembly halls, bars, restaurants, night clubs,
retail shops or rooms for other shops, service establishments or businesses are
provided, additional off-street parking spaces shall be required in accordance with
the regulations set forth herein for such uses. Dormitories, sororities, fraternities
and all other similar places: at least one off-street parking space for each five beds.
C. Hospitals, including convalescent homes, homes for the aged and infirmed, and all
other similar institutions: at least one off-street parking space for each patient bed,
plus at least one additional off-street parking space for each employee (including
nurses). Sanitariums, asylums, orphanages: at least one off-street parking space for
each five patient beds, plus at least one additional off-street parking space for each
staff and visiting doctor, plus at least one additional off-street parking space for
each employee (including nurses).
D. Restaurants, including bars, taverns, nightclubs, lunch counters, diners and all other
similar eating and/or drinking establishments: at least one off-street parking space
for each 50 square feet of total floor area. Where restaurants are located on the same
lot with a shopping center or part of a shopping center development or easements
exist for the use of parking on a shopping center lot, the requirement shall be as set
forth in Article XXVII, § 500-2702G.
E. Theaters, including motion-picture houses: at least one off-street parking space for
each four seats provided for patron use.
F. Places of public assembly, including private clubs, lodges and fraternal buildings
not providing overnight accommodation; assembly halls, bowling alleys, sports
arenas, stadiums, gymnasiums, amusement parks, racetracks, fairgrounds, circus
grounds, churches, funeral homes and mortuaries, community centers, libraries,
museums, and all other similar places of relatively infrequent public assembly: at
least one off-street parking space for each four seats provided for patron use or at
least one off-street parking space for each 50 square feet of total floor area used or
intended to be used for service to the public as customers, patrons or clients,
whichever requires the greater number of parking spaces.
G. Retail establishments.
(1) Retail establishments, including personal service shops, equipment or repair
shops, gasoline or other motor fuel stations, motor vehicle repair
establishments, all retail stores and/or businesses, banks and/or other financial
and/or lending institutions, and medical marijuana dispensaries: at least one
off-street parking space for each 125 square feet of total floor area used or
intended to be used for service to the public as customers, patrons and clients,
plus at least one off-street parking space for each employee of such
establishments. [Amended 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-03]
§ 500-2702 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2702
500:206
(2) Two or more such uses located on the same lot shall provide the following
minimum number of parking spaces:
(a) Up to 25,000 square feet of gross leasable area: 5.5 spaces per 1,000
square feet of gross leasable area.
(b) From 25,000 square feet of gross leasable area to 100,000 square feet of
gross leasable area: five spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable
area.
(c) From 100,000 square feet of gross leasable area and above: 4.5 spaces per
1,000 square feet of gross leasable area. "Gross leasable area" shall be
defined as set forth in § 500-1704A herein.
H. Office buildings, including business, government and professional buildings;
medical and dental offices and clinics: at least one off-street parking space for each
200 square feet of total floor area.
I. Wholesale, manufacturing and industrial plants, including warehouses and storage
buildings and yards, public utility buildings, contractor equipment and
lumberyards, research laboratories, business service establishments such as
blueprinting, printing and engraving, soft drink bottling establishments, fabricating
plants, medical marijuana growers/processors, and all other structures devoted to
similar mercantile or industrial pursuits: at least one off-street parking space for
every two employees. [Amended 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-03]
J. Terminal facilities, including airports, railroad passenger and freight stations, bus
depots, truck terminals and all other similar personal or material terminal facilities:
at least such off-street parking spaces as the Board of Supervisors shall deem
adequate to service the public as customers, patrons, visitors and employees.
K. Schools, including academies, colleges, universities, elementary schools, junior
high schools, high schools, prep schools, and all other similar institutions of
learning: at least one off-street parking space for each employee, including
administrators, teachers and building maintenance personnel. In addition, for high
schools or the equivalent: at least one off-street parking space for each 20 classroom
seats or one off-street parking space for each 10 auditorium seats, whichever
formula will require the larger number of parking spaces.
L. Motor vehicle sales establishments: at least one off-street parking space for each
200 square feet of gross interior floor area used or intended to be used for the sale
of vehicles and at least one off-street parking space for each 1,000 square feet of
gross exterior vehicle sales display area, plus at least one off-street parking space
for each employee of such establishments. No parking spaces shall be located in the
right-of-way of adjacent streets.
M. Off-street parking areas shall conform to the minimum dimensional standards set
forth in § 440-421 of Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development, as
amended. The size of parking stalls shall be measured from the middle of the
parking stall stripes required by § 500-2704F(2) below.
§ 500-2702 ZONING § 500-2703
500:207
§ 500-2703. Off-street loading required.
Any building or structure which is to be erected, substantially altered or changed in use
and which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by tractortrailers
or similar vehicles shall be provided off-street loading berths which meet the
minimum requirements specified in this section.
§ 500-2704. Off-street parking and loading; general regulations. [Amended
8-18-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8]
A. Every department store, supermarket, retail store, hospital, nursing home,
warehouse or wholesale establishment, manufacturing plant, or medical marijuana
grower/processor or medical marijuana dispensary with a gross floor area of 25,000
square feet or more shall be provided with at least one off-street loading berth.
[Amended 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-03]
B. Every office building, restaurant and hotel with a gross floor area of 35,000 square
feet or more shall be provided with at least one off-street loading berth.
C. In addition, the uses listed above shall provide at least one off-street loading berth
for each three tractor-trailers serving the facility on an average day.
D. Any proposed change in use or occupancy that would result in an increase in the
number of required off-street loading berths shall not receive a use or occupancy
permit from the Zoning Officer until the use complies with the off-street loading
requirements of this section.
E. The Board of Supervisors may require any other building or structure to provide
off-street loading berths if it is determined that, due to the volume or size of
materials or merchandise that will be received or distributed, such loading berths
are necessary.
A. Continuing character of obligation.
(1) Compliance with the schedule of requirements for off-street parking space and
off-street loading space applicable to newly erected or substantially altered
structures shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of the real estate on
which any such structure is located so long as the structure is in existence and
its use requiring vehicle parking or vehicle loading facilities continues. It shall
be unlawful for an owner of any building affected by this chapter to
discontinue, change or dispense with, or to cause the discontinuance or change
of the required vehicle parking or loading space, apart from the
discontinuance, sale or transfer of such structure, without establishing
alternative vehicle parking and/or loading spaces which meet with the
requirements of and are in compliance with this chapter. It shall also be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use a building without
acquiring such land for vehicle parking and loading spaces which meet with
the requirements of and are in compliance with this chapter.
(2) All off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided and maintained
so long as the use exists which the facilities were designed to serve. No open
area in an off-street parking area shall be encroached upon by buildings,
§ 500-2703 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2704
500:208
storage or any other use; nor shall the number of off-street parking spaces be
reduced in total extent after their provision, except upon the approval of the
Zoning Hearing Board, and then only after proof that, by reason of diminution
in floor area, seating area, the number of employees, or change in other factors
controlling the regulation of the number of parking spaces, such reduction is in
conformity with the requirements of this article. Reasonable precautions shall
be taken by the owner or sponsor of a use to assure the availability of required
facilities to the employees or other persons the facilities are designed to serve.
Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner as to at no time
constitute a nuisance, a hazard or an unreasonable impediment to traffic.
B. Fractional measurements. If in determining the number of required off-street
parking and off-street loading spaces, the result is a requirement of a fractional
space, any fraction up to and including 1/2 shall be disregarded and any fraction
over 1/2 shall require one off-street parking or off-street loading space.
C. Location of required parking and loading facilities. The off-street parking facilities
required by this chapter shall be located on the same lot or parcel of land as the
structure they are intended to serve. When practical difficulties, as determined by
the Board of Supervisors, prevent their establishment on the same lot, off-street
parking facilities may be located within 400 feet of the premises to which they are
appurtenant. The off-street loading facilities required by this chapter shall, in all
cases, be on the same lot or parcel of land as the structure they are intended to serve.
In no case shall the off-street loading space be part of the area used to satisfy the
off-street parking requirements of this chapter.
D. Plan of required off-street parking and/or loading areas. For the purpose of
converting parking and/or loading spaces into the required parking and/or loading
areas, plans must be submitted to the Township Zoning Officer to show how the
required parking and/or loading spaces shall be arranged in the area supplied for
that purpose and to indicate sufficient space for parking maneuvers, as well as
adequate ingress and egress to the parking and/or loading area. The applicant shall
state on his application, in writing, the area of off-street parking and off-street
loading he proposes to provide in square feet and shall indicate on the plan
submitted the calculations made to compute these totals. Plans of required parking
for motor vehicle sales establishments shall also show areas to be used for display
of cars, and such areas shall be permanently marked on the establishment's premises
by on-site monuments.
E. Use of required off-street parking by another building. No part of an off-street
parking area required for a building or use to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall be included as a part of an off-street parking area similarly required
for another building or use, unless the periods of usage by the buildings or uses will
not be simultaneous with each other. The applicant shall demonstrate to the Board
of Supervisors that the hours or days of peak parking needed for the uses are so
different that a lower total will provide adequately for all uses served by the facility.
F. Construction and maintenance of public off-street parking places.
(1) All off-street parking facilities required pursuant to the provisions of this
article shall be paved, drained and lighted; all off-street parking and loading
§ 500-2704 ZONING § 500-2704
500:209
§ 500-2705. Reduction of nonresidential parking requirements.
In order to prevent the establishment of a greater number of parking spaces than is
actually required to serve the needs of nonresidential uses, the Board of Supervisors,
after consulting with the Planning Commission and Township Engineer, may permit a
conditional reduction of parking space if the following conditions are satisfied:
spaces shall be painted so as to indicate their location and periodically
maintained by the owner in accordance with Township specifications. Such
facilities shall be arranged for convenient access and safety of pedestrians and
vehicles.
(2) White or yellow paint shall be used to stripe all parking stalls. All parking
stalls required by § 500-2702M shall be delineated and separated by two
parallel stripes which are two feet apart, measured from the outside edge of
each stripe. Each stripe shall be four inches in width. The requirements
established in this section shall be in addition to those requirements established
in § 500-2702M.
G. Paved exceptions. When authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board, places of public assembly used less than 12 times per year shall not be
required to pave parking areas in accordance with Township specifications.
H. Collective action relative to off-street parking and loading. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to prevent the joint use of off-street parking or off-street loading
spaces by two or more buildings or uses if the total number of spaces provided is
not less than the sum of the spaces required for each use individually, except as
permitted in § 500-2704E.
I. Mixed uses. In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off-street parking
and off-street loading shall be the sum of the spaces required for each use
individually. The off-street parking and off-street loading space for one use shall
not be considered as providing the off-street parking or off-street loading space for
another use, except as permitted in § 500-2704E.
J. Nonconforming uses. Whenever there is an alteration of a structure or a change or
extension of a use which increases the parking requirements according to the
standards of this chapter, the total amount of parking required for the existing
structure or use and the alteration, change or extension shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of § 500-2702.
A. The design of the parking lot, as indicated on the land development plan, must
designate sufficient space to meet the parking requirements of this chapter. The plan
shall also illustrate the layout for the total number of parking spaces.
B. The conditional reduction shall provide for the establishment of not less than 80%
of the required number of parking spaces, as specified in this chapter. This initial
phase of the parking provision shall be clearly indicated on the plan.
C. The balance of the parking area conditionally reserved shall not include areas for
required buffer yards, setbacks or areas which would otherwise be unsuitable for
parking spaces due to the physical characteristics of the land or other requirements
§ 500-2704 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2705
500:210
of this chapter. This parking area which is reserved shall be located and have
characteristics so as to provide amenable open space should it be determined
the additional parking spaces are not required. The developer shall provide a
landscaping plan for the reserved area with the land development plan.
D. The developer shall enter into a written agreement with the Board of Supervisors
that, after one year following the issuing of the last occupancy permit, the additional
parking spaces shall be provided at the developer's or owner's expense should it be
determined that the required number of parking spaces are necessary to satisfy the
need of the particular land development.
E. At the time of the above-stated agreement, the developer or owner shall post a
performance bond or other securities to cover the expense of a traffic study to be
undertaken by a registered traffic engineer of the Board of Supervisors' choosing,
who shall determine the advisability of providing the full parking requirement. Said
study shall be undertaken one year after the issuance of the last occupancy permit
pursuant to Subsection D above. With recommendations of the Traffic Engineer,
the Township Engineer and the Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors
shall determine if the additional spaces shall be provided by the developer or if the
area shall remain as open space.
F. Land which has been determined and designated by the Board of Supervisors to
remain as open space rather than as required parking shall not be used to provide
parking spaces for any addition or expansion but shall remain as open space.
§ 500-2705 ZONING § 500-2705
500:211

ARTICLE XXVIII
Sign Regulations
§ 500-2801. Conformance.
Any sign hereafter erected or maintained shall conform with the provisions of this article
and any other ordinance or regulations of the Township of Middletown not inconsistent
herewith.
§ 500-2802. Purpose.
§ 500-2803. General sign regulations. [Amended 3-23-1999 by Ord. No. 99-04]
A. The objectives of this article are to establish requirements for placing, installing and
maintaining signs in order to preserve and protect the health, safety, welfare and
general well-being of the community's citizens. Just as regulations for the
placement, construction and maintenance of buildings and structures through
zoning is a valid use of the law, so are regulations for the placement, installation
and maintenance of signs a valid use of the law, because signs, in the literal sense,
must be considered structures and, in a practical sense, are capable of producing
many of the same nuisances as buildings produce.
B. Sign regulations are further justified by the primary purpose of a sign: to draw
attention to its content. However, since signs can distract drivers or obstruct views,
the very nature of a sign can be a potential hazard to the safety of the motorist.
Therefore, it is the intent of this article to regulate the location of signs in such a
way that they can fulfill their purpose without causing unsafe conditions for
motorists.
C. Finally, it is the objective of this article to protect and preserve the visual character
of the community by regulating the placement, installation and maintenance of
signs. Because signs are intended to command visual contact, this gives them an
important role in the overall visual character of a community. This visual impact
affects the value and enjoyment of property; therefore, the regulation of signs can
work to enhance the value of property, encourage appropriate land use throughout
a municipality and minimize visual clutter in the community.
D. With this purpose in mind, it is the intention of this article to authorize only those
uses of signs which are:
(1) Compatible with their surroundings.
(2) Appropriate to the type of activity or function to which they pertain.
(3) Expressive of the identity and purpose of the individual property, occupant or
of the community as a whole.
(4) Legible in the circumstances in which they are seen.
A. Definitions of signs. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ANIMATED SIGN — A type of freestanding, wall, projecting or roof sign with
§ 500-2801 ZONING § 500-2803
500:213
motion, flashing light, or color changes requiring electrical energy or electronic or
manufactured sources of supply. For the purposes of this chapter, this definition
shall not be meant to include public service signs, such as time-and-temperature
signs, revolving or changeable copy signs, or wind-activated elements, such as
flags, banners or similar items.
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION — Any projection, except signs, which is not
intended for occupancy and which extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a
building.
BACKGROUND AREA OF SIGN — The entire area of a sign on which copy can
be placed, including framing and border, but not including structural supports and
decorative trim which is incidental to the copy content of the display itself.
BENCH SIGNS — A sign located on any part of the surface of a bench or seat
placed on or adjacent to a public right-of-way.
BILLBOARD — See "off-premises signs" and "commercial outdoor advertising
signs."
BUILDING CODE — The current Building Code as officially adopted by the
Township which governs construction standards, approved materials, and
projection standards, unless otherwise specified herein.196
BUILDING FACADE — That portion of any exterior elevation of a building
extending vertically from grade to the top of the parapet, wall or eaves and
horizontally across the entire width of the building elevation.
BUSINESS SIGN — An on-premises sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, industry or other activity which is sold, offered or conducted
on the premises on which such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign on which the message copy can be
changed through the use of attachable letters, numerals or graphics or through the
use of electronic switching of lamps or other illuminated devices. This includes
public service information, such as time-and-temperature displays, or any sign
which features automatic or manual switching or changing of its message content.
COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN—A permanent off-premises
sign erected, maintained or used for the purpose of providing copy area for
advertising messages for rent or lease.
COMMUNITY SPECIAL EVENT SIGN — A type of temporary sign which is
intended to advertise a nonprofit community or civic event.
CONSTRUCTION/DEVELOPMENT SIGN — A type of temporary sign which is
intended to advertise the name of a project or development and/or the contractor,
architect, engineer, financier, etc.
COPY AREA OF SIGN — The actual area of the sign copy applied to any
background. Compute copy area by straight lines drawn tangent to copy extremities
encompassing individual letters, words and graphic elements.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign which is designed and erected solely for the
196.Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Construction Standards.
§ 500-2803 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2803
500:214
purpose of traffic or pedestrian direction and which is placed on the property to
which the public is directed.
DIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign designed to give forth artificial
light directly (or through transparent or translucent material) from a source of light
within such sign, including, but not limited to, neon and exposed lamp signs.
EAVES — The lowest horizontal line of a sloping roof.
ERECT — To build, construct, attach, hang, suspend, affix, alter, structurally
repair, paint, relocate or renew on a wall or any other background surface.
FASCIA SIGN — See "wall sign."
FESTOON LIGHTING — A directly illuminated sign comprised of a group of
incandescent bulbs hung or strung overhead.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign permanently supported by an upright(s) which
is permanently anchored into the ground. Such signs must be anchored below the
frost line with a footing.
ILLUMINATED SIGN—A sign in which an internal or external source of light is
used.
INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign illuminated with a light so
shielded that no direct rays therefrom are visible elsewhere on the lot where said
illumination occurs. If such shielding device is defective, such sign shall be deemed
to be a directly illuminated sign.
INTERIOR SIGN — Any sign, except a window sign, placed within a building,
regardless of whether its message is visible to the exterior of the building. Interior
signs are not regulated by the provisions of this chapter.
KIOSK — A permanent structure designed for the posting of temporary signs or
messages.
MARQUEE—A permanent, roofed structure attached to a building and projecting
over public or private property.
MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign attached to a marquee (see "wall sign").
MONUMENT DISPLAY — An internally illuminated structure with display or
copy faces that use a visual communication technology (VCT), such as lightemitting
diodes (LED) or other internal light sources, to communicate municipal,
civic or emergency messaging, on-premises advertising, and/or commercial offpremises
advertising. A monument display shall be capable of remotely or
automatically changing displays. The portion of the monument display structure
where the messaging or advertising is displayed is called the "active area."[Added
1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-01]
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign directing attention to a business, person,
commodity or service not sold or located upon the premises where the sign is
located.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which carries only messages strictly incidental to
lawful use of the premises on which it is located. Such signs may include but not
be limited to messages indicating the business transacted, services rendered, goods
§ 500-2803 ZONING § 500-2803
500:215
sold or produced on the premises, name of the business, and name of the person,
firm or corporation occupying the premises.
OPINION SIGN — Any sign that expresses or declares the personal belief, idea
or conviction of the citizen(s) residing on the premises as protected under the First
Amendment of the United States Constitution.
PARAPET — The portion of a facade or wall that extends above the roof.
POLE SIGN — See "freestanding sign."
POLITICAL SIGN — Any temporary sign pertaining to political views, an
individual seeking election or appointment to a public office, or a forthcoming
public election or referendum.
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign, with or without display or legend, which is selfsupporting
without being firmly embedded in the ground or is fixed on a movable
stand or mounted on wheels or removable vehicles or made easily movable in some
other manner.
PREMISES — A separate lot or tax parcel or a single use on more than one lot or
tax parcel with individual frontage abutting the street line. A premises may include
more than one occupant as in an office complex or shopping center.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign, other than a wall sign, which is attached to and
projects more than 18 inches from a wall of a building.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign pertaining to the sale, lease or rent of a property
upon which it is located.
REVOLVING SIGN—A type of freestanding sign which revolves 360° or agitates
back and forth.
ROOFLINE — The uppermost line of the roof of the building or, in the case of an
extended facade or parapet, the uppermost height of said facade or parapet.
ROOF SIGN—A sign erected or maintained upon the roof or parapet of a building,
the entire face of which is situated above the eaves or highest architectural point of
the building to which it is attached, and which is wholly or partially supported by
said building.
SIGN — Any letter, number, symbol, figure, character, mark, plane, design,
picture, stroke, stripe, trademark or combination of these, including permanent
window signs erected in any manner whatsoever, which shall be used for the
attraction of the public to any place, subject, person, firm, corporation, public
performance, article or merchandise and which shall be displayed in any manner
whatsoever.
SNIPE SIGN—A small off-premises sign attached in any way to an object or tree.
TIME-AND-TEMPERATURE SIGN — A display containing illuminated or
reflective numerals switching alternately to show the time and temperature.
VEHICULAR SIGN—A portable sign which is affixed and/or painted to a vehicle
in such a manner that the carrying of such sign or signs is no longer incidental to the
vehicle's primary purpose. Such signs shall be subject to the regulations for portable
signs as defined in this article.
§ 500-2803 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2803
500:216
VISUAL COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (VCT) — Any type of lighting
element that, when operational, is able to communicate a visual message. A visual
communication technology may include, but is not limited to, the following: dual
in-line packaged light-emitting diodes (LED); surface-mounted diode LED; chip
on board LED; fiber optic LED; internally illuminate Lexan; intense pulsed light
technology; outdoor projection technology; outdoor projection video-mapping
technology; holographic technology; and 3D holographic technology.[Added
1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-01]
WALL AND FASCIA SIGN — A sign which is parallel to any exterior wall of
a building or structure. Also includes signs affixed to architectural projections,
canopies or marquees which project from a building facade, provided the copy area
of such sign remains parallel to the building facade.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign affixed to or within 12 inches of the interior surface of
a window with its message visible to the outside of said window surface.
B. Area of signs.
(1) The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, wording and
accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background, whether
open or enclosed, on which they are displayed, but not to include any
supporting framework, bracing or decorative trim which is incidental to the
copy content of the display itself.
(2) In the computation of square foot area of a double-faced sign or multiple-faced
sign, only one side shall be considered, provided all faces are identical in size.
If the interior angle formed by the faces of a double-faced or multiple-faced
sign is greater than 90°, then all sides of such sign shall be considered in
calculating the sign area. All faces of a revolving sign or a revolving sign
component shall be considered in calculating the sign area of such sign or
component.
(3) If an establishment has walls fronting on two or more streets or if the property
fronts on more than one street, the sign area for each building wall or property
frontage shall be computed separately.
(4) With the exceptions of billboards, commercial outdoor advertising signs,
monument displays and off-premises signs, a sign supported by more than one
means (and therefore may be defined as freestanding, wall, roof or projecting
sign) shall have its area and height calculations determined by the type of sign
that has the most restrictive standards. [Amended 1-17-2017 by Ord. No.
17-01]
(5) Frontage on Interstate 95 shall not be used in the calculation of sign area.
C. Height of signs.
(1) The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from the
elevation of the shoulder of the road to the highest point of the sign structure.
In the case where there is a sidewalk, the height of the sign shall be measured
from the elevation of the sidewalk.
§ 500-2803 ZONING § 500-2803
500:217
§ 500-2804. Placement of signs.
In no case, except for official traffic and street signs, shall any sign be erected so that it:
§ 500-2805. Exempted signs. [Amended 3-23-1999 by Ord. No. 99-04]
The following signs are permitted in all districts and do not require a permit, provided
the applicable conditions and uses have been met:
(2) For a projecting, wall or roof sign, the maximum height shall be determined
by the height of the facade of the building.
D. Illumination of signs. No directly or indirectly illuminated sign shall violate the
provisions of § 500-2505 of this chapter. Illumination of billboards, commercial
outdoor advertising signs and monument displays shall be governed by
§ 500-2811D and § 500-2812, as applicable. [Amended 1-17-2017 by Ord. No.
17-01]
E. Supports. Effective January 1, 2000, the use of wire supports for any sign permitted
to be placed in the right-of-way or on government-owned property is prohibited.
Wire supports necessary for signs not located in the right-of-way or on governmentowned
property shall not encroach into any right-of-way or onto any governmentowned
property.
A. Lies within 10 feet of or projects over a point within 10 feet of the ultimate rightof-
way of any street or is within 10 feet of the shoulder or curb, whichever is
greater, with the specific exception that such placement of political signs shall be
permitted if done in compliance with all other provisions regarding political signs.
B. Lies within the clear sight triangle. The requirements of § 500-2308 of this chapter
and Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development, § 440-416A, Corner sight
distance (clear sight triangle), shall be met.
C. Obscures a motorist's view of traffic signals, stop signs or other warning devices as
viewed from a distance of 500 feet along established thoroughfares.
D. Obscures a motorist's view of roadway or intersections ahead as viewed from a
distance of 500 feet along established thoroughfares.
E. Limits a pedestrian's view of vehicular traffic to less than 500 feet while he stands
inside the curbline at an intersection or other established crossing point.
F. Lies within a distance of 20 feet from either side yard property line.
G. Lies within a parking space or fire lane.
H. Blocks the movement of pedestrians traveling on public thoroughfares.
I. Blocks the entrance, exit, fire escape or fire lane to a building.
A. Official highway route number signs, street name signs, directional or other traffic
signs may be erected on public roads and highways in the interest of public safety.
B. Signs displaying the name and address of the occupant of the premises, provided
§ 500-2803 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2805
500:218
that the area of any such sign shall not exceed 120 square inches and not more than
one such sign shall be erected for each occupant of a premises, unless such property
fronts on more than one street; in which case, one such sign may be erected on each
street frontage.
C. No-trespassing signs, signs indicating the prohibition or control of fishing, hunting
etc., or signs indicating the private nature of a road, provided the area of any such
sign does not exceed 216 square inches.
D. Real estate signs shall be permitted, provided that the area of any such sign shall
not exceed six square feet in all residential districts and 12 square feet in all other
districts and that not more than one such sign shall be placed on property held in
single and separate ownership unless the property fronts on more than one street; in
which case, one such sign shall be permitted along each street. All such signs shall
be removed within 10 days after a settlement of sale, lease or rental has been
entered into.
E. Legal notices.
F. Public service and information signs advertising the availability of rest rooms,
telephones or similar public conveniences; also, signs advertising meeting times
and places of nonprofit service or charitable organizations. These signs may be
erected, provided they do not advertise any commercial establishment, activity,
organization, product, goods or service, except those of public utilities. Any such
sign shall not exceed four square feet.
G. Vending machine signs bearing the brand name of a product or the price of such
product when displayed on a vending machine selling such product.
H. Bulletin or announcement board signs for institutional, nonprofit service or
charitable organizations, provided that the area of any one side of such sign shall
not exceed 16 square feet.
I. Memorial signs or historical signs or tablets, provided such sign or tablet does not
exceed four square feet.
J. Window signs giving store hours or the name or names of credit or charge
institutions, provided the total area of any sign or all signs together does not exceed
two square feet.
K. Temporary window signs, including community special event signs, provided such
signs take up no more than 50% of the window area.
L. Signs which are a permanent architectural feature of a building or structure, such as
a cornerstone, or identifying letters carved into or embossed on a building, provided
the letters are not made of a reflective material nor contrast in color with the
building.
M. Mechanics' or artisans' signs may be erected during the period such persons are
performing work on the premises on which such signs are erected, provided that
such signs shall be removed upon completion of work by the mechanic or artisan,
and the total area for all such signs shall not exceed six square feet. Not more than
one such sign shall be placed on any given property on which such person is
§ 500-2805 ZONING § 500-2805
500:219
§ 500-2806. Nonconforming signs.
§ 500-2807. Prohibitions.
performing work unless such property fronts on more than one street; in which case,
one such sign shall be permitted along each street. All such signs shall be removed
immediately upon completion of the work.
N. Bunting, pennants and similar materials are permitted to announce the opening of a
new business or industry and must be removed seven days after the opening day or
the first day of business. The owner/user of the business or industry shall inform the
Township Zoning Officer in writing of the opening day or the first day of business.
Such notice shall be submitted at least 14 days prior to the opening day or the first
day of business.
O. Revolving barbershop pole sign, provided that it does not exceed 36 inches in
height and that it is erected only in a commercial district.
P. Signs advertising a yard sale are permitted, provided the signs do not exceed four
square feet in area, remain up only during the sale, and do not appear more than
once every six months on the same premises. Not more than one such sign shall be
placed on any given property on which the yard sale shall occur unless such
property fronts on more than one street; in which case, one such sign shall be
permitted along each street. Not more than three such signs may be placed offpremises
to provide direction to the yard sale.
Q. Opinion sign, provided it is erected in accordance with § 500-2809B(6).
A. Any sign legally existing at the time of the passage of this chapter that does not
conform in use, location, height or size with the regulations of the district in which
such sign is located shall be considered a nonconforming sign and shall be bound
by the regulations of this chapter regarding nonconforming signs.
B. A sign on a building or structure which does not conform to this chapter shall be
removed when the building or structure is demolished or when the fair market value
of the cost of the building or structure renovation or expansion exceeds 50% of the
fair market value of the building or structure as determined by applying the formula
set forth in the Annual Certification of the Pennsylvania State Tax Equalization
Board to the value of the building or structure as assessed by the Bucks County
Board of Tax Assessment.
C. A sign not conforming to this chapter shall be removed when the sign requires any
structural renovation or the background area of the sign is to be altered.
D. A nonconforming sign must be removed within 14 days or be made to conform to
this chapter in every respect, whenever:
(1) It is not firmly attached to the ground or some other object and can be easily
moved.
(2) It becomes so deteriorated that it no longer serves a useful purpose of
communication and is a nuisance as determined by the Township.
§ 500-2805 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2807
500:220
A. Zoning information. With the exceptions of billboards, commercial outdoor
advertising signs, monument displays and off-premises signs, no sign shall be
erected on a property containing information that the subject property may be used
for any purpose not permitted in the zoning district in which the subject property is
located. [Amended 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-01]
B. Prohibited signs. The following signs are unlawful and prohibited:
(1) Any banner, pennant or novelty-type sign suspended between poles and
lighted by a series of lights is prohibited.
(2) A sign that uses any method of illumination that can cause glare is prohibited,
except in accordance with the following:
(a) It must be so effectively shielded that glaring beams or rays of light are
not directed to any portion of any street, highway or adjacent property or
structure.
(b) It must be less than 1/4 footcandle, as measured from the curbline or
shoulder, so as not to cause glare or impair the vision of any motorist or
otherwise interfere with the driver's operation of his motor vehicle.
(3) No sign may use the words "Stop," "Look," "Danger" or any word or character
which attempts or appears to attempt to direct the movement of traffic or
which interferes with or resembles any official traffic sign, signal or device
within 75 feet of a public right-of-way or within 200 feet of a traffic control
device, whichever is greater.
(4) Except for traffic control signals, red and green lights are prohibited within 75
feet of a public right-of-way or 200 feet of a traffic control device signal,
whichever is greater.
(5) Except for temporary community special event signs, any sign erected on a
utility pole, street identification sign, traffic control sign or device, streetlight
pole, traffic signal pole, tree or other natural feature is prohibited.
(6) Any banner, pennant or novelty sign or sign of any other type is prohibited
across a public street or on any private property, except for such signs which
are approved by the Board of Supervisors, as a conditional use, to be of general
benefit to the Township or for public convenience, necessity or welfare. No
application for such conditional use shall be granted unless such application
includes written approval for installation of such sign from the owner of the
public street, right-of-way or private property and the owner of any utility
poles or streetlight poles located within the public street, right-of-way or
private property and a specified date for removal of the sign. [Amended
5-20-2005 by Ord. No. 08-05]
(7) Any sign suspended between poles which is either a banner, pennant or
novelty sign which blows in the wind or a spinner which spins in the wind is
prohibited. Refer to § 500-2805 for exceptions.
(8) Any sign is prohibited which does not conform to the requirements of the sign
regulations which were in effect when the sign was erected.
§ 500-2807 ZONING § 500-2807
500:221
§ 500-2808. Permits; construction and maintenance; violations.
(9) Any sign which is not included under the types of signs permitted in district
regulations or in this article.
(10) Any portable sign, except as permitted under the provisions of this article.
(11) Festoon lights.
(12) Snipe signs.
(13) Signs painted directly on walls.
C. Violations. A sign in violation of Subsections A and B above shall be removed
within 14 days of notice from the Township that such sign must be removed.
A. Permits required.
(1) A permit must be obtained from the Township before the erecting of all signs
erected in the Township, unless specifically exempted herein.
(2) Exemptions from the necessity of securing a permit, however, shall not be
construed to relieve the owner of the sign involved from responsibility for its
erection in a safe manner and in a manner in accord with all the other
provisions of this chapter.
(3) Before any permit is granted for the erection of a sign or sign structure, plans
and specifications shall be filed with the Township, showing:
(a) The dimensions of the sign and, where applicable, the dimensions of the
wall surface of the building to which it is to be attached.
(b) The dimensions of the sign's supporting members.
(c) The maximum height of the sign.
(d) The proposed location of the sign in relation to the face of the building in
front of which or above which it is to be erected.
(e) The proposed location of the sign in relation to the boundaries of the lot
upon which it is to be situated.
(f) Where the sign is to be attached to an existing building, a current
photograph of the face of the building to which the sign is to be attached.
(g) The materials, finish and details of construction, including loads, stresses,
anchorage and any other pertinent engineering data.
(h) Plans for signs with a proposed area greater than 100 square feet shall be
prepared and sealed by a structural engineer.
(i) The application for a permit shall be accompanied by the written consent
of the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is to be erected
for Township officials to enter said premises to inspect such sign.
§ 500-2807 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2808
500:222
(4) The following changes to a sign do not require a permit:
(a) The changing of movable parts of an approved changeable copy sign that
is designed for such changes or the repainting or reposting of display
matter shall not be deemed an alteration, provided the conditions of the
original approval and requirements of this article are not violated.
(b) The changing of the advertising copy or message of a painted, plastic face
or printed sign only. Except for signs specifically designed for the use of
replaceable copy, electric signs shall not be include in this exception.
(c) The electrical, repainting or cleaning maintenance of a sign.
(d) The repair of a sign.
(e) Permit fees to erect a sign shall be in accordance with the sign fee
schedule adopted by the Township.
B. Construction requirements. All signs shall meet the design and construction
requirements of the International Building Code, together with any and all other
applicable building codes then in effect within the Township. All electrical signs
shall meet the design and construction requirements of the International Electrical
Code, together with any and all other applicable electrical codes then in effect
within the Township.
C. Maintenance requirements. Every sign permitted by this chapter must be
constructed of durable materials and kept in good condition and repair.
D. Removal or abandonment of signs.
(1) The owner of any property or premises upon which any sign is erected shall be
responsible for its complete removal at such time as the circumstances which
caused its erection have ceased to exist or at such other time that the sign must
be removed under any other provisions of this chapter. If the owner of any
property upon which a sign has been erected shall fail or neglect to render it as
hereinabove required, the Zoning Officer shall give notice to remove the sign
by certified mail to the owner. If this letter is returned undelivered for any
reason, he may post such notice upon the premises. If upon the expiration of
30 days following notice the owner fails to remove the sign, the Zoning Officer
shall arrange for its removal on behalf of the Township and shall bill the owner
for the cost of such work plus 10% for administrative cost. If such bill remains
unpaid after the expiration of 30 days, the Township Solicitor shall take the
necessary steps to collect the same. Failure of a property owner to remove such
sign after the notice hereinabove provided shall constitute a violation of the
terms of this chapter, and each day's continuance of such failure shall
constitute a separate violation.
(2) If the owner of any sign in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is
not the owner of the premises on which it is situated, the identical notices
specified above may be issued to him in like manner, and such owner of the
sign shall be required to take such steps to comply with the notice or notices
issued to him as though he were the owner of the property or premises on
§ 500-2808 ZONING § 500-2808
500:223
which the sign is located. If such owner of the sign fails to comply, such failure
shall constitute a violation of the terms of this chapter. Such owner of the sign
shall be liable to the same extent as the owner of the property or premises on
which the sign is located.
E. Unsafe and unlawful signs. If the Zoning Officer finds that any sign regulated
herein is unsafe or insecure or is a menace to the public or has been constructed,
erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, he shall give
notice to remove or alter the sign to comply with this chapter in the same manner
as in Subsection D above to the party to whom the permit was issued to erect the
sign or to the owner of the sign or to any combination of them. If the parties notified
fail to remove or alter the sign to comply with the standards herein set forth within
30 days after notice, such sign may be removed or altered by the Building Inspector
at the expense of each and every person notified. The expenses of the removal or
alteration shall be computed and paid for by the parties notified in the same manner
as in Subsection D above, and the same sanctions shall apply. The Building
Inspector may cause any sign or other advertising structure which is in immediate
peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice.
F. Annual registration and inspection of certain signs.
(1) For all signs not exempted under this chapter, whether or not such signs have
been erected prior to the adoption of this subsection, the owner of the premises
upon which the sign is erected and maintained (or, in the case of leased
property, the tenant) shall annually, before January 15 of the year following
the year in which a permit for such sign has been secured, pay the registration
fee in the amount established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors for
each and every sign required to be registered under the provisions of this
subsection.
(2) With the annual registration, the applicant shall submit a statement by which
the applicant agrees to indemnify and save harmless the Township against any
loss, damage, costs and expenses which the Township may hereafter suffer,
incur, be put to, or pay by reason of any claims resulting from the erection of
the sign and agrees to pay and discharge forthwith on demand of the Township
each and every claim, obligation or judgment against said Township resulting
from the erection of said sign.
G. Insurance. It shall be unlawful for any individual, partnership, corporation or other
entity to erect, repair or maintain electrical signs, regardless of size or location, or
nonelectrical signs which are higher than 10 feet above grade or larger than 24
square feet without submitting a certificate of insurance to the Building Inspector's
office in the amount of $100,000 and $300,000 personal injury liability and $35,000
property damage.
H. Licensing. In the case of a proposed erection or repair of any electrical or neon sign,
or any nonelectrical sign 24 square feet in size or 10 feet above grade, no permit for
the erection of such sign or signs shall be issued until after the applicant has
complied with the following provisions:
(1) The erector or its agent or employees shall apply for and obtain an annual
license for the erection of signs of this category with a fee established by
§ 500-2808 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2808
500:224
§ 500-2809. Signs permitted in residential districts. [Amended 3-23-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-04]
In RA-1, RA-2, RA-3, OR, R-1, R-2, R-3, MR, RC and MHP Districts, the following
standards shall govern:
resolution of the Board of Supervisors to be paid to the Township for such
license.
(2) Such license shall be obtained or renewed annually for the calendar year
period beginning January 1 of each year or at such later time that such sign
erection company wishes to obtain its first permit for the erection or repair of
a sign of this category in Middletown Township.
(3) The fee for the annual renewal of the license shall be established by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors.
A. General regulations.
(1) Freestanding signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions of this
section; provided, however, that no such sign shall exceed a height of seven
feet.
(2) Animated, changeable copy, commercial outdoor advertising, portable,
projecting, revolving, roof, directly illuminated, and indirectly illuminated
signs are prohibited, except as specifically permitted in Subsection B(5)
hereof.
B. On-premises signs.
(1) Construction signs which identify the name of a subdivision, development or
the developer are permitted, provided that the aggregate area of the sign shall
not exceed a maximum of 40 square feet. Not more than one such sign shall be
placed on property held in single and separate ownership unless the property
fronts on more than one street; in which case, one such sign shall be permitted
along each street. Such signs shall be removed within 20 days after the last
structure has been satisfactorily inspected for Building Code compliance by
the Township.
(2) Signs or bulletin boards of schools, colleges, churches, hospitals, sanitariums,
cemeteries, nonprofit clubs, and other nonprofit institutions of a similar nature
or signs indicating the name of a particular organization, farm or estate, or
nonprofit organization are permitted, provided that the size of any such sign is
not in excess of 40 square feet. Not more than one such sign may be placed on
any property held in single and separate ownership unless the property fronts
on more than one street; in which case, one such sign shall be permitted along
each street frontage.
(3) Directional signs, such as entrance signs or exit signs, provided that such signs
do not advertise any commercial establishment, activity, organization,
product, goods or services. Such sign shall not exceed two square feet in size
and eight feet in height.
§ 500-2808 ZONING § 500-2809
500:225
(4) Professional, home occupation or name sign indicating the profession, activity
or name of the occupant of a dwelling, provided the following conditions are
met.
(a) The size of such sign shall not exceed 120 square inches.
(b) Not more than one such sign shall be erected for each permitted use or
dwelling unit.
(c) Any such sign shall be erected only on premises wherein the professional
use or home occupation is located. No such sign shall be indirectly
illuminated.
(5) One nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated sign at the principal access street
or access drive to a residential development or complex, indicating the name
of such area or complex and, in the case of a rental complex, the name of the
owner or management organization, subject to the following requirements:
(a) The size of any such sign shall not exceed 24 square feet.
(b) Such a sign may be located on lands of the rental complex or on common
open lands, provided all other setback or location restrictions are
observed.
(6) Opinion signs are permitted, provided that:
(a) The size of any such sign to be placed on a single lot shall not exceed six
square feet with an aggregate area limitation per single lot of 12 square
feet.
(b) A freestanding or wall sign is permitted.
(c) Such sign shall not be illuminated.
(d) Setbacks shall be in compliance with the provisions of § 500-2804.
C. Off-premises signs.
(1) Political signs are permitted, provided that:
(a) The size of any such sign to be placed on a single lot shall not exceed 12
square feet with an aggregate area limitation per single lot of 24 square
feet.
(b) When placed in a road right-of-way, political signs shall not be located in
such a way as to constitute a hazard to motorists or pedestrians and shall
be set back an appropriate distance from the edge of pavement or curb so
as not to obstruct the vision of motorists or pedestrians. The size of any
such sign to be placed within the road right-of-way shall not exceed 32
square feet. In addition, effective January 1, 2000, the use of wire
supports for political signs placed within the right-of-way or on
government-owned property is prohibited.
(c) No such sign shall be erected on a utility pole, street identification sign,
§ 500-2809 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2809
500:226
§ 500-2810. Signs permitted in A-O, OC and P Districts.
In the A-O Apartment-Office, OC Office Campus, and P Professional Districts, the
following standards shall govern:
traffic control sign or device, streetlight pole, traffic signal pole, tree or
other natural feature.
(d) Such signs shall not be posted earlier than 60 days prior to the election to
which such signs relate.
(e) The erector of such signs or an authorized agent of the political party or
candidate applies for and obtains a permit from the Township Zoning
Officer and deposits with the Township at the time of his application the
sums established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors as a guarantee
that all such signs will be removed promptly within 10 days after the date
of the election to which such signs relate. If such signs are not removed
at the end of the ten-day period, the Township may have them removed
and retain such sums from the deposit in an amount equal to the expense
incurred by the Township for such removal. The Township reserves the
right to collect from the applicant any such expenses not covered by the
deposit.
(2) Community special event signs are permitted, provided that:
(a) No such sign shall exceed 25 square feet in area.
(b) Signs shall not be posted earlier than four weeks before the occurrence of
the exhibit, show or event and shall be removed within five days after the
termination of the exhibit, show or event.
(c) A maximum of four such signs may be permitted within the Township for
any one exhibit, show or event.
(d) No permit shall be issued for the erection of such signs until a deposit has
been paid in an amount established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors. If such signs are not removed within five days after the
termination of the exhibit, show or event, the Township may have them
removed and keep from the sum deposited an amount equal to the
expenses incurred by the Township for such removal. The Township
reserves the right to collect from the applicant any such expenses not
covered by the deposit.
A. General regulations.
(1) Freestanding signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions of this
section; provided, however, that no such sign shall exceed a maximum height
of 12 feet.
(2) Animated, changeable copy, commercial outdoor advertising, portable,
projecting, revolving and roof signs are prohibited.
B. On-premises signs.
§ 500-2809 ZONING § 500-2810
500:227
(1) Any sign permitted in the RA-1, RA-2, RA-3, OR, R-1, R-2, R-3, MR, RC and
MHP Districts shall be permitted in accordance with § 500-2809 of this
chapter.
(2) For any one property or parcel, one freestanding or one wall sign, erected as
an identification sign, including a directory of occupants of an apartment
building or development, of an office building, or of other permitted uses, shall
be permitted. The area of one side of any freestanding sign shall not exceed 40
square feet and not more than one such sign shall be erected on a premises held
in single and separate ownership unless such premises fronts on more than one
street; in which case, one such sign may be erected on each street frontage.
The maximum height of such freestanding sign shall not exceed 12 feet. The
area of such wall sign shall not exceed 40 square feet, and such sign shall be
placed below the eaves of a roof and no higher than the parapet of a wall.
(3) For any one use, one wall sign may be erected unless such premises fronts on
more than one street; in which case, one such sign may be erected on each
street frontage. The area of such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet. Such
sign shall be placed below the eaves of a roof or no higher than the parapet of
a wall.
(4) The use of portable signs shall be permitted in accordance with the following
provisions:
(a) The use of portable signs, on a permanent basis, is prohibited in all zoning
districts.
(b) The temporary use of portable signs shall be permitted only in the P
Professional District.
(c) "Temporary use" shall mean the use of any such sign on any one premises
no more than 20 days per calendar year.
(d) The temporary use of such signs shall be in accordance with the
placement regulations and area requirements for freestanding signs.
(e) Application for a portable sign permit must be made to the Township
accompanied by a cash deposit in an amount to be set by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors as a guarantee that the portable display shall be
promptly and completely removed at the end of the period authorized.
(f) Any portable sign which is electrically energized or which contains any
electrical device must conform to the same requirements and standards
which cover permanent electric signs under this chapter.
(g) Portable signs may not revolve, be animated, include pennants, or have
flashing lights.
(h) Not more than one such sign shall be used at anytime on a premises held
in single and separate ownership.
C. Off-premises signs. Any such sign as permitted in the RA-1, RA-2, RA-3, OR, R-1,
R-2, R-3, MR, RC and MHP Districts shall be permitted in accordance with
§ 500-2810 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2810
500:228
§ 500-2811. Signs permitted in commercial districts.
In the C Commercial, CS Shopping Center, and GB General Business Districts, the
following standards shall govern:
§ 500-2809 of this chapter.
A. General regulations. Except as specifically permitted in § 500-2811D, below,
animated signs, billboards, commercial outdoor advertising, monument displays,
projecting signs, revolving signs, portable signs and roof signs are prohibited.
[Amended 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-01]
B. On-premises signs.
(1) Any sign, except portable signs, permitted in the A-O Apartment-Office, OC
Office Campus, and P Professional Districts shall be permitted in accordance
with § 500-2810 of this chapter; provided, however, whenever the
requirements of this section for such signs are in conflict with the requirements
of § 500-2810 the most restrictive or the section imposing the higher standards
shall govern.
(2) Freestanding signs.
(a) Number of signs. There shall be only one freestanding sign per premises,
except as follows:
[1] For a premises that fronts on more than one street, there may be one
freestanding sign per each yard fronting on a street.
[2] For a premises with more than 500 lineal feet of frontage on a street,
there may be one freestanding sign per each 500 feet of frontage or
portion thereof.
(b) Sign area and height. The maximum sign area per frontage and the
maximum height per sign shall be determined by the length of frontage
per premises in accordance with Table 1. The maximum size of any one
sign shall be 150 square feet. The maximum height of any sign shall be
determined in accordance with Table 1 based on the sign area.
§ 500-2810 ZONING § 500-2811
500:229
Table 1
a. Freestanding signs which front on Old Lincoln Highway, Lincoln
Highway, Woodhouse Road, New Rogers Road and Oxford Valley
Road, where these are four lanes.
b. Freestanding signs which face on all other roads.
(3) Wall and permanent window signs. In lieu of a projecting sign as provided in
Subsection B(4) below, a wall or permanent widow sign may be erected in
accordance with the following provisions:
(a) Number of signs. There shall be no more than one wall or permanent
window sign per facade per occupant.
(b) Sign height. Such signs shall be placed below the eaves of a roof or no
higher than a parapet of a wall.
(c) Sign area. For signs placed on facades fronting on a street, such signs
§ 500-2811 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2811
500:230
shall not exceed 10% of the facade area or that portion of such facade
which is devoted to such establishment or 100 square feet, whichever is
less. For signs fronting on rear or side yards and not on a street, such
signs shall not exceed 5% of the facade area or that portion of such facade
which is devoted to such establishment or 60 square feet, whichever is
less.
(4) Projecting signs. In lieu of a wall or permanent window sign as provided in
Subsection B(3) above, a projecting sign may be erected in accordance with
the following provisions:
(a) Such signs shall have a sign area no greater than eight square feet per side
and a minimum clearance of 10 feet from the sidewalk and shall be
mounted as nearly as possible perpendicular to the building face.
(b) One such sign may be permitted for each entrance to a facility served by
a canopy or other pedestrian walkway, provided that they do not exceed
eight square feet in area.
(5) Time and/or temperature signs.
(a) Time and/or temperature signs shall be displayed only as a part of a
freestanding or a wall sign, subject to all regulations applying to those
signs.
(b) Any such device with alternating messages shall display each message
for not less than three seconds.
(6) Changeable copy sign.
(a) A changeable copy sign shall be displayed only as a part of a freestanding
or wall sign, subject to all regulations applying to those signs.
(b) The changeable copy sign shall not exceed 1/3 of the total proposed area
of the wall or freestanding sign.
(c) Any such device with alternating messages shall display each message
for not less than three seconds.
(7) Commercial directional sign. On-premises directional signs which are
designed and erected solely for the purpose of traffic or pedestrian direction
on properties on which the principal use is a commercial establishment.
(a) Such signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in size.
(b) The message on such signs shall be limited to direction, hours of
operation, or building identification or purpose.
(c) Such signs shall be placed so as to meet the requirements of § 500-2804,
Placement of signs, except that one such sign may be placed at an
entrance or exit to the property. The message on such sign shall be limited
to the words "enter," "exit," "entrance," "in," "out," or similar words of
direction. The sign shall be placed to ensure proper sight distance in
accordance with § 500-2804B and shall not exceed four square feet in
§ 500-2811 ZONING § 500-2811
500:231
area.
C. Off-premises signs. Any such sign as permitted in the RA-1, RA-2, RA-3, OR, R-1,
R-2, R-3, MR, RC and MHP Districts shall be permitted in accordance with
§ 500-2809 of this chapter.
D. Monument displays. [Added 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-01]
(1) A monument display is permitted in the C Commercial District subject to the
following regulations:
(a) The monument display shall be located along Lincoln Highway (Business
U.S. Route 1).
(b) The monument display shall be located within:
[1] Three hundred feet of the center of the intersection of Lincoln
Highway (Business U.S. Route 1) and Oxford Valley Road (SR
2029); or
[2] Three hundred feet of the center of the intersection of Lincoln
Highway (Business U.S. Route 1) and New Rodgers Road/Veterans
Highway (SR 413).
(c) A monument display may constitute another principal use on a lot.
(d) A monument display may display on-premises and off-premises
commercial advertising.
(e) A monument display shall provide availability and display time for
municipal, civic and emergency messaging.
(f) Maximum active area. The maximum active area of a monument display
shall be 490 square feet per each sign face with a monument display
having no more than three separate active areas each oriented towards
distinct roadways directions.
(g) Monument display height. The maximum height of a monument display
structure shall not exceed 45 feet when measured from the grade of the
road from which the monument display structure is primarily intended to
be viewed.
(h) Spacing. No monument display shall be located within 500 feet of
another monument sign display.
(i) Setbacks.
[1] Maximum setback from the legal or existing right-of-way. The
nearest edge of the active area of a monument display shall be
located no more than 35 feet from the edge of the legal or existing
right-of-way of the roadway from which the monument display is
intended to be primarily visible.
[2] Minimum setback from existing residences. A monument display
§ 500-2811 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2811
500:232
shall be a minimum of 400 feet from any existing single-family
detached residence at the time a monument display permit
application is submitted.
(j) Illumination. A monument sign may be illuminated, provided that:
[1] The illumination for a monument display shall incorporate a
minimum of three types of visual communication technology
(VCT).
[2] All monument displays shall incorporate ambient light sensors that
measure the levels of surrounding light and automatically reduce the
intensity of illumination during periods of darkness or increase the
intensity of illumination during periods of brightness.
(k) A monument display using light-emitting diodes (LEDs) as its VCT shall
have a resolution of 16 mm or better.
(l) Intensity of illumination. No monument display shall exceed a maximum
illumination intensity of 500 nits during nighttime hours (dusk until
dawn) and 7,500 nits during daytime hours (dawn until dusk) when the
active area is in direct sunlight.
(m) Maximum light spillage or glare. A monument display shall not spill light
or glare exceeding 0.3 footcandles of light above the ambient light levels
measured in accordance with this section.
§ 500-2811 ZONING § 500-2811
500:233
[1] Light spillage or glare shall be measured by a professional lighting
consultant, hereinafter referred to as the "Lighting Inspector," and
shall be performed by the Township, upon completion of
construction of the monument sign and prior to the issuance of a
permit for the operation of the monument display. A follow-up
inspection shall be performed by the Lighting Inspector 12 months
from the date of the issuance of the permit for the operation of the
monument display. At any time, on demand and upon 15 days' prior
written notice by the Township, additional inspections may be
requested and performed by the Township. The Lighting Inspector
shall use a properly calibrated low-level footcandle light metering
device with a two-decimal-place capability at a height of five feet
above the grade of the monument display held at a preset distance
from the monument display called the "illuminance measurement
distance," which is calculated in accordance with the formula below.
The Lighting Inspector shall aim the light meter toward the
monument display perpendicular from the illuminance measurement
distance. When a measurement from the required distance is
obstructed by private property, a building, or other permanent
structure, the measurement shall be taken from the furthest possible
perpendicular extent.
Illuminance Measurement Distance = √(Active VCT area x
100\(Sq. Ft.))
[2] In order to determine the ambient light level, the Lighting Inspector
shall employ one of two methods at his or her discretion as follows:
[a] Inactive monument display. Upon 24 hours' notice to the
monument display operator, the Lighting Inspector can require
the operator to momentarily turn off the active area, during
which time the Lighting Inspector shall position the light meter
at an elevation of five feet above the grade at the illuminance
measurement distance. Immediately following measurement of
the ambient light level, the active area shall be turned back on,
whereupon the Lighting Inspector shall measure the light
spillage or glare emanating from the active area to determine
compliance.
[b] Active monument display. The Lighting Inspector shall aim the
light meter toward the active area but shall place an opaque
black sheet of material that is of an appropriate size to obstruct
the light meter from reading any light emanating from the
active area. A material size of 12 inches high by 40 inches is
recommended but subject to the discretion of the Lighting
Inspector. The material should be placed at a distance of 10 feet
away from the Lighting Inspector in between the monument
display and the Lighting Inspector. Please see Diagram A
below for an illustration.
§ 500-2811 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2811
500:234
Diagram A: Measuring Ambient Light Level
[i] If measuring the illumination intensity during daytime
hours (dawn to dusk), the Lighting Inspector shall conduct
the measurement within a time frame of at least 30
minutes after dawn and 30 minutes before dusk. If
measuring during nighttime hours (dusk to dawn), the
Lighting Inspector shall conduct the measurement within
a time frame of at least 60 minutes after dusk but 60
minutes before dawn.
[ii] All light meter measurements shall be represented by two
circles, a larger field of view circle and a smaller target
area circle inside the view finder. The Lighting Inspector
shall position the target area circle so it falls entirely
within the brightest portion of the active area that is being
measured, as outlined in Diagram B below.
Diagram B: Measuring Ambient Light Level
[3] A monument display shall not use an active area background
consisting of bright white.
(n) Automatic changeable copy. A monument display may have changeable
copy, provided that:
[1] Dwell time. No monument display shall change message or copy on
the active area more than once every seven seconds.
[2] Message or copy transition. All message or copy changes shall be
instantaneous; there shall be no scrolling, fading, animated, flashing
or moving messages or copy.
(o) Operation and maintenance.
[1] Hours of operation. The hours of operation of a monument display
§ 500-2811 ZONING § 500-2811
500:235
shall be 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, and the monument display
shall be turned off between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00
a.m.
[2] Maintenance. The owner or operator of the monument display shall
continuously maintain the monument display structure and
surrounding associated area. At its discretion, the Township may
perform annual inspections of the monument display to determine
compliance with the monument display permit. Any noncompliance
shall be corrected (or commercial reasonable shall be taken) within
30 days of written notice from the Township. Every five years, or
more frequently if the Township believes it necessary, the owner or
operator of the monument display structure shall have a
Pennsylvania-registered structural engineer inspect the monument
display structure and provide the Township with a certificate from
the engineer certifying that the monument display structure is
structurally sound.
(p) Landscaping.
[1] Any and all landscaping associated with the monument display shall
be submitted to the Township for review and approval as part of the
monument display permit application.
[2] Any monument display design that incorporates landscaping shall
require the owner and operator (the entity, person, or individual who
owns the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation outdoor
advertising sign permit for the specific monument display) to
permanently maintain the landscaping and to execute a maintenance
agreement with the Township that will include the posting of escrow
in an amount sufficient to replace any diseased or dead landscaping
in the event the owner and/or operator fails to do so.
(q) Restrictions. A monument display shall not:
[1] Advertise adult or sexually oriented businesses or materials, hate
speech, advertisements related to abortion, or otherwise display any
content prohibited by 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903.
[2] Advertise obscene or profane language.
[3] Emit any verbal or musical announcements or noises.
[4] Display any moving, flashing, scrolling or animated text or video.
(r) Architectural requirements. The architecture of a monument display shall
incorporate visual art or architecture elements in addition to its messaging
function, thereby creating a unique or distinctive architectural design.
[1] As part of the monument display permit application, the applicant
shall submit conceptual architectural renderings elevations of the
monument display and the surrounding area and built environment
in a three-dimensional software platform, together with a general list
§ 500-2811 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2811
500:236
§ 500-2812. Signs permitted in manufacturing districts.
In the M-1 Manufacturing Districts the following standards shall govern.
of proposed building materials for review and approval by the
Township.
[2] A monument display design shall incorporate one or more of the
following architectural elements: stone, stucco, wood, brick,
ornamental iron or decorative steel.
[3] The Township may require a monument display to display the name
of the municipality as part of the structure.
(s) Monument display permit application procedure. A monument display
application shall be submitted, reviewed and approved under the
Township's standard building permit process. A monument display shall
not require subdivision and land development approval.
[1] The Township shall review and issue its comments to any proposed
monument display architecture within 60 days of submission of a
monument sign display permit application and any subsequent
revised submissions.
[2] Revisions to a proposed monument display architecture or design
shall not be considered a substantial amendment requiring a formal
resubmission of a monument display permit application.
[3] Based upon comments received from the Township, the applicant
shall be permitted to revise the monument display design as many
times as may be necessary to obtain architecture and design
approval.
A. On-premises signs.
(1) Any sign, except portable signs, permitted in all other districts shall be
permitted in accordance with §§ 500-2809, 500-2810 and 500-2811 herein;
provided, however, whenever the requirements of this section for such signs
are in conflict with the requirements of §§ 500-2809, 500-2810 and 500-2811
the most restrictive or the section imposing the higher standards shall govern.
(2) Animated signs. A sign may be animated, provided that the total cycle of
motion or illumination does not exceed six times per minute.
(3) Projecting signs.
(a) Projecting signs are permitted, provided the area of such sign does not
exceed one square foot for each two lineal feet of building frontage which
is perpendicular to the sign. No projecting sign may be larger than 50
square feet nor may any projecting sign extend in a vertical dimension
above the roofline or highest architectural point of a building.
(b) Projecting signs shall have a minimum clearance of 10 feet between the
§ 500-2811 ZONING § 500-2812
500:237
bottom of the sign and the ground and, if projecting over a public
sidewalk, may project not more than 2/3 the width of the sidewalk.
(c) Projecting signs may exist instead of but not in addition to freestanding
signs on a given premises. Where a premises is allowed two or more
freestanding signs, a projecting sign may be used to substitute for one of
the freestanding signs.
(4) Revolving signs. Such signs shall be permitted in accordance with the
regulations in this section for freestanding signs, provided they do not exceed
four revolutions per minute.
(5) Roof signs.
(a) The maximum area of a roof sign shall not exceed 5% of the total area of
the building facade upon which the roof sign sits.
(b) The maximum height that a roof sign may project above a parapet or
eaves of a building shall be equivalent to 20% of the height of the
building facade.
(c) Roof signs may exist instead of but not in addition to freestanding signs
on a given premises. Where a premises is allowed two or more
freestanding signs, a roof sign may be used to substitute for one of the
freestanding signs.
B. Off-premises signs.
(1) Any such sign as permitted in the RA-1, RA-2, RA-3, OR, R-1, R-2, R-3, MR,
RC and MHP Districts shall be permitted in accordance with § 500-2809 of
this chapter.
(2) Commercial outdoor advertising signs. [Amended 1-17-2017 by Ord. No.
17-01]
(a) General regulations.
[1] Only one commercial outdoor advertising sign may be erected on
each lot, and a lot may not be further subdivided in order to create
an additional commercial outdoor advertising sign.
[2] A commercial outdoor advertising sign may constitute a second
principal use on a lot.
[3] A commercial outdoor advertising sign shall be located on property
adjacent to and shall be directed only toward vehicular traffic
travelling on U.S. Route 1.
[4] A commercial outdoor advertising sign shall provide availability and
display time for municipal, civic and emergency messaging.
(b) Setbacks.
[1] No outdoor advertising sign shall be located any further than 175
§ 500-2812 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2812
500:238
feet from the centerline of U.S. Route 1.
[2] No outdoor advertising sign shall be constructed within 35 feet of
any side or rear property line.
(c) Spacing.
[1] No outdoor advertising sign shall be erected within 1,250 feet of
another outdoor advertising sign on the same side of the highway.
[2] No outdoor advertising sign shall be erected within 400 feet of an
existing single-family detached residence.
(d) Area and height.
[1] No outdoor advertising sign shall be permitted to exceed a maximum
sign area of 672 square feet in copy sign area. An outdoor
advertising sign is permitted to have two sides back to back or Vshaped
with a horizontal angle not greater than 90°, with each side
having a maximum copy sign area of 672 square feet.
[2] No outdoor advertising sign shall be permitted to exceed 45 feet in
height above the elevation of the highway directly opposite the
proposed sign.
(e) Illumination. An outdoor advertising sign may be illuminated in
accordance with § 500-2811D(1)(j) through (m).
(f) Changeable copy. An outdoor advertising sign may have changeable
copy, provided that:
[1] Dwell time. No outdoor advertising sign shall change message or
copy on the active area more than once every seven seconds.
[2] Message or copy transition. All message or copy changes shall be
instantaneous; there shall be no scrolling, fading, animated, flashing
or moving messages or copy.
[3] The outdoor advertising sign is more than 2,000 feet away from
another changeable copy outdoor advertising sign, regardless of
which side of the highway the other changeable outdoor advertising
sign is located.
(g) Restrictions. An outdoor advertising sign shall not:
[1] Advertise adult or sexually oriented businesses or materials, hate
speech, advertisements related to abortion, or otherwise display any
content prohibited by 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903.
[2] Advertise obscene or profane language.
[3] Emit any verbal or musical announcements or noises.
[4] Display any moving, flashing, scrolling or animated text or video.
§ 500-2812 ZONING § 500-2812
500:239
(h) Hours of operation. Commercial outdoor advertising signs may operate
continuously for successive twenty-four-hour periods.
§ 500-2812 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2812
500:240
ARTICLE XXIX
Nonconformities
§ 500-2901. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area or dimensions of which were lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE—A structure or part of a structure which does not
comply with the applicable area, dimensional, parking, buffer, environmental or other
provisions of this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such
structure lawfully existed prior to enactment of such ordinance or amendment. Such
nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure, which does not
comply with the applicable use provisions of this chapter or amendment heretofore
or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment
of such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance or
amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
§ 500-2902. Continuation.
The lawful use of a building or structure or the lawful use of any land as existing and
lawful at the time of the enactment of this chapter, or in the case of an amendment to
this chapter, then at the time of such amendment, may be continued except as hereinafter
provided, although such use or structure does not conform to the provisions of this
chapter or subsequent amendments.
§ 500-2903. Nonconforming lots.
A. A building may be erected on a vacant lot which is not of the required area or width,
provided a certificate of nonconformance has been issued for that lot by the Zoning
Hearing Board in accordance with the following:
(1) A certificate of nonconformance shall be issued for a vacant lot which has
been held in single and separate ownership since the effective date of the lot
area and width requirements applicable to that lot.
(2) If two or more contiguous vacant lots are in a single ownership as of or
subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, these lots shall be consolidated
to minimize the nonconformity.
B. If a building is erected or altered on a vacant lot pursuant to a certificate of
nonconformance, that building must comply with all applicable area and design
requirements except minimum lot area or width. Any other deviation from those
requirements shall be permitted only by variance.
C. Additions to buildings that already exist on a lot that does not have the required
minimum area or width for the underlying zoning district may be permitted, subject
§ 500-2901 ZONING § 500-2903
500:241
§ 500-2904. Extension of nonconforming uses and structures.
§ 500-2905. Restoration.
A nonconforming building or any building containing a nonconforming use, wholly or
partially destroyed by fire, explosion, flood or other phenomenon, or legally condemned,
may be reconstructed, provided that:
to compliance with the following procedure:
(1) Landowner shall submit an application for registration of a nonconforming lot
with the Zoning Officer.
(2) Landowner shall establish by submission of chain of ownership records that
the lot has been owned in single and separate ownership since the effective
date of the lot area and width requirements for the underlying zoning district.
D. Satisfaction of this requirement shall be solely within the jurisdiction of the Zoning
Officer.
A. A structure that does not conform with the area, dimensional, parking, buffer,
environmental and any other requirements of the district and this chapter may be
extended by right along the building lines of the existing nonconformity in keeping
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter.
B. A use that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is
located may be extended by special exception, provided that:
(1) The proposed extension shall take place only upon the lot or contiguous lots
held in single and separate ownership at the time the use became
nonconforming. Permission to extend a nonconforming use as described in this
article shall be construed to mean that a new use or uses may be established. A
nonconforming use, including off-street parking areas for such use, shall be
prohibited from encroaching on another parcel of land subsequently added to
the original parcel.
(2) The proposed extension shall conform with the setback, yard, area,
dimensional, building height, parking, buffer, sign, environmental and other
requirements of the district in which said extension is located, except as
permitted in Subsection A above.
(3) Any increase in building or floor area shall not exceed an aggregate of more
than 50% of the building or floor area, whichever is less, existent at the date
the use became nonconforming. Structures or land uses that have reached their
maximum expansion allowance under previous ordinances are not eligible for
any increase in building or floor area under this chapter. A structure which is
nonconforming in terms of height shall not be extended to increase the height.
A. A reconstructed building which contained a nonconforming use shall be used for
the same nonconforming use except in accordance with § 500-2907.
B. The reconstructed building shall not exceed in height, area and volume the building
destroyed or condemned, except in accordance with § 500-2904.
§ 500-2903 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-2905
500:242
§ 500-2906. Abandonment.
If a nonconforming use of a building or land is abandoned for a continuous period of
one year, subsequent use of such building shall be in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter. For the purpose of this chapter, abandonment shall commence when the
nonconforming use ceases.
§ 500-2907. Use changes.
C. Reconstruction of the building shall be commenced within one year from the date
the building was destroyed or condemned and shall be carried on without
interruption.
A. A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use only under all
of the following conditions:
(1) Such change shall be permitted only as a special exception by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
(2) The applicant shall show that a nonconforming use cannot reasonably be
changed to a permitted use.
(3) The applicant shall show that the proposed change will be less objectionable
in external effects than the existing nonconforming use with respect to:
(a) Traffic generation and congestion, including truck, passenger car, and
pedestrian traffic.
(b) Noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, heat, odor, glare or vibration.
(c) Storage and waste disposal.
(d) Appearance.
B. Once changed to a conforming use, no structure or land shall be permitted to revert
to a nonconforming use.
§ 500-2905 ZONING § 500-2907
500:243

ARTICLE XXX
Administration
§ 500-3001. Zoning Officer; duties and powers.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning Officer
in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code
(Act 247, as amended by Act 170).197 The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the
Township Board of Supervisors. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer, and he/she
shall have the power to:
A. Receive and examine all applications for zoning permits.
B. Issue permits only where there is compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
with other Township ordinances, and with the laws of the commonwealth and the
federal government. Permits for construction or uses requiring a special exception
or variance shall be issued only upon order of the Zoning Hearing Board. Permits
requiring approval by the Board of Supervisors shall be issued only after receipt of
approval from the Board of Supervisors.
C. Record and file all applications for zoning permits with accompanying plans and
documents and make such reports as the Board of Supervisors may require.
D. Receive applications for conditional uses, curative amendments and zoning
changes, forwarding requests and all pertinent information to the Board of
Supervisors, the Planning Commission, and other appropriate agencies.
E. Receive applications for special exceptions and variances and forward these
applications and all pertinent information to the Zoning Hearing Board for action
thereon.
F. Following refusal of a permit, receive applications for interpretation, appeals and
variances. These applications and all pertinent information will then be forwarded
to the Zoning Hearing Board for action thereon.
G. Conduct inspections and surveys to determine compliance or noncompliance with
the terms of this chapter.
H. Institute in the name of the Township any appropriate action or civil enforcement
proceedings (in accordance with §§ 500-3303 and 500-3304) to prevent unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or
use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation, so as to prevent the occupancy or
use of any building, structure, landscaping or land; or to prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business or use in or about such premises.198
I. Revoke any order or zoning permit issued under a mistake of fact or contrary to the
law or the provisions of this chapter.
J. Maintain a map (or maps) showing the current zoning classification of all land in
the Township.
197.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
198.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 500-3001 ZONING § 500-3002
500:245
§ 500-3002. Requirement of zoning permits.
A zoning permit shall be secured from the Zoning Officer prior to construction,
reconstruction, erection or alteration of any building, structure or portion thereof, any
change in the use of a building or land, and prior to the change or extension of a legal
nonconforming use. However, a zoning permit shall not be required for the following:
§ 500-3003. Application requirements for zoning permits. [Amended 8-16-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-09]
A. Alteration of an existing building not involving any exterior addition thereto.
However, a building permit shall be secured from the Building Inspector for this
purpose prior to commencing such an alteration.
B. Farm buildings situated 50 feet or more from any street or property line, but all such
farm buildings shall be erected in conformity with the use, area and height
regulations applicable in the district in which such farm buildings are located.
A. All requests for zoning permits shall be made in writing by the owner or his
authorized agent to the Zoning Officer on a form to be supplied by the Township.
Such application shall contain all information required by the Zoning Officer to
ascertain whether the proposed erection, alteration, use or change in use complies
with the provisions of this chapter. Such application shall be accompanied by the
following information, where applicable:
(1) A statement as to the proposed use of the building or land.
(2) A plan drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions and height of
proposed buildings, structures or uses and any existing buildings in relation to
property lines and street lines.
(3) The location, dimensions and arrangement of all open spaces, yards and buffer
yards, including methods to be employed for screening.
(4) The site layout shall indicate all existing trees which are to be saved, the tree
protection zone boundary, and the method by which tree protection will occur.
(5) The location, size, arrangement and capacity of all areas to be used for motor
vehicle access, off-street parking, off-street loading and unloading, and
provisions to be made for lighting such areas.
(6) The dimensions, location and methods of illumination for signs, if applicable.
(7) The location and dimensions of sidewalks and all other areas to be devoted to
pedestrian use.
(8) Provisions to be made for treatment and disposal of sewage and industrial
wastes, water supply and storm drainage.
(9) The capacity and arrangement of all buildings used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, including the proposed density in terms of number of
dwelling units per acre of land.
(10) A description of any proposed industrial or commercial operations in sufficient
§ 500-3002 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-3003
500:246
§ 500-3004. Issuance of zoning permits.
A zoning permit shall be issued with a one-year life and may be renewed yearly without
the payment of additional fees for a period of not more than three years, provided that
construction pursuant to said permit has commenced within the one-year period. The
permit shall be numbered, and a certification that such permit has been issued shall be
given to the permittee in a durable form to be supplied by the Township. The permit shall
be prominently displayed on the premises before construction is begun and shall remain
there until a certificate of occupancy is granted.
§ 500-3005. Temporary permits.
The Zoning Officer shall issue temporary permits for temporary structures in accordance
with the requirements of § 500-2405 of this chapter. Where a special exception is
required for a temporary structure, a temporary permit shall be issued only upon order of
the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 500-3006. Fees.
All applicants for zoning permits shall pay a fee in accordance with a fee schedule
adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. All such fees shall be paid into the
Township's treasury.
§ 500-3007. Certificates of use and occupancy.
No building hereafter constructed, erected or altered under a zoning permit shall be
occupied or used in whole or in part for any use whatsoever, and no change in use or
occupancy of any building or part of building shall hereafter be made until the builder,
owner or occupant has been issued a certificate of use and occupancy by the Zoning
Officer indicating that the building, use or occupancy complies with the terms of the
zoning and/or building permit and with the provisions of this chapter. A certificate of
use and occupancy shall be granted or denied within 90 days of the date of written
application therefor.
detail to indicate effects of those operations in producing noise, glare, air
pollution, fire hazards, traffic congestion, or other safety hazards.
(11) Description of methods to be employed in controlling any excess noise, air
pollution, smoke, fumes, water pollution, fire hazards, or other safety hazards.
(12) A plan drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions and topography of any
watercourses flowing through or within 100 feet of the tract boundary.
(13) Any other data deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer, Planning
Commission or the Board of Supervisors to enable it to determine the
compliance of the proposed development with the terms of this chapter.
B. One permit, to be termed either "zoning permit" or "building permit," shall satisfy
the requirements of both this chapter and the Township Building Code (Chapter
190, Article II).
§ 500-3003 ZONING § 500-3007
500:247

ARTICLE XXXI
Zoning Hearing Board and Board of Supervisors
§ 500-3101. Establishment of Zoning Hearing Board.
A Zoning Hearing Board is established in order that the objectives of this chapter be
more fully and equitably achieved and a means for competent interpretation of this
chapter provided.
§ 500-3102. Membership; terms of office.
§ 500-3103. Removal of members of Zoning Hearing Board.
Any Zoning Hearing Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance
or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the Board of
Supervisors, taken after 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A
hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.
§ 500-3104. Organization of Zoning Hearing Board. [Amended 10-2-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-14]
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of five residents of the Township appointed
by resolution by the Board of Supervisors. The terms of office shall be five years
and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire each year.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall promptly notify the Board of Supervisors of any
vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the
unexpired portion of the term. Members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall hold no
other office in the Township.
B. Alternate members. The Board of Supervisors may appoint by resolution at least
one, but no more than three, residents of the Township to serve as alternate
members of the Zoning Hearing Board, subject to the following provisions:
(1) The term of office of an alternate member shall be three years.
(2) Alternate members shall hold no other office in the Township.
(3) Any alternate member may participate in any proceeding or discussion of the
Zoning Hearing Board but shall not be entitled to vote as a member of the
Zoning Hearing Board nor receive any compensation (if such compensation
exists) unless designated as a voting alternate member.
(4) If by reason of absence or disqualification of a Zoning Hearing Board member
a quorum is not reached, the Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board shall
designate as many alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board to sit on
the Zoning Hearing Board as may be needed to provide a quorum. Any
alternate member of the Zoning Hearing Board shall continue to serve on the
Zoning Hearing Board in all proceedings involving the matter or case for
which the alternate member was initially appointed until the Zoning Hearing
Board has made a final determination of the matter or case. Designation of an
alternate member shall be made on a case-by-case basis in rotation according
to declining seniority among all alternates.
§ 500-3101 ZONING § 500-3104
500:249
§ 500-3105. Expenditures for services of Zoning Hearing Board. [Amended
4-21-1992 by Ord. No. 92-6]
§ 500-3106. Jurisdictions of Zoning Hearing Board and Board of Supervisors.
A. Officers. The Zoning Hearing Board shall elect from its own membership its
officers, who shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves.
B. Procedures. The Zoning Hearing Board may make, alter and rescind rules and
forms for its procedures consistent with ordinances of the Township and laws of the
commonwealth.
C. Meetings. Meetings shall be open to the public and shall be at the call of the
Chairman and at such other times as the Zoning Hearing Board shall specify in its
rules of procedure. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a
quorum shall be not less than a majority of all members of the Zoning Hearing
Board. The Zoning Hearing Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own
membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf, and the parties may waive any
further action by the Zoning Hearing Board.
D. Records and decisions. The Zoning Hearing Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or
failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall be the property of the Township and shall
be a public record. The Zoning Hearing Board shall submit a report of its activities
to the Board of Supervisors as requested by the Board of Supervisors.
E. Time limits on Zoning Hearing Board decisions. A special exception or variance
authorized by a decision of the Zoning Hearing Board shall expire if the applicant
fails to obtain a building or use and occupancy permit pursuant thereto within one
year from the date of granting of the special exception or variance.
(1) If the subject of the use ultimately constitutes either a subdivision or land
development, the special exception or variance shall expire if the applicant
fails to file the required subdivision or land development plan within one year
of the granting of the special exception or variance; provided that, however:
(a) The applicant shall have one year after the final record plan of the
subdivision or land development is approved to obtain a building/use
permit.
A. Each of the five members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be compensated for
the exercise of their duties at a rate of $100 per month, regardless of the number of
duly convened public meetings required to be held during such month.
B. Alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board may receive compensation for the
performance of their duties in the same manner and amount as regular members
when designated as alternate members pursuant to § 500-3102B of this chapter.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final
adjudications in the following matters:
§ 500-3104 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-3106
500:250
§ 500-3107. Zoning Hearing Board; variances.
(1) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except those
brought before the Board of Supervisors pursuant to § 500-3114A(2) of this
chapter.
(2) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural questions
or alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption, which challenges
shall be raised by an appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of said
chapter.
(3) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including, but not
limited to, the granting or denial of any permit or failure to act on the
application therefor or the issuance of any cease and desist order.
(4) Appeals from the determination by the Municipal Engineer or the Zoning
Officer with reference to the administration of any floodplain regulations.
(5) Applications for variances pursuant to § 500-3107 of this chapter.
(6) Applications for special exceptions pursuant to § 500-3108 of this chapter.
(7) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Municipal Engineer
in the administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof with
reference to sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater management
insofar as the same relate to development not involving an application for a
subdivision or land development.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final
adjudications in the following matters:
(1) All applications for subdivision and land development pursuant to Chapter
440, Subdivision and Land Development.
(2) Applications for conditional uses pursuant to § 500-3109 of this chapter.
(3) Applications for curative amendments pursuant to § 500-3114A(2) of this
chapter.
(4) All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances pursuant to Article XXXII
of this chapter.
(5) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or the Municipal
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or provisions thereof
with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater
management insofar as the same relate to applications for subdivision or land
development.
A. Applicability. Upon appeal from a decision by the Zoning Officer, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall have the power to vary or adapt the strict application of any of
the requirements of this chapter where, by reason of exceptional narrowness,
shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of
the chapter or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other
§ 500-3106 ZONING § 500-3107
500:251
§ 500-3108. Zoning Hearing Board; special exceptions.
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition on such piece of property,
the strict application of any regulation enacted under this chapter would result in
peculiar and exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of such property, but
in no other case.
B. Condition. In general, the power to authorize a variance from the terms of this
chapter shall be sparingly exercised and only under peculiar and exceptional
circumstances.
C. Requirements and standards. No variance in the strict application of the provisions
of this chapter shall be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board unless the Zoning
Hearing Board finds that the requirements and standards are satisfied.
(1) The applicant must prove that the variance will not be contrary to the public
interest and that practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship will result if it is
not granted. In particular, the applicant shall establish and substantiate that the
request for the variance is in conformance with all the requirements and
standards listed below:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or shape, or
exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such
conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by
the provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or district in which the
property is located.
(b) That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no
possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with
the provisions of this chapter and that the authorization of a variance is,
therefore, necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the applicant or
that the applicant at the time that he purchased the property was not aware
or could not reasonably have been expected to be aware of the zoning
classification and restrictions placed on the property or the circumstances
giving rise to the hardship.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of
the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development
of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that
will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of the
regulation in issue.
(2) In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach reasonable
conditions and safeguards as may be necessary to implement the purposes of
this chapter.
§ 500-3107 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-3108
500:252
A. Applicability. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the power to approve special
exceptions when this chapter specifically requires the obtaining of such approval
and for no other use or purpose.
B. Conditions and standards. In granting a special exception, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall make findings of fact consistent with the provisions of this chapter. The
Zoning Hearing Board shall not approve a special exception except in conformance
with the conditions and standards outlined in this chapter.
C. General requirements and standards applicable to all special exceptions.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board shall grant a special exception only if it finds
adequate evidence that any proposed development submitted will meet all of
the following general requirements listed herein, as well as any specific
requirements and standards for the proposed use. The Zoning Hearing Board
shall, among other things, require that any proposed use and location be:
(a) In accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and § 500-104 of this chapter
and consistent with the spirit, purposes and intent of this chapter.
(b) In the best interests of the Township, the convenience of the community,
the public welfare, and be a substantial improvement to property in the
immediate vicinity.
(c) Suitable for the property in question and designed, constructed, operated
and maintained so as to be in harmony with and appropriate in appearance
to the existing or intended character of the general vicinity.
(d) Appropriate in terms of its effect upon the logical, efficient and
economical extension of public services and facilities such as public
water, sewer, police and fire protection, and public schools.
(e) Guide the development of state highway frontage insofar as possible so
as to limit the total number of access points and encourage the fronting of
buildings on parallel marginal roads or on roads perpendicular to the
highway.
(f) Adequate with regard to sanitation and public safety provisions. Where
required or deemed advisable, a certificate of adequacy of sewage and
water facilities from a governmental health agency shall be provided.
(g) Require that all commercial or industrial parking, loading, access or
service areas be adequately illuminated at night while in use, and that
such lighting, including sign lighting, shall be arranged so as to protect
the highway and neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous
interference of any kind.
(h) In conformance with all applicable requirements of this chapter and all
municipal ordinances.
(i) Suitable in terms of effects on highway traffic and safety, with adequate
access arrangements to protect streets from undue congestion and hazard.
§ 500-3108 ZONING § 500-3108
500:253
§ 500-3109. Board of Supervisors; conditional uses. [Amended 10-2-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-14]
(j) In accordance with sound standards of subdivision and land development
practice, where applicable.
(2) The Zoning Hearing Board may impose whatever conditions regarding layout,
circulation and performance it deems necessary to ensure that any proposed
development will secure substantially the objectives of this chapter.
(3) The Zoning Hearing Board shall refuse an application for special exception
where opponents to the application establish by a preponderance of evidence
that the application is contrary to the health, safety and morals or general
welfare of the community at large.
D. Transportation impact study. A transportation impact study shall be submitted with
an application for a special exception when the proposed use meets the applicability
criteria set forth in § 500-3205C of this chapter.
(1) The transportation impact study shall be conducted and prepared in accordance
with the requirements of § 500-3205C of this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Hearing Board shall review the impact study to analyze its
adequacy in solving any traffic problems that will occur due to the proposed
use. The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the impact study and the
analysis of the impact study before the application is allowed or denied. In
acting on the application, the Zoning Hearing Board may, if adverse impacts
or major problems are identified:
(a) Reject the application.
(b) Require specific on- or off-site improvements as a condition of approval.
(c) Require the reduction of the intensity of use as a condition of approval.
(d) A combination of Subsection D(2)(b) and (c) hereinabove.
A. Applicability. The Board of Supervisors shall have the power to approve
conditional uses when this chapter specifically requires the obtaining of such
approval, and for no other use or purpose.
B. Conditions and standards. In granting a conditional use, the Board of Supervisors
shall make findings of fact consistent with the provisions of this chapter. The Board
of Supervisors shall not approve a conditional use except in conformance with the
conditions and standards outlined in this chapter.
C. General requirements and standards applicable to all conditional uses. The Board
of Supervisors shall grant a conditional use only if it finds adequate evidence that
any proposed development submitted will meet all of the following general
requirements listed herein as well as any specific requirements and standards for
the proposed use. The Board of Supervisors shall, among other things, require that
any proposed use and location be:
§ 500-3108 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-3109
500:254
(1) In accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and § 500-104 of this chapter and
consistent with the spirit, purposes and intent of this chapter.
(2) In the best interests of the Township, the convenience of the community, the
public welfare, and be a substantial improvement to the property in the
immediate vicinity.
(3) Suitable for the property in question and designed, constructed, operated and
maintained so as to be in harmony with and appropriate in appearance to the
existing or intended character of the general vicinity.
(4) Appropriate in terms of its effect upon the logical, efficient and economical
extension of public services and facilities such as public water, sewer, police
and fire protection, and public schools.
(5) Guide the development of state highway frontage insofar as possible so as to
limit the total number of access points and encourage the fronting of buildings
on parallel marginal roads or on roads perpendicular to the highway.
(6) Adequate with regard to sanitation and public safety provisions. Where
required or deemed advisable, a certificate of adequacy of sewage and water
facilities from the applicable water/sewer agency and, where necessary, the
Bucks County Health Department and/or the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection shall be provided.
(7) Require that all commercial or industrial parking, loading, access or service
areas be adequately illuminated at night while in use, and that such lighting,
including sign lighting, shall be arranged so as to protect the highway and
neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind.
(8) In conformance with all applicable requirements of this chapter and all
municipal ordinances.
(9) Suitable in terms of effects on highway traffic and safety with adequate access
arrangements to protect streets from undue congestion and hazard.
(10) In accordance with sound standards of subdivision and land development
practice where applicable.
D. The Board of Supervisors may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards,
other than those related to off-site transportation or road improvements, in addition
to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter.
E. Review by the Planning Commission. The Board of Supervisors shall request an
advisory opinion from the Planning Commission on any application for a
conditional use. The Planning Commission shall submit a report of such advisory
opinion prior to the date of the public hearing held by the Board of Supervisors on
an application.
F. The Board of Supervisors shall refuse an application for conditional use where
opponents to the application establish by a preponderance of evidence that the
application is contrary to the health, safety and morals or general welfare of the
§ 500-3109 ZONING § 500-3109
500:255
§ 500-3110. Zoning Hearing Board; fees and escrow deposits.
community at large.
G. Transportation impact study. A transportation impact study shall be submitted with
an application for a conditional use when the proposed use meets the applicability
criteria set forth in § 500-3205C of this chapter.
(1) The transportation impact study shall be conducted and prepared in accordance
with the requirements of § 500-3205C of this chapter.
(2) The Board of Supervisors shall review the impact study to analyze its
adequacy in solving any traffic problems that will occur due to the proposed
use. The Board of Supervisors shall consider the impact study and the analysis
of the impact study before the application is allowed or denied. In acting on
the application, the Board of Supervisors may, if adverse impacts or major
problems are identified:
(a) Reject the application.
(b) Require specific on- or off-site improvements as a condition of approval.
(c) Require a reduction of the intensity of use as a condition of approval.
(d) A combination of Subsection G(2)(b) and (c) hereinabove.
H. Conditional use applications shall be governed by the following:
(1) The landowner shall make a written request to the Board of Supervisors that it
hold a hearing on his application. The request shall contain a statement
reasonably informing the Board of Supervisors of the matters that are in issue.
(2) The application shall be accompanied by plans and other material describing
the use or development proposed. Such plans and other materials shall provide
a sufficient basis for evaluating the applicant's request. Information required
by this chapter shall accompany the application.
(3) The Board of Supervisors shall hold a hearing pursuant to public notice upon
the request, commencing not later than 60 days after the request is filed, unless
the applicant requests or consents in writing to an extension of time. In
addition, the Board shall render a written decision within 45 days after the last
hearing.
I. Administration. The Board of Supervisors shall conduct hearings and make
decisions in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in § 500-3111.
J. Fees. The applicant for any hearing on a conditional use request before the Board
of Supervisors shall at the time of making application pay a fee in accordance with
a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, or as such
schedule may be amended from time to time. In addition, an escrow deposit may be
required, as established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
A. The applicant for any hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board shall at the time of
making application pay the Zoning Officer, for the use of the municipality, a fee in
§ 500-3109 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-3110
500:256
§ 500-3111. Zoning Hearing Board; hearings.
Hearings pursuant to this chapter shall be held by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the following requirements.
accordance with a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors,
and as such schedule may be amended from time to time. In addition, an escrow
deposit may be required. The escrow deposit requirements shall be set from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
B. The total fees payable for any one application shall be determined by the total
number of specific reliefs separately sought, and the inclusion of more than one
relief sought in any one application or application form will not avoid the obligation
of the applicant to pay the multiple fees in accordance with the adopted fee
schedule.
C. The Zoning Officer shall, subject to the modification of the Board, determine the
actual nature and number of specific reliefs sought by any one application. Such
determination shall be irrespective of the use by the respective applicant in his
application of the descriptive terms "variance," "special exception" or "appeal,"
unless otherwise so indicated by the application.
A. Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the applicant, the
Zoning Officer, such other persons as the Board of Supervisors shall designate by
ordinance and to any person who has made timely request for the same. Written
notices shall be given at such time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by
ordinance or, in the absence of ordinance provision, by rules of the Zoning Hearing
Board. In addition to the written notice provided herein, written notice of said
hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one week
prior to the hearing.
B. The Board of Supervisors may prescribe reasonable fees by resolution with respect
to hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said hearings may include
compensation for the Secretary and members of the Zoning Hearing Board, notice
and advertising costs and necessary administrative overhead connected with the
hearing. The costs, however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing
Board, expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants or
expert witness costs.
C. The hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date of the applicant's request,
unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time.
D. The hearing shall be conducted by the Zoning Hearing Board, or the Zoning
Hearing Board may appoint any member as a hearing officer. The decision or,
where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Zoning Hearing
Board; however, the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to
the municipality, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decisions or
findings by the Zoning Hearing Board and accept the decision or findings of the
hearing officer as final.
E. The parties to the hearing shall be the Township, any person affected by the
application who has made timely appearance of record before the Zoning Hearing
§ 500-3110 ZONING § 500-3111
500:257
Board, and any other person, including civic or community organizations, permitted
to appear by the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have
power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter appearance
in writing on forms provided by the Zoning Hearing Board for that purpose.
F. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing
officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents and
papers, including witnesses and documents requested by the parties.
G. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded
the opportunity to respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine
adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
H. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence may be excluded.
I. The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer, as the case maybe, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall
be shared equally by the applicant and the Zoning Hearing Board. The cost of the
original transcript shall be paid by the Zoning Hearing Board if the transcript is
ordered by the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer or shall be paid by the
person appealing from the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board if such appeal is
made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person
requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party requesting the original
transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
J. The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue
involved except upon notice and where all parties have opportunity to participate.
The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer shall not take notice of any
communication, report, staff memorandum, or other materials, except advice from
its solicitor, unless all parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so
noticed, and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement
of hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are given an
opportunity to be present.
K. The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the
application within 45 days after the last hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board
or hearing officer. Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall
be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, together with
the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on the provisions of any act of the
commonwealth or any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the
provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in
light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, and there
has been no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall make its report and recommendations available to the parties within 45
days, and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to the
Zoning Hearing Board prior to the final decision or entry or findings, and the
Zoning Hearing Board's decision shall be entered no later than 30 days after the
§ 500-3111 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-3111
500:258
§ 500-3112. Mediation option.
report of the hearing officer. Where the Zoning Hearing Board fails to render its
decision within the period required by this subsection, or fails to hold the required
hearing within 60 days from the date of the applicant's request for a hearing, the
decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the
applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a
decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the
Zoning Hearing Board to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the
Zoning Hearing Board shall give public notice of said decision within 10 days from
the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner as provided in
Subsection A of this section. If the Zoning Hearing Board shall fail to provide such
notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right
of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
L. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the findings shall
be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him not later than the day
following its date. To all other persons who have filed their name and address with
the Zoning Hearing Board not later than the last day of the hearing, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall provide by mail or otherwise brief notice of the decision or
findings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or findings may be
examined.
A. Parties to proceedings in Articles IX and X-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, as amended by Act 170 (PA MPC),199 may utilize
mediation as an aid in completing such proceedings. In proceedings before the
Zoning Hearing Board, in no case shall the Zoning Hearing Board initiate mediation
or participate as a mediating party. Mediation shall supplement, not replace, those
procedures in Articles IX and X-A of the PA MPC once they have been formally
initiated. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as expanding or limiting
municipal police powers or as modifying any principles of substantive law.
B. Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary. The appropriateness of
mediation shall be determined by the particulars of each case and the willingness of
the parties to negotiate. The municipality shall assure that in each case, the
mediating parties, assisted by the mediator as appropriate, develop terms and
conditions for:
(1) Funding mediation.
(2) Selecting a mediator who, at a minimum, shall have a working knowledge of
municipal zoning and subdivision procedures and demonstrated skills in
mediation.
(3) Completing mediation, including time limits for such completion.
(4) Suspending time limits otherwise authorized in the PA MPC, provided there is
written consent by the mediating parties and by an applicant or municipal
199.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 500-3111 ZONING § 500-3112
500:259
§ 500-3113. Parties appellant before Zoning Hearing Board.
Appeals under § 500-3106A(1), (2), (3), (4) and (7) of this chapter may be filed with
the Zoning Hearing Board, in writing, by the landowner affected, any officer or agency
of the Township, or any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance under § 500-3107
and for special exception under § 500-3108 of this chapter may be filed with the Zoning
Hearing Board by any landowner or any tenant with the permission of such landowner.
§ 500-3114. Validity of ordinance; substantive questions.
decisionmaking body if either is not a party to the mediation.
(5) Identifying all parties and affording them the opportunity to participate.
(6) Subject to legal restraints, determining whether some or all of the mediation
sessions shall be open or closed to the public.
(7) Assuring that mediated solutions are in writing and signed by the parties and
become subject to review and approval by the appropriate decisionmaking
body pursuant to the authorized procedures set forth in the PA MPC.
C. No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding the final written
mediated agreement, shall be admissible as evidence in any subsequent judicial or
administrative proceedings.
A. A landowner who, on substantive grounds, desires to challenge the validity of an
ordinance or map or any provision thereof which prohibits or restricts the use or
development of land in which he has an interest shall submit the challenge either:
(1) To the Zoning Hearing Board under § 500-3106A of this chapter.
(2) To the Board of Supervisors under § 500-3106B(3) of this chapter, together
with a request for a curative amendment.
B. Persons aggrieved by a use or development permitted on the land of another by an
ordinance or map, or any provision thereof, who desire to challenge its validity on
substantive grounds shall first submit their challenge to the Zoning Hearing Board
for a decision thereon under § 500-3106A(1) of this chapter.
C. The submissions referred to in Subsections A and B shall be governed by the
following:
(1) In challenges before the Zoning Hearing Board, the challenging party shall
make a written request to the Zoning Hearing Board that it hold a hearing on
its challenge. The request shall contain the reasons for the challenge. Where
the landowner desires to challenge the validity of such ordinance and elects to
proceed by curative amendment, his application to the Board of Supervisors
shall contain, in addition to the requirements of the written request hereof, the
plans and explanatory materials describing the use or development proposed
by the landowner in lieu of the use or development permitted by the challenged
ordinance or map. Such plans or other materials shall not be required to meet
the standards prescribed for preliminary or final approval or for the issuance
of a permit so long as they provide reasonable notice of the proposed use or
§ 500-3112 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-3114
500:260
development and a sufficient basis for evaluating the challenged ordinance or
map in light thereof. Nothing herein contained shall preclude the landowner
from first seeking a final approval before submitting his challenge.
(2) If the submission is made by the landowner to the Board of Supervisors under
Subsection A(2), the request also shall be accompanied by an amendment or
amendments to the ordinance proposed by the landowner to cure the alleged
defects therein.
(3) If the submission is made to the Board of Supervisors, the Township Solicitor
shall represent and advise it at the hearing or hearings.
(4) The Board of Supervisors may retain an independent attorney to present the
defense of the challenged ordinance or map on its behalf and to present its
witnesses on its behalf.
(5) Based upon the testimony presented at the hearing or hearings, the Board of
Supervisors or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the case may be, shall determine
whether the challenged ordinance or map is defective, as alleged by the
landowner. If a challenge heard by the Board of Supervisors is found to have
merit, the Board of Supervisors may accept a landowner's curative
amendment, with or without revision, or may adopt an alternative amendment
which will cure the challenged defects. If a challenge heard by the Zoning
Hearing Board is found to have merit, the decision of the Zoning Hearing
Board shall include recommended amendments to the challenged ordinance
which will cure the defects found. In reaching its decision, the Zoning Hearing
Board or the Board of Supervisors, as the case may be, shall consider the
amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the landowner and
shall also consider:
(a) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water supplies,
schools and other public service facilities.
(b) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal upon
regional housing needs and effectiveness of the proposal in providing
housing units of a type actually available to and affordable by classes of
persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions of
the ordinance or map.
(c) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the site's
soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers, natural
resources and other natural features.
(d) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes, woodlands,
wetlands, floodplains, aquifers, natural resources and natural features, the
degree to which these are protected or destroyed, the tolerance of the
resources to development and any adverse environmental impacts.
(e) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and other
land uses which are essential to public health and welfare.
(f) The Board of Supervisors or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the case may
§ 500-3114 ZONING § 500-3114
500:261
be, shall render its decision within 45 days after the conclusion of the last
hearing.
(g) If the Board of Supervisors or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the case may
be, fails to act on the landowner's request within the time limits referred
to in Subsection C(5)(f), a denial of the request is deemed to have
occurred on the 46th day after the close of the last hearing.
D. The Zoning Board or Board of Supervisors, as the case may be, shall commence its
hearings within 60 days after the request is filed unless the landowner requests or
consents to an extension of time.
E. Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of the ordinance or
map is in question and shall give the place where and the times when a copy of the
request, including any plans, explanatory material or proposed amendments, may
be examined by the public.
F. The challenge shall be deemed denied when:
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Supervisors, as the case may be, fails
to commence the hearing within the time limits set forth in Subsection D.
(2) The Board of Supervisors notifies the landowner that it will not adopt the
curative amendment.
(3) The Board of Supervisors adopts another curative amendment which is
unacceptable to the landowner.
(4) The Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Supervisors, as the case may be, fails
to act on the request 45 days after the close of the last hearing on the request,
unless the time is extended by mutual consent by the landowner and Township.
G. Where, after the effective date of this chapter, a curative amendment proposal is
approved by the grant of a curative amendment application by the Board of
Supervisors pursuant to § 500-3106B(3) of this chapter or a validity challenge is
sustained by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 500-3106A of this chapter or
the court as finally on appeal from denial of a curative amendment proposal or a
validity challenge, and the proposal or challenge so approved requires a further
application for subdivision or land development, the developer shall have two years
from the date of such approval to file an application for preliminary approval
pursuant to Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development. Within the two-year
period, no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision and land
development or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any manner
which adversely affects the rights of the applicant as granted in the curative
amendment or the sustained validity challenge. Where the proposal appended to the
curative amendment application or the validity challenge is approved but does not
require further application under any subdivision or land development ordinance,
the developer shall have one year within which to file for a building permit. Within
the one-year period, no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision
and land development or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any
manner which adversely affects the rights of the applicant as granted in the curative
amendment or the sustained validity challenge. During these protected periods, the
§ 500-3114 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-3114
500:262
§ 500-3115. Court appeals.
All appeals from all land use decisions rendered pursuant to this article shall be taken
to the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial district wherein the land is located and
shall be filed within 30 days after entry of the decision or, in the case of a deemed
decision, within 30 days after the notice of said deemed decision is given as set forth in
§ 500-3111K of this chapter.
court shall retain or assume jurisdiction for the purpose of awarding such
supplemental relief as may be necessary.
H. If a municipality does not accept a landowner's curative amendment and a court
subsequently rules that the challenge has merit, the court's decision shall not result
in a declaration of invalidity for the entire Zoning Ordinance and Map but only for
those provisions which specifically relate to the landowner's curative amendment
and challenge.
§ 500-3114 ZONING § 500-3115
500:263

ARTICLE XXXII
Amendments
§ 500-3201. Power of amendment.
The Board of Supervisors may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify or
repeal this chapter, including the Zoning Map. When doing so, the Board of Supervisors
shall proceed in the manner prescribed in § 500-3203 of this article.
§ 500-3202. Who may initiate.
Proposals for amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal may be initiated
by the Board of Supervisors on its own motion, by the Planning Commission, or by
petition of one or more owners of property to be affected by the proposed amendment.
Each petition by one or more property owners shall be signed and acknowledged and
submitted in writing to the Zoning Officer. The applicant(s) for an amendment to the
Zoning Map shall submit the information required in § 500-3204, Plan requirements, and
§ 500-3205, Impact statements.
§ 500-3203. Enactment of Zoning Ordinance amendments.
§ 500-3204. Plan requirements.
The request for an amendment to the Zoning Map shall be accompanied by the following
A. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Board of Supervisors shall
hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice. In addition, if the proposed
amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice of said public hearing shall be
conspicuously posted by the Township at points deemed sufficient by the Township
along the perimeter of the tract to notify potentially interested citizens. The affected
tract or area shall be posted at least one week prior to the date of the hearings.
B. For an amendment other than that initiated by the Planning Commission, the Board
of Supervisors shall submit each such amendment to the Planning Commission at
least 30 days prior to the hearing on such proposed amendment to provide the
Planning Commission an opportunity to submit recommendations.
C. If after any public hearing held upon an amendment the proposed amendment is
changed substantially or is revised to include land previously not affected by it, the
Board of Supervisors shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice,
before proceeding to vote on the amendment.
D. The Township shall submit each amendment to the Bucks County Planning
Commission at least 30 days prior to the public hearing for recommendations.
E. The Township may offer a mediation option as an aid in completing proceedings
authorized by this section. In exercising such an option, the Township and
mediating parties shall meet the stipulations and follow the procedures set forth in
§ 500-3112 of this chapter.
F. Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to the Zoning Ordinance
shall be forwarded to the Bucks County Planning Commission.
§ 500-3201 ZONING § 500-3204
500:265
information:
§ 500-3205. Impact statements. [Amended 3-23-1999 by Ord. No. 99-04]
The following impact statements shall be submitted with all petitions for zoning changes
and when required by any other section of this chapter. The submission of a
transportation impact study and fiscal impact analysis shall be based on the applicability
criteria indicated below. These impact statements will be reviewed by the Township
and must be found to be satisfactory prior to approving the use or zoning change.
Any improvements identified by the studies will be required improvements at the time
approval is granted.
A. A map, drawn to scale, showing the location, boundaries, dimensions, and
ownership of land to be rezoned.
B. A statement outlining the nature, types of uses, general program of development,
and other pertinent information with respect to the proposed development of the
land to be rezoned.
C. A plan showing the land areas to be allocated to major use groups and buffer
provisions along boundary lines. In addition, such plan shall show the applicant's
conception of the entire layout to enable the Board of Supervisors to judge the
character and general effectiveness of design of the subject land and its relationship
to surrounding areas.
A. Comprehensive Plan impact. The applicant shall submit an analysis which
evaluates the consistency between his proposal and the Township Comprehensive
Plan.
B. Natural resources impact. The applicant shall submit an analysis which evaluates
his ability to meet the natural resource protection standards of § 500-2601 of this
chapter.
C. Transportation impact.
(1) The applicant shall submit a transportation impact study where the proposed
use or development meets one of the following criteria:
(a) Residential: 50 or more dwelling units.
(b) Nonresidential: a proposed use or development which will generate 500
or more trips per day. The number of trips per day shall be determined
through the use of Table 2: Trip Generation Rates.200 The proposed use or
development is identified using the columns "Type of Land Use" and
"Type of Development." The size of the proposed use or development
(gross square footage, number of beds, etc.) is multiplied by the
appropriate rate listed in the column "Average Trip Generation Rates" to
determine the trips per day.
(2) The Middletown Township Planning Commission, at it discretion, may require
that the petition for any other zoning change or an application for any other
200.Editor's Note: Table 2: Trip Generation Rates is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 500-3204 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-3205
500:266
proposed use or development be accompanied by a transportation impact
study; provided, however, that the Planning Commission notifies the applicant
of such a requirement immediately following the Planning Commission's first
meeting to consider the petition or application. Such a notification shall
specify the reason for the requirement, citing the proposal's particular location
or existing problems or type of use (i.e., generation of heavy truck traffic). The
transportation impact study shall be submitted to the Township within 30 days
of the date of said notification.
(3) The transportation impact study shall be conducted and prepared in accordance
with the requirements of the Middletown Township Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations (Chapter 440), which are incorporated herein by
reference.
(4) When within their jurisdiction, the Middletown Township Planning
Commission, the Bucks County Planning, the Municipal Engineer, the Zoning
Hearing Board and the Board of Supervisors shall review the impact study to
analyze its adequacy in solving any traffic problems that will occur due to the
proposed use. The Board shall consider the impact study and the analysis of
the impact study before the change of zoning or the application for a proposed
use or development is allowed or denied.
D. Fiscal impact analysis.
(1) The applicant shall prepare and submit a fiscal impact analysis for the current
zoning classification and for the proposed zoning district utilizing the
following standards and methodologies. A tract of land containing less than
five acres shall be exempted from this requirement.
(a) The Per Capita Multiplier Method, as defined in The New Practitioner's
Guide to Fiscal Analysis (1985), by Robert W. Burchell, David Listokin
and William R. Dolphin, shall be used to calculate the fiscal impact of
nonresidential development.
(b) The Proportional Valuation Method, as defined in The New Practitioner's
Guide to Fiscal Analysis (1985), by Robert W. Burchell, David Listokin
and William R. Dolphin, shall be used to calculate the fiscal impact of
nonresidential development.
(c) The annual net fiscal impact shall be calculated for the existing zoning
district and any proposed zoning district using the above-referenced
methodologies.
(d) The cumulative net fiscal impact over a ten- or twenty-year period,
depending on the anticipated pace of development, shall be calculated for
the existing and proposed zoning districts. The cumulative net fiscal
impact analysis shall include reasonable assumptions regarding the pace
and timing of development under the existing proposed zoning districts.
(e) The fiscal impact analysis will be conducted using the assumptions,
parameters and performance standards specified in Subsection D(2) and
(3) below unless otherwise permitted by the Board of Supervisors. If the
§ 500-3205 ZONING § 500-3205
500:267
applicant wishes to deviate from any of the assumptions outlined in this
chapter, the applicant shall submit an attachment to the fiscal impact
study indicating any such deviation together with the applicable
supporting data for the Board of Supervisors to consider in its review of
the study.
(2) Nonresidential annual fiscal impact analysis; assumptions and parameters. The
following assumptions shall be made and used for calculations involving
nonresidential development, whether it be under the existing or proposed
zoning district.
(a) The calculations shall be based on a specific development proposal or the
full development potential of the subject property based on a reasonable
use of the property and the maximum building coverage and impervious
surface ratios permitted by the zoning district. To illustrate the
development potential under the existing zoning classification, a
conceptual sketch plan shall be included with the submission.
(b) The value of the development shall be based on the projected assessed
land and building value.
[1] The projected assessed building and land value may be determined
by applying the current county assessment ratio to the projected
market value of the proposed nonresidential development. The
assessment ratio can be obtained from the Bucks County Board of
Assessment.
[2] If no reasonable estimate of the projected market value is available
for the development alternative under the current zoning
classification, the median assessed building value per square foot for
building types of the same category constructed in the last seven
years in the lower Bucks County area shall be multiplied by the
projected number of square feet of building space to determine the
projected assessed building value. The projected land assessed value
shall be the current assessed land value per acre on the proposed site
multiplied by the number of buildable acres.
(c) Employment projections shall be based on the employee-per-buildingsquare-
footage ratios published by the Urban Land Institute for various
types of nonresidential uses. The ratios are as follows:
[1] Two and one-half employees per 1,000 square feet of retail space.
[2] Three employees per 1,000 square feet of office space.
[3] Two employees per 1,000 square feet of industrial space.
[4] Seven-tenths of one employee per 1,000 square feet of hotel space.
[5] Four employees per 1,000 square feet of public sector space.
(d) Tax and millage rates for the current year shall be obtained from the
Township and Neshaminy School District.
§ 500-3205 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-3205
500:268
(e) The following revenue sources shall be considered in calculating revenue
generated by nonresidential development:
[1] Property taxes and applicable annual assessment supporting the
Township's governmental fund types.
[2] The real estate transfer tax is a one-percent tax, collected at the time
of sale, on the market value of real estate. When applicable, the tax
shall be applied on an annual basis to 5% of the estimated market
value of the development, indicating a nonresidential turnover rate
of 5%. Revenue from the transfer tax is divided equally between the
Township and the School District.
[3] All applicable taxes and license fees shall be considered in
calculating revenue generated by nonresidential development. Taxes
levied by the Township and School District include but are not
limited to occupational privilege, mercantile, business license,
amusement, vending machine and mechanical device. A complete
list of taxes can be obtained from the Township and School District.
[4] Revenue generated by fines, forfeitures, permits and licenses,
interest and rent shall be included. The calculations shall follow
Burchell's Per Capita Multiplier Method.
[5] Intergovernmental aid generated for the Township by nonresidential
development shall be limited to state subsidy revenue from liquid
fuels and foreign fire casualty insurance taxes. If the current state aid
formulas are not available, revenue from these sources shall be
calculated by determining the per capita revenue from each source,
using the Per Capita Multiplier Method, and multiplying the per
capita value by: a) the ratio of the total value of the Township's
nonresidential property to the total value of all Township property;
and b) the development's projected number of workers.
[6] The analysis shall include municipal revenue generated by the
nonresidential unit tax or the transportation impact fee, whichever is
greater.
(f) Municipal expenditures for the proposed development are limited to
general municipal operating and capital costs generated by the type of
development proposed using the Proportional Valuation Method.
Specific municipal expenditures subject to consideration under the
Proportional Valuation Method shall be total expenditures for the
Township's governmental fund types, plus (or minus) net operating
transfers from the Township's nongovernmental fund types.
(g) School District's costs related to nonresidential development shall be
assumed to be zero, unless otherwise required by Township officials.
(3) Residential annual fiscal impact; assumptions and parameters. The following
assumptions shall be made and used in the calculations for residential
development, whether it be for the existing or proposed zoning district:
§ 500-3205 ZONING § 500-3205
500:269
(a) The calculations shall be based on a specific development proposal or the
full development potential of the subject tract based on a reasonable use
of the property at the maximum density permitted by the zoning district.
To illustrate the development potential under the existing zoning district,
a conceptual sketch plan shall be included with the submission.
(b) The value of the development shall be based on the projected assessed
value.
[1] The projected assessed building and land value may be determined
by applying the current county assessment ratio to the projected
market value of the proposed residential development. The
assessment ratio can be obtained from the Bucks County Board of
Assessment.
[2] If no reasonable estimate of the projected market value is available
for the development alternative under the current zoning
classification, the maximum number of permitted housing units
multiplied by the median sales price for new housing units sold in
the Township of the type proposed or permitted shall represent the
estimated market value. Information on median housing prices for
the current year is available from the Bucks County Housing Prices
and Affordability Study (current edition) prepared by the Bucks
County Planning Commission.
(c) Population projections shall be based on the demographic multipliers for
the Northeast United States published in the most recent American
Housing Survey. The population projections should calculate the
following:
[1] Total population created by the development based on the
Demographic Multipliers for the Northeast for Common
Configurations of Standard Housing Types for Total Household
Size.
[2] Total school-age population projected for the development based on
the Demographic Multipliers for the Northeast for Common
Configurations of Standard Housing Types for School-Age
Children.
[3] Total projected public school enrollment based on that portion of
school-age children attending the Neshaminy School District.
(d) Tax and millage rates for the current year shall be obtained from the
Township and Neshaminy School District.
(e) The following revenue sources should be considered in calculating
revenue generated by residential development:
[1] Property taxes and applicable annual assessments supporting the
Township's governmental fund types.
[2] The real estate transfer tax is a one-percent tax, collected at the time
§ 500-3205 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-3205
500:270
§ 500-3206. Applicability of amendments. [Added 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-14]
When an application for either a special exception or a conditional use has been filed
with either the Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Supervisors, as relevant, and the
of sale, on the market value of real estate. The tax shall be applied
on an annual basis on 10% of the estimated market value of the
property, using a residential turnover rate of 10%. Revenue from the
transfer tax is divided equally between the Township and the School
District.
[3] The annual fee for municipal solid waste collection and the per
capita tax shall be considered in calculating revenue generated by
residential development.
[4] Revenues generated by fines, forfeitures, permits and licenses,
interest and rents shall be included. The calculations shall follow
Burchell's Per Capita Multiplier Method.
[5] Intergovernmental aid generated for the Township by residential
development shall be limited to state subsidy revenue from liquid
fuels and foreign fire casualty insurance taxes. If the current state aid
formulas are not available, the Per Capita Multiplier Method shall
be used to derive Township revenues from these intergovernmental
sources. Revenue from these sources shall be calculated by
determining the per capita revenue from each source, using the Per
Capita Multiplier Method.
(f) Municipal expenditures for the proposed development are limited to
general municipal operating and capital costs generated by the type of
development proposed using the Per Capita Multiplier Method noted in
The New Practitioner's Guide to Fiscal Analysis. Specific municipal
expenditures subject to consideration under the Per Capita Multiplier
Method shall be total expenditures from the Township's governmental
fund types, plus (or minus) net operating transfers from the Township's
nongovernmental fund types.
(g) School District revenues and expenditures.
[1] Tax rates for the current year shall be obtained from Neshaminy
School District.
[2] Intergovernmental aid generated by residential development shall be
limited to revenue sources where changes in the number of pupils
enrolled in the School District directly impact the level of
intergovernmental or other nonlocal aid. Such revenue sources
include, but are not limited to, the Pennsylvania basic per-pupil
subsidy and state transportation subsidies.
[3] School District expenditures shall be calculated in accordance with
the Per Capita Multiplier Method in The New Practitioner's Guide to
Fiscal Analysis.
§ 500-3205 ZONING § 500-3206
500:271
subject matter of such application would ultimately constitute either a land development
or a subdivision, as defined in § 107 of the Municipalities Planning Code (MPC),201 no
change or amendment of the zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance or plans
shall affect the decision on such application adversely to the applicant, and the applicant
shall be entitled to a decision in accordance with the provisions of the governing
ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application was duly filed. Provided,
further, should such an application be approved by either the Zoning Hearing Board
or Board of Supervisors, as relevant, applicant shall be entitled to proceed with the
submission of either land development or subdivision plans within a period of oneyear
or longer, as may be approved by either the Zoning Hearing Board or Board of
Supervisors, following the date of such approval in accordance with the provisions of
the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application was duly
filed before either the Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Supervisors, as relevant. If
either a land development or subdivision is so filed within said period, such plan shall
be subject to the provisions of Municipalities Planning Code § 508(1) through (4), and
specifically as to the time limitations of Municipalities Planning Code § 508(4), which
shall commence as of the date of filing such land development or subdivision plan. Said
five-year period as set forth in Municipalities Planning Code § 508(4) shall be extended
for the duration of any litigation or a sewer or utility moratorium imposed subsequently
to the filing of the application for preliminary approval of a plat.
201.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10107.
§ 500-3206 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-3206
500:272
ARTICLE XXXIII
Enforcement
§ 500-3301. Jurisdiction.
Unless otherwise provided by law or in this chapter, no building or structure shall be
constructed, erected or extended, and no building, structure or land shall be used or
occupied, except for the purposes permitted herein.
§ 500-3302. Remedies.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired,
converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this
chapter, the Zoning Officer may institute in the name of the Township any appropriate
action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such
violation; to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land; or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
§ 500-3303. Enforcement notice.
A. The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of
this section and to institute civil enforcement proceedings as provided for in
§ 500-3304 when acting within the scope of his employment.202
B. If it appears that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the Zoning Officer shall
initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement notice to the owner of
record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has
filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and to
any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.
C. An enforcement notice shall state the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the
municipality intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have not
been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(4) That the owner of record or other person against whom the municipality
intends to take action has five days to commence steps to comply with this
chapter and 30 days within which to complete such steps to be in compliance
with this chapter, unless such times are extended in writing by the Zoning
Officer for cause shown.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing
Board within 30 days of the date of the enforcement notice or not later than the
expiration of any extension granted, in writing, by the Zoning Officer.
202.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 500-3301 ZONING § 500-3303
500:273
§ 500-3304. Enforcement remedies.
(6) That the failure to comply with the enforcement notice within the time
specified, unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes
a violation with sanctions clearly described.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Township, shall pay a judgment of not more than
$500 plus all court costs plus reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Township
as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable
until the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge.
If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the Magisterial
District Judge determining that there has been a violation further determines that
there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this
chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall
be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the
date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge, and
thereafter each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition of the defendant, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per-diem judgment pending a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained herein shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person or
entity other than the Township the right to commence any action for enforcement
pursuant to this section.
§ 500-3303 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 500-3304
500:274
Appendix
§ 500-3304 ZONING § 500-3304
500:275

Chapter A510
LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS
§ A510-1. Annexation of territory.
Enactment Date Description
(Reserved)
§ A510-2. Bond issues and loans.
Enactment Date Description
Ord. No. 82 5-14-1958 $75,000 bond issue for Township building
Ord. No. 64-4 8-12-1964 $495,000 bond issue for street and sewer
improvements
Ord. No. 75-11 4-9-1975 $127,000 bond issue
Ord. No. 75-13 5-6-1975 $2,410,000 water revenue bond issue
Ord. No. 75-28 10-23-1975 $3,618,000 water and sewer revenue bonds for
acquisition of assets
Ord. No. 76-15 7-1-1976 $250,000 note for road resurfacing
Ord. No. 76-18 10-7-1976 $2,645,000 water revenue refunding bonds to
acquire Spring Water Co. and Parkland Water Co.
Ord. No. 76-19 10-7-1976 $3,618,000 water and sewer revenue bonds
Ord. No. 78-16 8-8-1978 $3,905,000 sewer revenue bonds
Ord. No. 78-17 8-8-1978 $5,515,000 water revenue bonds
Ord. No. 78-18 8-8-1978 $12,960,000 special obligation bonds
Ord. No. 81-15 7-21-1981 $800,000 general obligation promissory notes
Ord. No. 81-20 10-6-1981 Ord. No. 81-15 amended to reduce debt to
$700,000
Ord. No. 86-21 10-21-1986 $1,150,000 general obligation note
Ord. No. 93-01 3-30-1993 $3,860,000 general obligation bonds
Ord. No. 93-12 9-28-1993 $5,335,000 general obligation bonds
Ord. No. 95-17 12-5-1995 $3,100,000 general obligation bonds
Ord. No. 97-21 11-18-1997 $5,000,000 general obligation bonds
Ord. No. 98-12 11-24-1998 $5,650,000 general obligation bonds
Ord. No. 00-04 3-28-2000 $674,475 general obligation note
Ord. No. 00-06 6-13-2000 $9,995,000 general obligation bonds
Ord. No. 01-19 12-18-2001 Defeasance of principal and interest due on
outstanding bonds with a portion of the funds from
the sale of the Township's sewer system
Ord. No. 03-22 12-9-2003 $10,000,000 general obligation bonds
§ 500-3304 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-2
A510:1
Enactment Date Description
Ord. No. 2004-10 12-21-2004 $8,325,000 general obligation bonds
Ord. No. 2006-02 2-14-2006 $10,000,000 general obligation bonds
Ord. No. 2008-03 2-26-2008 $10,000,000 general obligation bonds
Ord. No. 09-01 12-8-2009 $8,500,000 general obligation bond
Ord. No. 10-01 5-3-2010 $5,620,000 general obligation bond
Ord. No. 11-04 $9,100,000 general obligation bond
Ord. No. 12-04 10-15-2012 $9,800,000 general obligation bond
Ord. No. 14-03 5-19-2014 $9,820,000 general obligation bond
Ord. No. 16-06 8-15-2016 $12,000,000 general obligation bonds
§ A510-3. Franchises and services.
Enactment Date Description
Ord. No. 81-19 10-6-1981 Cable TV franchise granted to Lower Bucks
Cablevision, Inc. [Repealed by Ord. No. 97-05]
Ord. No. 87-16 8-18-1987 Executing agreement to utilize services of Upper
Moreland Township for repaving of certain roads
Ord. No. 97-05 3-25-1997 Granting a nonexclusive franchise to construct,
operate and maintain a CATV system to Lower
Bucks Cablevision, Inc., and deleting Ord. No.
81-19 in its entirety
Ord. No. 06-16 9-12-2006 Granting a nonexclusive franchise to Verizon
Pennsylvania, Inc., to construct, operate and
maintain a cable television system within the
Township
Ord. No. 07-10 8-14-2007 Joint petition to reactivate the land use appeal
approving a stipulation of settlement with T-Mobile
Northeast, LLC, and authorizing the signing of a
lease agreement for a cellular telecommunications
facility use on the property known as 337
Hulmeville Avenue
Ord. No. 07-12 11-13-2007 Nonexclusive franchise cable agreement with
Verizon Pennsylvania, Inc., to construct, operate
and maintain a cable television system within the
Township
Ord. No. 09-02 5-12-2009 Nonexclusive cable franchise agreement with
Comcast of Levittown, LLC, to maintain, construct,
operate and upgrade its cable system within the
Township
§ A510-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-4
A510:2
§ A510-4. Governmental and intergovernmental affairs.
Enactment Date Description
Ord. No. 21 9-25-1953 Social Security System joined by Township
Ord. No. 64-2 2-14-1964 Reassessment of all taxable property
Ord. No. 75-27 10-23-1975 Municipal Authority's assets transferred to
Township
Res. No. 80-7R 7-15-1980 Educational Service Agency established
Res. No. 80-10R 7-29-1980 Water and Sewer Advisory Board reaffirmed
Res. No. 83-12R 4-5-1983 Microfilm records destroyed
Res. No. 84-16R 6-5-1984 Deferred compensation plan, administered by
ICMA Retirement Trust
Res. No. 85-9R 4-2-1985 State Foreign Casualty Insurance tax funds
committed to Police Pension Fund
Res. No. 86-40R 12-23-1986 Designating the Township Manager as Chief
Administrative Officer with respect to employee
pension plans
Res. No. 87-9R 3-17-1987 Youth Aid Panel established
Ord. No. 87-21 10-20-1987 Local Government Investment Trust; authorization
to purchase shares and to become a settlor
Ord. No. 96-06 9-16-1996 Authorizing the removal of a certain unsafe
structure located at 1100 Gartner Lane and owned
by Gregory J. and Grace Costigan
Ord. No. 97-16 8-26-1997 Authorizing participation in the Delaware Valley
Municipal Health Cooperative for the purpose of
studying the feasibility of creating a health
insurance trust pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law
Ord. No. 02-02 2-26-2002 Authorizing the Township's Animal Control
Officer to perform animal control services and
enforcement functions within the Borough of
Langhorne Manor
Ord. No. 02-17 12-17-2002 Authorizing the Township to enter into an
intergovernmental agreement with Falls Township
for improvements to the intersection of Bristol-
Oxford Valley Road and Trenton Road
Ord. No. 04-05 7-13-2004 Amendment to the intergovernmental agreement
with Falls Township for improvements to the
intersection of Bristol-Oxford Valley Road and
Trenton Road
Ord. No. 2005-11 9-13-2005 Intergovernmental agreement with other Bucks
County municipalities for legal services for the
negotiation of an agreement with Verizon for
cable television services
§ A510-4 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-4
A510:3
Enactment Date Description
Ord. No. 2006-04 2-21-2006 Amendment to the intergovernmental agreement
with Falls Township for improvements to the
intersection of Bristol-Oxford Valley Road and
Trenton Road
Ord. No. 13-01 Authorizing participation in the Delaware Valley
Workers' Compensation Trust for the purposes of
reducing the cost of workers' compensation claims
through its participation in a group self-insurance
fund
§ A510-5. Plan approval.
Enactment Date Description
(Reserved)
§ A510-6. Public property.
Enactment Date Description
Ord. No. 79 11-12-1957 Municipal Building; land acquired
Ord. No. 61-4 2-9-1961 Agreement with Leah Shore: lease of lands within
Township park for recreation purposes
Ord. No. 75-34 12-5-1975 Right-of-way for sewer and water lines acquired
by eminent domain
Ord. No. 76-20 10-7-1976 Right-of-way for Hollybrooke sewer trunk line
acquired by eminent domain
Ord. No. 76-22 11-4-1976 Right-of-way for sewer and water lines for a U.S.
No. 1 ring road connection acquired by eminent
domain
Res. No. 79-8R Drainage easement through lands of Reedman
Corp.
Ord. No. 81-12 7-14-1981 Robert E. Moreland, Inc.; waterline easement
accepted
Ord. No. 82-5 2-9-1982 Windybush; small parcel accepted
Res. No. 85-13R 7-9-1985 Right-of-way for sewer in Penn Hill Drive area
acquired by eminent domain
Ord. No. 91-21 7-23-1991 Accepting dedication of open space parcels "A,"
"B" and "C" located in Cider Knoll Development
Ord. No. 92-22 7-23-1991 Accepting dedication of open space parcel "D"
located in the Laurel Oaks Development
Ord. No. 91-29 11-10-1991 Accepting dedication of a detention basin located
in Woods of Lincoln
Ord. No. 91-32 12-10-1991 Accepting dedication of a 2.240-acre detention
basin located in Lakeview Estates Development
§ A510-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-6
A510:4
Enactment Date Description
Ord. No. 92-1 2-11-1992 Accepting dedication of a street and retention
basin in the Agzigian/Sherrill Subdivision
Ord. No. 94-06 5-4-1994 Accepting dedication of open space in Heaton's
Mill Development as more particularly described
on the final plan of lots for said development
prepared by Pickering, Corts and Summerson, Inc.
Ord. No. 94-18 10-18-1994 Accepting dedication of open space in Neshaminy
Pointe Development as more particularly
described on the final plan of subdivision for Lee
D. Williams by Urwiler & Walter, Inc.
Ord. No. 97-08 4-15-1997 Accepting dedication of open space parcels as
public open space and accepting dedication of
streetlights located within the Idlewood of the
Neshaminy Development
Ord. No. 98-01 1-20-1998 Accepting dedication of open space in Henry's
Run Development as more particularly described
on the plan of lots for said development prepared
for Gianni Middletown Corp.
Ord. No. 99-05 5-11-1999 Accepting dedication of open space parcels "A"
and "B" in the Fairways Development
Ord. No. 02-08 8-6-2002 Accepting dedication of open space, of certain
water easements and facilities, certain sanitary
sewer easements, certain access easements, certain
stormwater easements and certain streets located
in the Villages of Flowers Mill and the Shoppes at
Flowers Mill
Ord. No. 03-01 1-21-2003 Accepting dedication of a certain parcel of land
between the easterly legal right-of-way line and
the center line of Richardson Avenue adjacent to
Tax Map Parcel Nos. 22-026-012-1 and 22-17-16
consisting of 5,294 square feet by Country
Builders, Inc.
Ord. No. 05-02 4-26-2005 Accepting dedication of certain open space
containing 61,127 square feet, Tax Parcel No.
22-026-022, Lot 9 in the Township of
Middletown, Bucks County
Ord. No. 12-02 2-6-2012 Vacating, abandoning and extinguishing a twentyfoot-
wide utility easement located on and across
Nova Property Development, LLC, fronting on
Walnut Street
Ord. No. 13-02 7-22-2013 Creating a permanent and perpetual utility
easement and stormwater management easement
over the entire portion of Old Oxford Valley Road
§ A510-6 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-6
A510:5
Enactment Date Description
Ord. No. 14-01 3-31-2014 Creating a permanent and perpetual utility
easement and stormwater management easement
over the entire portion of Sumac Street
§ A510-7. Sewers.
Enactment Date Description
Ord. No. 18 4-11-1953 Municipal Authority given power to construct
sewer facilities
Ord. No. 60-17 12-14-1960 Agreement with Lower Bucks County Joint
Municipal Authority (LBCJMA): treatment of
sewage from Oaklihurst-Langhorne Gables Area
Ord. No. 61-1 1-20-1961 Trenton road sewer construction to serve
Middletown Township schools
Ord. No. 61-3 4-6-1961 Sewer facilities construction in unspecified area
Ord. No. 61-7 4-6-1961 Grant of rights to Municipal Authority for sewer
construction
Ord. No. 61-8 4-6-1961 Lease of sewer system from Municipal Authority
Ord. No. 61-9 3-30-1961 Herbert Hoover School; agreement regarding
volume of sewage
Ord. No. 65-7 3-24-1965 Agreement with County Municipal Authority
regarding sewer system and sewer rentals
Ord. No. 67-23 10-25-1967 Grant of rights to Municipal Authority for sewer
construction
Ord. No. 67-24 10-25-1967 Plan approved for sewer construction by
Municipal Authority
Ord. No. 68-15 10-2-1968 Plan approved for sewer construction in Parkland-
Langhorne Terrace area by the Municipal
Authority
Ord. No. 68-16 10-2-1968 Lease of sewer system from Municipal Authority
Ord. No. 71-8 9-2-1971 Supplemental lease for sewage system to supply
additional working capital
Ord. No. 74-10 10-22-1974 Langhorne Gables-Hulmeville Terrace area; plan
approved for sewer construction
Ord. No. 74-11 10-22-1974 Langhorne Gables-Hulmeville Terrace area;
annual charges established
Ord. No. 74-12 10-22-1974 Langhorne Gables-Hulmeville Terrace area;
granting rights to Authority for construction
Ord. No. 74-13 10-22-1974 Langhorne Gables-Hulmeville Terrace area;
requiring property owners to connect
Ord. No. 74-14 10-22-1974 Lease of Langhorne Gables-Hulmeville Terrace
area sewer system from Municipal Authority
§ A510-6 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-7
A510:6
Enactment Date Description
Ord. No. 75-33 12-4-1975 Sewer I and Sewer II service areas designated
Res. No. 80-14R 11-25-1980 Area of Township between Langhorne Borough
and Langhorne Manor Borough and Route 413
included in official sewage facilities plan of
Langhorne Manor Borough
Ord. No. 95-12 6-6-1995 Accepting dedication of a sanitary sewer easement
in the Neshaminy Pointe Development as more
particularly described on the final plan of
subdivision prepared for Lee D. Williams by
Urwiler & Walter, Inc.
Ord. No. 98-02 1-20-1998 Accepting dedication of a five-foot-wide sanitary
sewer easement and a 20-foot-wide sanitary sewer
easement located in the Janney Station
Development
Ord. No. 99-05 5-11-1999 Accepting dedication of a certain 30-foot-wide
storm sewer and sanitary sewer easements "B" and
"C," of a certain 20-foot-wide storm sewer and
sanitary sewer easement "D," of a certain 20-footwide
emergency access easement "F," and of a
certain 20-foot-wide storm sewer easements "A"
and "E," all of the Fairways Development
Ord. No. 99-07 5-25-1999 Accepting dedication of certain drainage
easements, sanitary sewer easements and access,
driveway easements and of a certain sewage
pumping station located within the Wellington
Chase subdivision
§ A510-8. Streets and sidewalks.
This section contains an alphabetical listing of streets and, under each street, a
chronological listing of all ordained activities.
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Abbey Circle Accepted part Highland Gate
Development
90-20 12-4-1990
Adams Avenue Opened From Harrison
Avenue to Lincoln
Avenue
79-18 10-23-1979
Adams Avenue Improvement From Lincoln Avenue
to Woodland Avenue
02-12 9-24-2002
Adams Avenue Accepted part From Harrison
Avenue to Lincoln
Avenue
02-13 9-24-2002
§ A510-7 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-8
A510:7
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Adams Avenue Accepted part From Lincoln Avenue
to dead end behind
Woodland Avenue
02-13 9-24-2002
Adeline Place Accepted Unspecified 83-2 1-25-1983
Alberts Way Accepted Unspecified 81-21 12-15-1981
Alberts Way Accepted part Hampton Bridge
Development, Section
3
88-2 1-26-1988
Algate Road Accepted Unspecified 83-2 1-25-1983
Alscot Circle Accepted Ivystream
Development
88-27 10-25-1988
Alscot Lane Accepted Ivystream
Development
88-27 10-25-1988
Amerco Road Vacate Final plan of lots for
WGMS Industrial
Park as recorded in
Plan Book 81, page 38
00-03 2-24-2000
Amity Court Accepted Unspecified 81-22 12-15-1981
Amity Court Description
change
Unspecified 85-1 1-22-1985
Andover Drive Accepted Unspecified 79-14 8-28-1979
Andover Drive Accepted part Unspecified 80-19 10-21-1980
Andover Drive Accepted Unspecified 81-21 12-15-1981
Anita Circle Accepted Highland Gate
Development
90-20 12-4-1990
Apple Valley
Drive
Accepted part Highland Gate
Development
90-20 12-4-1990
Apple Valley
Drive
Accepted Apple Valley
Subdivision, Phase II
(Cider Knoll)
91-21 7-23-1991
Arch Avenue Name change Idlewood tract;
previously known as
"Ash Avenue"
78 -/-/1957
Arch Avenue Vacate portion From the intersection
of Ravine Avenue and
Arch Avenue
94-09 6-21-1994
Argyle Road Accepted part Silver Lake
Development
85-27 12-3-1985
Argyle Road Accepted part Silver Lake
Development
86-13 7-29-1986
§ A510-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-8
A510:8
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Atkinson Lane Accepted Maple Point
Development
87-26 12-8-1987
Atkinson Lane Accepted part Laurel Oaks
Development, Phase I
and I-A
91-22 7-23-1991
Baldwin Lane Accepted part Laurel Oaks
Development, Phase I
and I-A
91-22 7-23-1991
Banks Road Curbs North side, between
parcels 22-31-19 and
22-31-19-1
89-13 11-14-1989
Bartlett Street Name change Langhorne Highlands;
previously known as
"Center Street"
78 -/-/1957
Barley Court Accepted Silver Lake
Development
86-13 7-29-1986
Barnsbury Road Accepted Unspecified 83-2 1-25-1983
Barnsbury Road Accepted part Silver Lake
Development
85-27 12-3-1985
Barnsbury Road Accepted part Silver Lake
Development, Section
2
86-17 10-7-1986
Basil Road Accepted Silver Lake
Development
85-27 12-3-1985
Bateman Road Accepted Apple Valley
Subdivision, Phase II
(Cider Knoll)
91-21 7-23-1991
Baylis Road Accepted Silver Lake
development
86-13 7-29-1986
Bellaire Avenue Accepted part From SR 413 (New
Rodgers Road) to
Sandybrooke Drive
02-13 9-24-2002
Bellevue
Avenue
Curbs and walks From Hulmeville
Borough line to
Penndel Borough line
68-13 8-26-1968
Bernick Drive Accepted Unspecified 81-21 12-15-1981
Bernick Drive Accepted Unspecified 84-13 12-18-1984
Big Oak Road Accepted part Maple Point
Development
87-26 12-8-1987
§ A510-8 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-8
A510:9
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Big Oak Road Accepted part Apple Valley
Subdivision, Phase II
(Cider Knoll)
91-21 7-23-1991
Blue Bell
Avenue
Vacated part CVS Plaza
Development
91-27 10-22-1991
Boat Avenue Name change Lower Parkland;
previously known as
"Parkland Avenue"
78 -/-/1957
Boxwood Drive Accepted Ramblewood
Development
90-9 5-22-1990
Branford Way Accepted Unspecified 80-20 10-28-1980
Branford Way Accepted Hampton Bridge
Development,
Sections 2A and 2B
87-15 8-18-1987
Brick Mill
Street
Name change 1,350 feet east from
Hulmeville Road;
previously known as
"Cedar Street"
78 -/-/1957
Briggs Road Accepted part Highland Gate
Development
90-20 12-4-1990
Britany Street Accepted Neshaminy Point
Development
94-18 10-18-1994
Bromley Way Accepted Hampton Bridge
Development;
Sections 2A and 2B
87-15 8-18-1987
Brown Street Vacate portion From the center-line
intersection of Ravine
Avenue and Brown
Street
94-09 6-21-1994
Buchanan Drive Accepted From Highland
Avenue to end
(Highland Hills)
93-11 8-10-1993
Butternut Lane Accepted Entire length;
unspecified location
68-14 9-23-1968
Butternut Lane Name change Woodbourne;
previously known as
"Beech Lane"
78 -/-/1957
Butterworth
Lane
Accepted Unspecified 81-2 1-27-1981
Butterworth
Lane
Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 91-14 3-19-1991
§ A510-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-8
A510:10
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Cable Road Curbs Unspecified 81-10 6-23-1981
Cabot
Boulevard
Accepted Parcel "B" 75-32 11-25-1975
Cactus Road Curbs Unspecified 80-13 8-12-1980
Calicobush
Road
Curbs Unspecified 81-10 6-23-1981
Cambridge
Drive
Accepted Unspecified 84-13 12-18-1984
Cameo Place Curbs Unspecified 80-13 8-12-1980
Cameo Road Curbs Unspecified 80-13 8-12-1980
Canal Road Curbs Unspecified 81-10 6-23-1981
Canary Road Curbs Unspecified 81-10 6-23-1981
Candytuft Road Curbs Unspecified 81-10 6-23-1981
Canna Road Curbs Unspecified 80-13 8-12-1980
Canoebirch
Road
Curbs Unspecified 81-10 6-23-1981
Canton Lane Accepted Hampton Bridge
Development;
Sections 2A and 2B
87-15 8-18-1987
Canton Lane Accepted part Hampton Bridge
Development; Section
3
88-2 1-26-1988
Canvasback
Lane
Accepted part Unspecified 91-32 12-10-1991
Canyon Road Curbs Unspecified 81-10 6-23-1981
Cardinal Road Curbs Unspecified 81-10 6-23-1981
Carlene Court Accepted Quale Pas Estates
Development
95-13 6-27-1995
Carmen Lane Accepted Durham Chase
Development
95-15 9-26-1995
Catalpa Street Name change Langhorne
Improvement
Company tract;
previously known as
"Chestnut Street"
78 -/-/1957
Chaff Court Accepted Old Mill Woods
Development
88-5 3-8-1988
§ A510-8 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-8
A510:11
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Chancery Road Accepted Apple Valley
Subdivision, Phase II
(Cider Knoll)
91-21 7-23-1991
Cherry Street Vacated Unspecified 67-20 9-27-1967
Chestnut Street Vacated Beginning at corner of
Lincoln Highway
87-6 3-3-1987
Chickenfoot
Road
Vacated part Unspecified 68-19 11-18-1968
Chickenfoot
Road
Accepted part Unspecified 77-11 5-24-1977
Chickenfoot
Road
Vacated part Unspecified 77-11 5-24-1977
Chilton Place Accepted part Silver Lake
development
86-13 7-29-1986
Chilton Road Accepted part Silver Lake
Development
85-27 12-3-1985
Chilton Road Accepted part Silver Lake
development
86-13 7-29-1986
Choate Court Accepted Unspecified 81-21 12-15-1981
Circle Road Curbs Unspecified 81-10 6-23-1981
Claymont
Avenue
Curbs From Durham Road to
Lincoln Road
70-3 8-10-1970
Claymont
Avenue
Accepted Unspecified 76-26 12-2-1976
Claymont
Avenue
Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 91-14 3-19-1991
Clear Creek
Road
Accepted Northwesterly side of
Pine Glen Road
88-10 4-12-1988
Clearview
Avenue
Accepted part Unspecified 77-4 2-8-1977
Clett Rock Road Curbs Unspecified 80-13 8-12-1980
Cloister Road Curbs Unspecified 81-10 6-23-1981
Clover Drive Vacate Portion beginning at
Periwinkle Avenue
and ending at the
Neshaminy Creek
west of Periwinkle
Avenue
03-23 12-9-2003
Cobalt Drive
East
Curbs Unspecified 81-10 6-23-1981
§ A510-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-8
A510:12
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Cobalt Drive
South
Curbs Unspecified 80-13 8-12-1980
Colby Lane Accepted Unspecified 80-20 10-28-1980
Colonial Drive Accepted Unspecified 81-2 1-27-1981
Colonial Drive Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 91-14 3-19-1991
Concord Place Accepted Hampton Bridge
Development;
Sections 2A and 2B
87-15 8-18-1987
Cotton Road Curbs Unspecified 80-13 8-12-1980
Cottonwood
Drive
Accepted Eagles Mere
Development
89-1 3-14-1989
Coventry Lane Accepted Unspecified 79-14 8-28-1979
Creek Street Naming Oaklihurst; previously
an unnamed street or
way
78 -/-/1957
Crescent
Avenue
Accepted Neshaminy Point
Development
94-18 10-18-1994
Crestmont Lane Accepted part Laurel Oaks
Development, Phase I
and I-A
91-22 7-23-1991
Crestwood
Road
Curbs Unspecified 80-13 8-12-1980
Croasdale Drive Accepted Maple Point
Development
87-26 12-8-1987
Croasdale Drive Accepted Apple Valley
Subdivision, Phase II
(Cider Knoll)
Crown Road Curbs Unspecified 80-13 8-12-1980
Currant Avenue Name change Lower Parkland;
previously known as
"Janney Avenue"
78 -/-/1957
Currant Avenue Vacated Formerly known as
"Janney, Topham and
McCoy Avenues"
68-22 12-30-1968
Curry Hill Road Curbs Unspecified 80-13 8-12-1980
Cypress Avenue Name change Langhorne Gables;
previously known as
"Center Avenue"
78 -/-/1957
Cypress Avenue Accepted Unspecified portion 68-14 9-23-1968
§ A510-8 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-8
A510:13
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Cypress Avenue Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 91-14 3-19-1991
Danby Lane Accepted part Hampton Bridge
Development; Section
3
88-2 1-26-1988
Daos Court Accepted Unspecified 73-4 10-9-1973
Darrah Street Accepted part Unspecified 81-13 7-14-1981
Dawn Road Accepted part From Deep Dale
Drive West to Dawn
Road
02-13 9-24-2002
Dawson Road Accepted Silver Lake
Development
85-27 12-3-1985
Deep Dale
Drive
Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 90-4 2-20-1990
Deep Dale Way Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 90-4 2-20-1990
Deer Drive Name change Formerly known as
"Kay Avenue"
94-05 3-29-1994
Deer Drive Vacate portion From the center-line
intersection of Oak
Street and Deer Drive
94-09 6-21-1994
Deer Drive Accepted Idlewood on
Neshaminy
96-03 5-6-1996
Deer Drive Accepted A portion in Idlewood
on Neshaminy
Subdivision
98-04 1-27-1998
Denbign Road Accepted part Highland Gate
Development
90-20 12-4-1990
Detective
Christopher
Jones Way
Name change Formerly known as
"Shasta Road"; that
portion of Shasta
Road between North
Flowers Mill Road
and Forget Me Not
Lane, adjacent to
Police Department
and Municipal
Building
19-04 4-1-2019
Dilworth Lane Accepted Unspecified 81-22 12-15-1981
Dilworth Lane Description
change
Unspecified 85-1 1-22-1985
§ A510-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-8
A510:14
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Dilworth Lane Accepted part Laurel Oaks
Development
91-22 7-23-1991
Dogwood Street Name change Newtown Gardens;
previously known as
"Pear Street"
78 -/-/1957
Dorset Court Accepted Silver Lake
Development, Section
2
86-17 10-7-1986
Double Woods
Road
Accepted Westerly side of
Woodbourne Road
88-10 4-12-1988
Downhill Road Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 90-4 2-20-1990
Duxbury Drive Accepted Highland Pines
Subdivisions
97-12 6-10-1997
Duxbury Road Accepted Bucks Hill Farms II
Development
97-11 6-10-1997
Eagle Lane Naming Formerly known as
"Hill Avenue"
94-05 3-29-1994
Eagle Lane Vacate portion Formerly known as
"Hill Avenue"
94-09 6-21-1994
Eagle Lane Accepted Idlewood on the
Neshaminy
96-03 5-6-1996
Eagle Lane Vacate portion Unspecified 01-09 8-7-2001
East Lincoln
Highway
Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 90-4 2-20-1990
East Lincoln
Highway
Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 91-14 3-19-1991
East Lincoln
Highway
Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 92-2 3-3-1992
East Ravine
Street
Accepted A portion in Idlewood
on Neshaminy
Subdivision
98-04 1-27-1998
Eaton Court Accepted part Unspecified 80-19 10-21-1980
Edmond Street Vacated Between Virginia
Avenue and the
Langhorne Water Co.
77-30 12-13-1977
Edgemont Lane Accepted Fifty-foot right-ofway,
Station No.
100+40.00 to Station
110+98.36
00-02 1-18-2000
§ A510-8 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-8
A510:15
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Edgemont Lane Accepted Fifty-foot right-ofway,
Station No.
110+98.36 to Station
No. 119+92.72
00-02 1-18-2000
Edgemont Lane Accepted A thirty-foot-wide
utility easement as
filed in the Bucks
County Registrars
Office, Plan Book
290, Page No. 42
00-02 1-18-2000
Edgemont Lane Accepted A twenty-foot-wide
drainage easement
across Lot No. 1 as
shown on plan entitled
"Plan of Subdivision
of Bridgetown Gran"
00-02 1-18-2000
Edgemont Lane Accepted A drainage easement
across Lot No. and
Lot No. 5, Plan Book
290, Page No. 42
00-02 1-18-2000
Egerton Road Accepted Apple Valley
Subdivision, Phase II
(Cider Knoll)
91-21 7-23-1991
Elisa Lynn Way Accepted Unspecified 83-11 12-13-1983
Elisa Lynn Way Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 91-14 3-19-1991
Elizabeth Street Vacated part Between Virginia
Avenue and
Langhorne Water Co.
77-29 12-13-1977
Ellen Street Name change Langhorne Highlands;
previously known as
"Elm Street"
78 -/-/1957
Erica Drive Dedication Orchard Crossing 04-07 9-7-2004
Essex Lane Accepted Ivystream
Development
88-27 10-25-1988
Exeter Court Accepted Unspecified 81-21 12-15-1981
Fairhill Avenue Accepted A portion in Idlewood
on Neshaminy
Subdivision
98-04 1-27-1998
Fairman Lane Accepted Maple Point
Development
87-26 12-8-1987
§ A510-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-8
A510:16
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Fairview
Avenue
Vacated part A portion which
intersects with
Neshaminy Street for
a distance of 150.06
feet in an easterly
direction, consisting
of approximately
6,002.4 square feet
and abutting Tax
Parcel No. 22-035-007
04-01 3-9-2004
Fairway Drive Accepted Fairways
Development
99-05 5-11-1999
Falcon Road Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 90-4 2-20-1990
Farleigh Court Accepted part Unspecified 80-19 10-21-1980
Fawnhill Drive Accepted part Laurel Oaks
Development, Phase I
and I-A
91-22 7-23-1991
Fawnhill Drive Accepted part Laurel Oaks
Development, Phase II
91-33 12-17-1991
Fern Avenue Vacate Entire length from
Periwinkle Avenue to
Venetian Avenue
03-23 12-9-2003
Fern Drive Vacate Entire length from
Forrest Avenue to
Elmwood Avenue
03-23 12-9-2003
Fernwood
Avenue
Accepted In Langhorne Gables 79-7 5-22-1979
Fernwood
Avenue
Vacate Portion which
intersects with
Glenside Avenue and
Longwood Avenue
04-08 9-28-2004
Fir Avenue Accepted part Unspecified 83-11 12-13-1983
Fir Avenue Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 91-14 3-19-1991
First Street Accepted part Unspecified 81-13 7-14-1981
Fite Terrace Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 92-2 3-3-1992
Flame Drive Accepted Unspecified 83-11 12-13-1983
Flame Drive Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 91-14 3-19-1991
§ A510-8 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-8
A510:17
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Flint Road Accepted part Highland Gate
Development
90-20 12-4-1990
Flint Road Accepted Apple Valley
Subdivision, Phase II
(Cider Knoll)
91-21 7-23-1991
Flour Lane Accepted Old Mill Woods
Development
88-5 3-8-1988
Ford Avenue Accepted Portion located in
Henry's Run
Development
98-01 1-20-1998
Forsythia Drive
East
Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 95-11 6-6-1995
Forsythia Drive
North
Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 98-06 3-24-1998
Forsythia Drive
South
Curb
reconstruction
From Flagstone Place
to Firtree Road
93-05 4-13-1993
Fotheringhem
Court
Accepted part From SR 213 (Maple
Avenue) to SR 213
(Maple Avenue)
02-13 9-24-2002
Fountain Road Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 90-4 2-20-1990
Fox Court Accepted Unspecified 81-23 12-15-1981
Friendship Lane Accepted Unspecified 67-2 2-22-1967
Frosty Hollow
Road
Accepted part From SR 2049
(Durham Road) to
Green Meadow Drive
(T-831)
02-13 9-24-2002
Fullturn Road Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 90-4 2-20-1990
Gables Court Accepted Oaklihurst Gables
Development
91-9 2-19-1991
Garden Court Accepted Agzigian/Sherrill
Subdivision
92-1 2-11-1992
Gartner Lane Vacate Unopened portion 05-12 11-15-2005
Garrison Court Accepted Unspecified 79-14 8-28-1979
Gibson Avenue Vacated Formerly known as
"Janney, Topham and
McCoy Avenues"
68-22 12-30-1968
Gilliam Avenue Vacated Unspecified 67-20 9-27-1967
§ A510-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-8
A510:18
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Gilliam Avenue Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 91-14 3-19-1991
Gladstone Road Accepted part Highland Gate
Development
90-20 12-4-1990
Golf Club Drive Accepted Windy Bush
Development
85-11 6-4-1985
Granary Lane Accepted Old Mill Woods
Development
88-5 3-8-1988
Grand Avenue Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 91-14 3-19-1991
Grand Avenue Vacate portion From the center-line
intersection of Ravine
Avenue and Grand
Avenue
94-09 6-21-1994
Grand Avenue Accepted Idlewood on
Neshaminy
96-03 5-6-1996
Grand Avenue Accepted A portion in Idlewood
on Neshaminy
Subdivision
98-04 1-27-1998
Grane Avenue Vacated part Unspecified 75-7 3-5-1975
Granite Avenue Name change Idlewood tract;
previously known as
"Grove Avenue"
78 -/-/1957
Granite Avenue Naming Formerly known as
"Grove Street"
94-05 3-29-1994
Granite Street Vacate portion From the center-line
intersection of
Orchard Avenue and
Granite Street
(formerly "Grove
Street")
94-09 6-21-1994
Granite Street Accepted A portion of Idlewood
on Neshaminy
Subdivision
98-04 1-27-1998
Granite Hill
Court
Accepted Unspecified 82-13 12-21-1982
Green Street Renaming Pheasant Drive
Green Street Vacate portion From the center-line
intersection of Holly
Avenue and Green
Street
94-09 6-21-1994
§ A510-8 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-8
A510:19
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Green Meadow
Drive
Accepted part From Tina Drive to
Frosty Hollow Road
(T-325)
02-13 9-24-2002
Green Meadow
Drive
Accepted part From Frosty Hollow
Road (T-325) to
Carmen Lane (T-830)
02-13 9-24-2002
Green Meadow
Lane
Accepted Durham Chase
Development
95-15 9-26-1995
Green Valley
Road
Accepted Unspecified 67-2 2-22-1967
Gunning Lane Accepted part Laurel Oaks
Development, Phase I
and I-A
91-22 7-23-1991
Gunning Lane Accepted part Laurel Oaks
Development, Phase II
91-33 12-17-1991
Haines Court Accepted part Swan Pointe
Development
88-3 2-23-1988
Halfturn Road Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 90-4 2-20-1990
Hampton Court Accepted part Hampton Bridge
Development; Section
3
88-2 1-26-1988
Hampton Drive Accepted Hampton Bridge
Development;
Sections 2A and 2B
87-15 8-18-1987
Hampton Drive Accepted part Hampton Bridge
Development; Section
3
88-2 1-26-1988
Hanover Court Accepted Unspecified 84-13 12-18-1984
Harmony Road Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 94-12 6-28-1994
Harwood Court Accepted Apple Valley
Subdivision, Phase II
(Cider Knoll)
91-21 7-23-1991
Harrison
Avenue
Accepted Unspecified 83-11 12-13-1983
Harrison
Avenue
Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 91-14 3-19-1991
Harrow Road Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 90-4 2-20-1990
§ A510-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-8
A510:20
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Hay Road Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 94-09 6-28-1994
Hazel Avenue Accepted part Unspecified 77-4 2-8-1977
Healy Court Accepted Hampton Bridge
Development;
Sections 2A and 2B
87-15 8-18-1987
Healy Way Accepted Hampton Bridge
Development;
Sections 2A and 2B
87-15 8-18-1987
Heaton's Mill
Circle
Accepted Heaton's Mill final
plan
94-06 5-3-1994
Heaton's Mill
Drive
Accepted Heaton's Mill final
plan
94-06 5-3-1994
Henry Avenue Name change Ruhl-Widmaier Tract;
previously known as
"Hazel Avenue"
78 -/-/1957
Henry Avenue Accepted Woods of Lincoln
Subdivision
91-28 11-12-1991
Heston Court Accepted Unspecified 81-22 12-15-1981
Heston Court description
change
Unspecified 85-1 1-22-1985
Hickory Street Name change Ruhl-Widmaier Tract;
previously known as
"Highland Street"
78 -/-/1957
Hidden Spring
Lane
Accepted Westerly side of
White Swan Lane
88-10 4-12-1988
Highland Park
Place
Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 95-11 6-6-1995
High Point
Circle
Accepted Neshaminy Point
Development
94-18 10-18-1994
High Point
Circle
Accepted Neshaminy Point
Development
95-12 6-6-1995
Hill Avenue Renaming Eagle Lane 94-05 3-29-1994
Hill Avenue Vacate portion From the center-line
intersection of Fairhill
Avenue and Hill
Avenue
94-09 6-21-1994
Hillbrook Lane Accepted part Laurel Oaks
Development, Phase II
91-33 12-17-1991
§ A510-8 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-8
A510:21
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Hillcrest
Avenue
Name change Idlewood Tract;
previously known as
"Hill Avenue"
78 -/-/1957
Hilltop Court Accepted Unspecified 82-13 12-21-1982
Holly Avenue Renaming Turtle Lane 94-05 3-29-1994
Hollybrooke
Drive
Accepted Unspecified 75-26 10-2-1975
Hollybrooke
Drive
Accepted part In Hollybrooke
Development;
included parking court
89-20 12-19-1989
Hollywood
Avenue
Accepted part Unspecified 77-4 2-8-1977
Hollywood
Avenue
Vacated part At Buckthorne
Avenue
77-4 2-8-1977
Hollywood
Avenue
Vacated part Between Beechwood
Avenue and
Clearview Avenue
77-17 8-2-1977
Homestead
Road
Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 90-4 2-20-1990
Hulme Avenue Accepted Unspecified portion 68-14 9-23-1968
Hulme Street Accepted part Unspecified 81-13 7-14-1981
Huntington
Place
Accepted Unspecified 80-20 10-28-1980
Idle Avenue Vacate portion From the center-line
intersection of Oak
Avenue and Idle
Avenue
94-09 6-21-1994
International
Road
Vacate Final plan of lots for
WGMS Industrial
Park, recorded in Plan
Book 81, page 38
00-03 2-24-2000
Iron Rock Court Accepted Summit Trace
Development
90-10 6-26-1990
Ithan Lane Accepted part Laurel Hills
Development, Phase II
91-33 12-17-1991
Ivy Court Accepted Apple Valley
Subdivision, Phase II
(Cider Knoll)
91-21 7-23-1991
James Court Accepted Unspecified 81-21 12-15-1981
Janney Terrace Accepted Unspecified 67-2 2-22-1967
§ A510-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-8
A510:22
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Janney Terrace Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 92-2 3-3-1992
Jefferson
Avenue
Accepted part Oaklihurst
Development
89-17 12-12-1989
Jefferson
Avenue
Road
construction
From Harrison
Avenue to Lincoln
Road
90-1 1-9-1990
Jefferson
Avenue
Improvement From Longview
Avenue to Harrison
Avenue
02-05 4-2-2002
Jefferson
Avenue
Accepted part From Longview
Avenue to Harrison
Avenue
02-13 9-24-2002
Jeffrey Lane Accepted Unspecified 81-23 12-15-1981
Joan Trail Accepted part Swan Pointe
Development
88-3 2-23-1988
Katie Drive Accepted part Swan Pointe
Development
88-3 2-23-1988
Kay Avenue Renaming Deer Drive 94-05 3-29-1994
Kenton Drive Accepted part Unspecified 80-19 10-21-1980
Keystone Court Accepted Unspecified 79-22 12-4-1979
Kilburn Road Accepted part Highland Gate
Development
90-20 12-4-1990
Kilburn Road Accepted Apple Valley
Subdivision, Phase II
(Cider Knoll)
91-21 7-23-1991
Knollbrook
Drive
Accepted part Laurel Oaks
Development, Phase I
and I-A
91-22 7-23-1991
Laurel Drive Vacate Entire length 03-23 12-9-2003
Laurel Oaks
Drive
Accepted part Laurel Oaks
Development, Phase I
and I-A
91-22 7-23-1991
Laurel Oaks
Drive
Accepted part Laurel Oaks
Development, Phase II
91-33 12-17-1991
Lenape Circle Accepted Unspecified 67-2 2-22-1967
Lincoln Avenue Accepted From Adams Avenue
to Jefferson Avenue
79-18 10-23-1979
Lincoln Avenue Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 91-14 3-19-1991
§ A510-8 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-8
A510:23
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Lincoln Avenue Accepted part From Jefferson
Avenue to Adams
Avenue
02-13 9-24-2002
Linden Avenue Accepted Unspecified portion 68-14 9-23-1968
Linden Avenue Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 91-14 3-19-1991
Lollard Court Accepted part Highland Gate
Development
90-20 12-4-1990
Longview
Avenue
Accepted Unspecified portion 68-14 9-23-1968
Longview
Avenue
Vacated part Unspecified 73-2 9-11-1973
Longview
Avenue
Accepted Unspecified 83-11 12-13-1983
Lowell Court Accepted Unspecified 79-14 8-28-1979
Madison
Avenue
Curbs and walks From Woodland
Avenue to Trenton
Road
65-4 2-24-1965
Magnolia Street Name change Langhorne Highlands;
previously known as
"Cedar Street"
78 -/-/1957
Mallard Drive Accepted Westerly side of
White Swan Way
88-10 4-12-1988
Mallard Lane Accepted part Unspecified 91-32 12-10-1991
Maple Point
Drive
Accepted Unspecified 81-22 12-15-1981
Maple Point
Drive
Description
change
Unspecified 85-1 1-22-1985
Maple Point
Drive
Accepted part Maple Point
Development
87-26 12-8-1987
Maplewood
Drive
Accepted part From Dawn Road to
Dawn Road
02-13 9-24-2002
Markham Court Accepted Unspecified 81-22 12-15-1981
Markham Court Description
change
Unspecified 85-1 1-22-1985
Marshall
Avenue
Vacated part From intersection with
Green Avenue
87-4 2-24-1987
§ A510-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-8
A510:24
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Marshall
Avenue
Accepted part From Brendwood
Drive (T-624) to dead
end at Township line
with Langhorne
Borough
02-13 9-24-2002
Meadowview
Court
Accepted Summit Trace
Development
90-10 6-26-1990
Middle Avenue Accepted part Unspecified 81-13 7-14-1981
Midway
Avenue
Accepted Unspecified 79-15 8-28-1979
Mill Creek
Avenue
Name change 1,200 feet north of
Lincoln Highway;
previously known as
"Hill Top Avenue"
78 -/-/1957
Mill Pond Place Accepted part Swan Pointe
Development
88-3 2-23-1988
Millstone Court Accepted Old Mill Woods
Development
88-5 3-8-1988
Mistletoe Drive Vacate Portion beginning at
Periwinkle Avenue
and ending at Blue
Bell Avenue, and
portion beginning at
Bridle Drive and
ending at the
Neshaminy Creek
03-23 12-9-2003
Moon Drive Accepted part From Pickering Bend
to Pickering Bend
02-13 9-24-2002
Mulberry Court Accepted Eagles Mere
Development
89-1 3-14-1989
Myrtlewood
Avenue
Accepted part Unspecified 77-4 2-8-1977
Neshaminy
Street
Curbs At Shaw Avenue 60-10 6-22-1960
New Falls Road Named Formerly known as
"Newportville-
Fallsington Road"
75-17 7-10-1975
Newgate Road Accepted Highland Gate
Development
90-20 12-4-1990
Norsam Drive Accepted part Laurel Oaks
Development, Phase II
91-33 12-17-1991
§ A510-8 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-8
A510:25
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Norsam Lane Accepted part Laurel Oaks
Development, Phase I
and I-A
91-22 7-23-1991
North
Clearview
Avenue
Accepted part Unspecified 83-7 7-26-1983
Oak Ridge
Drive
Accepted Unspecified 82-13 12-21-1982
Oak Ridge
Drive
Accepted part Summit Trace
Development
90-10 6-26-1990
Oak Street Vacate portion Idlewood on the
Neshaminy
Subdivision
94-09 6-21-1994
Oakwynne
Terrace
Accepted part Laurel Oaks
Development, Phase I
and I-A
91-22 7-23-1991
Old Lincoln
Highway
Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 91-14 3-19-1991
Old Mill Drive Accepted Old Mill Woods
Development
88-5 3-8-1988
Orchard Avenue Vacate portion From the center-line
intersection of Ravine
Avenue and Orchard
Avenue
94-09 6-21-1994
Orchard Avenue Accepted Idlewood on the
Neshaminy
96-03 5-6-1996
Orchard Avenue Accepted A portion in Idlewood
on Neshaminy
Subdivision
98-04 1-27-1998
Oriental Avenue Vacated part At Langhorne Terrace 62-6 5-9-1962
Oriental Avenue Vacate Entire length 03-23 12-9-2003
Oswin Turn Accepted Ivystream
Development
88-27 10-25-1988
Oxford Court Accepted Unspecified 78-7 5-2-1978
Oxford Drive Accepted Ivystream
Development
88-27 10-25-1988
Parcel B Dedication Unspecified 2005-08 8-9-2005
Par Drive Accepted Fairways
Development
99-05 5-11-1999
§ A510-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-8
A510:26
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Park Avenue Vacate portion From the center-line
intersection of Sumac
Street and Park
Avenue
94-09 6-21-1994
Parkside Drive Accepted Luxembourg Estates
Development
98-13 11-24-1998
Parkview
Avenue
Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 91-14 3-19-1991
Paxson Lane Accepted Maple Point
Development
87-26 12-8-1987
Paxson Lane Accepted Highland Gate
Development
90-20 12-4-1990
Pear Street Name change Langhorne Highlands;
previously known as
"Pine Street"
78 -/-/1957
Peel Road Accepted Highland Gate
Development
90-20 12-4-1990
Penncrest Drive
East
Accepted Unspecified 68-1 2-12-1968
Penncrest Drive
North
Accepted Unspecified 68-1 2-12-1968
Penncrest Drive
West
Accepted Unspecified 68-1 2-12-1968
Penn Hills
Drive
Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 88-16 7-19-1988
Pheasant Drive Accepted A portion in Idlewood
on Neshaminy
Subdivision
98-04 1-27-1998
Pheasant Drive Naming Formerly known as
"Green Street"
94-05 3-29-1994
Pheasant Drive Vacate portion Formerly known as
"Green Street"
94-09 6-21-1994
Pheasant Drive Vacate portion From Fairhill Avenue
to Turtle Lane
94-14 9-13-1994
Pickering Bend Accepted part From SR 2033
(Woodbourne Road)
to SR 2033
(Woodbourne Road)
02-13 9-24-2002
Pin Oak Drive Accepted Eagles Mere
Development
89-1 3-14-1989
§ A510-8 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-8
A510:27
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Pine Glen Road Accepted part Swan Pointe
Development
88-3 2-23-1988
Pine Tree
Terrace
Accepted part Laurel Oaks
Development, Phase II
91-33 12-17-1991
Pintail Court Accepted part Unspecified 91-32 12-10-1991
Playwicki Street Extension Across open space
known as Tax Map
Parcel No. 22-008-130
04-03 3-9-2004
Plum Street Name change Langhorne Highlands;
previously known as
"Oak Street"
78 -/-/1957
Poplar Avenue Accepted Bucks Hill Farms II
Development
97-11 6-10-1997
Popular Street Accepted Unspecified portion 68-14 9-23-1968
Princeton Court Accepted Unspecified 78-7 5-2-1978
Quaker Circle Accepted part Highland Gate
Development
90-20 12-4-1990
Railroad Street Name change Hilltop lots;
previously known as
"Reading Street"
78 -/-/1957
Raintree Court Accepted part Summit Trace
Development
90-10 6-26-1990
Ralph Avenue Vacated part Unspecified 62-2 2-28-1962
Ralph Avenue Vacated Between Rodgers
Road and East End
Avenue
81-7 4-28-1981
Ralph Avenue Accepted part From SR 2049
(Durham Road) to
West End Avenue
02-13 9-24-2002
Ravine Street Name change Portion between Old
Lincoln Highway and
Eagle Lane shall be
called "East Ravine
Avenue"
94-05 3-29-1994
Ravine Street Vacate portion From the center-line
intersection of Oak
Street and Ravine
Avenue (formerly
"Fern Avenue")
94-09 6-21-1994
Red Ridge Road Curbs Unspecified 80-13 8-12-1980
Red Rose Way Curbs Unspecified 81-10 6-23-1981
§ A510-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-8
A510:28
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Ridge Drive Accepted part From SR 413 (New
Rodgers Road) to
Dawn Road
02-13 9-24-2002
Rising Sun
Avenue
Vacate Portion abutting Tax
Parcel Nos.
22-019-211,
22-019-211.1,
22-019-212,
22-019-212.1,
22-019-213,
22-019-213.1 and
22-019-214
04-09 12-21-2004
Robin Circle Accepted Unspecified 80-18 10-21-1980
Robinwood
Drive
Accepted Unspecified 80-18 10-21-1980
Rugby Lane Accepted part Laurel Oaks
Development
91-33 12-17-1991
Sandybrooke
Drive
Accepted part From Bellaire Avenue
to Bellaire Avenue
02-13 9-24-2002
Sanitary sewer
easement
Dedication Orchard Crossing,
over and under Lot A
04-07 9-7-2004
Scarlet Oak
Road
Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 90-4 2-20-1990
Sequoia Street Name change Langhorne Highlands;
previously known as
"Chestnut Street"
78 -/-/1957
Service Road V Vacated Adjacent to Tax
Parcel No. 22-057-041
03-08 5-13-2003
Shaw Avenue Curbs From Neshaminy
Street to Hillside
Avenue
60-10 6-22-1960
Shaw Avenue Curbs costs From Neshaminy to
Hillside Avenue
61-12 5-24-1961
Shaw Avenue Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 88-16 7-19-1988
Shelton Lane Accepted Hampton Bridge
Development;
Sections 2A and 2B
87-15 8-18-1987
Silver Lake
Road
Accepted part Unspecified 83-2 1-25-1983
§ A510-8 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-8
A510:29
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Silver Lake
Road
Annexed Adjacent to Newtown
Township
90-14 7-10-1990
Snowball Drive Curbs Unspecified 80-13 8-12-1980
Stoneybrook
Court
Accepted part Summit Trace
Development
90-10 6-26-1990
Storm sewer
easements
Dedication Orchard Crossing 04-07 9-7-2004
Strawberry
Circle
Accepted Strawberry Ridge I 80-6 -/-/1980
Strawberry
Lane
Accepted Strawberry Ridge II 85-25 11-19-1985
Summit Trace
Road
Accepted Unspecified 82-13 12-21-1982
Sunny Hill
Drive
Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 92-2 3-3-1992
Sunset Avenue Vacated part Unspecified 75-8 3-5-1975
Swamp Road Vacated part From Big Oak Road
to I-95 right-of-way
90-5 3-13-1990
Swift Road Relocated Between Banks Road
and Woodbourne
Road
88-6R 3-15-1988
Swift Road Accepted Easterly side of White
Swan Way
88-10 4-12-1988
Tanglewood
Drive
Accepted Unspecified 79-22 12-4-1979
Tareyton Drive Accepted Unspecified 78-7 5-2-1978
Tareyton Drive Accepted Unspecified 79-14 8-28-1979
Tareyton Drive Accepted part Unspecified 80-19 10-21-1980
Tareyton Drive Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 90-4 2-20-1990
Taylor Drive Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 92-2 3-3-1992
Teal Drive Accepted part Unspecified 91-32 12-10-1991
Thistle Road Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 92-2 3-3-1991
Timber Lane Accepted From LR 281 to end
(Timberwoods)
93-06 4-27-1993
Tina Drive Accepted Durham Chase
Development
95-15 9-26-1995
§ A510-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-8
A510:30
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Tina Drive Accepted part From dead end to
Frosty Hollow Road
(T-325)
02-13 9-24-2002
Tina Drive Accepted part From Frosty Hollow
Road (T-325) to
Green Meadow Drive
(T-831)
02-13 9-24-2002
Tinder Road Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 92-2 3-3-1992
Tinsel Road Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 92-02 3-3-1992
Tollgate Road Vacated part In Core Creek Park
area
72-11 10-23-1972
Towpath Road Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 92-2 3-3-1992
Township Line
Road
Opening Between Langhorne-
Yardley Road and
Village Road
94-01 1-22-1994
Trail Road Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 92-2 3-3-1992
Trappe Lane Accepted Maple Point
Development
87-26 12-8-1987
Trellis Road Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 92-2 3-3-1992
Tulip Tree Road Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 92-2 3-3-1992
Turtle Avenue Accepted A portion in Idlewood
on Neshaminy
Subdivision
98-04 1-27-1998
Turtle Lane Name change Formerly known as
"Holly Avenue"
94-05 3-29-1994
Umber Road Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 90-4 2-20-1990
Underwood
Road
Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 90-4 2-20-1990
Unity Turn Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 90-4 2-20-1990
Unnamed
streets
Accepted Parcel "A" 75-32 11-25-1975
§ A510-8 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-8
A510:31
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Unnamed
streets
Accepted Parcel "A" of Cabot &
Forbes Co. Business
Park
79-9R 8-14-1979
Unnamed
streets
Accepted Parcel "B" of Cabot &
Forbes Co. Business
Park
79-16R 11-13-1979
Unnamed
streets
Improvements Unspecified 86-15 7-29-1986
Unnamed street Vacated In the Green Valley
Subdivision
02-03 2-26-2002
Unnamed street Vacate Unspecified 05-12 11-15-2005
Uphill Road Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 90-4 2-20-1990
Upland Road Curb
reconstruction
Unspecified 90-4 2-20-1990
Valley Court Accepted Unspecified 74-8 9-11-1974
Valley Road Accepted part Unspecified 73-4 10-9-1973
Valley View
Road
Accepted part Unspecified 74-8 9-11-1974
Venetian
Avenue
Vacate Entire length 03-23 12-9-2003
Village Road Vacated part In Core Creek Park
area
72-11 10-23-1972
Village Road Accepted part Unspecified 91-32 12-10-1991
Village Road Accepted part From Township Line
Road to Farm
Driveway
02-13 9-24-2002
Wain Lane Accepted Unspecified 81-22 12-15-1981
Wain Lane Description
change
Unspecified 85-1 1-22-1985
Waldon Road Accepted Unspecified 84-13 12-18-1984
Walnut Street Vacated Unspecified 73-1 1-22-1973
Wellington
Drive
Accepted Wellington Chase
Subdivision
99-07 5-25-1999
West End
Avenue
Vacated part Unspecified 62-2 2-28-1962
Wheatsheaf
Lane
Accepted Old Mill Woods
Development
88-5 3-8-1988
§ A510-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-8
A510:32
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Wheel Court Accepted Old Mill Woods
Development
88-5 3-8-1988
Wheeler Way Accepted Parcel "A" 75-32 11-25-1975
White Ash
Drive
Accepted Eagles Mere
Development
89-1 3-14-1989
White Swan
Way
Accepted part Swan Pointe
Development
88-3 2-23-1988
White Swan
Way
Accepted Northerly side of
Swift Road
88-10 4-12-1988
Willow Avenue Accepted Unspecified portion 68-14 9-23-1968
Windham Drive Accepted Unspecified 80-20 10-28-1980
Windsor Street Name change Langhorne
Improvement
Company Tract;
previously known as
"Cherry Street"
78 -/-/1957
Wisteria
Avenue
Opening Unspecified 07-06 4-17-2007
Woodbourne
Road and
Langhorne-
Newtown Road
Dedication Orchard Crossing 04-07 9-7-2004
Wood Court Accepted Easterly portion 80-18 10-21-1980
Wood Court Accepted Westerly portion 80-18 10-21-1980
Wood Duck
Lane
Accepted part Unspecified 91-32 12-10-1991
Wood Lane Dedication Villages of Flowers
Mill
2005-08 8-9-2005
Wood Stream
Court
Accepted part Summit Trace
Development
90-10 6-26-1990
Woodbine
Avenue
Accepted part Unspecified 77-4 2-8-1977
Woodbourne
Road
Accepted part Swan Pointe
Development
88-3 2-23-1988
Woodbourne
Road
Accepted Westerly side of
Woodbourne Road
and Double Woods
88-10 4-12-1988
Woodbourne
Road
Accepted Eagles Mere
Development
89-1 3-14-1989
§ A510-8 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-8
A510:33
Name Activity Location
Ord. No./
Res. No. Date
Woodbourne
Road
Accepted part Apple Valley
Subdivision, Phase II
(Cider Knoll)
91-21 7-23-1991
Woodbourne
Emilie
Curbs and walks From Terrace Road to
U.S. Route 1
60-16 9-9-1960
Woodbourne
Emilie
Curb costs From Terrace Road to
U.S. Route 1
62-7 5-23-1962
Woodland
Avenue
Curbs and walks From Bellevue
Avenue to Madison
Avenue
68-13 8-26-1968
Woods Edge
Place
Accepted part Summit Trace
Development
90-10 6-26-1990
Woodward
Avenue
Name change Hulmeville Park
Heights; previously
known as "Woodland
Avenue"
78 -/-/1957
Wychwood
Lane and open
space and
detention basin
area
Accepted Wychwood Glen
Development
88-8 3-29-1988
Zimmerman
Lane
Accepted part From Durham Road to
dead end
02-13 9-24-2002
Coolidge
Avenue
Vacate portion Between Ford Avenue
and Wesley Avenue
10-04 11-15-2010
Polo Road Acceptance Laurel Oaks Preserve
residential subdivision
11-05 10-17-2011
Glenside
Avenue
Vacate portion Between Cypress
Avenue and Fernwood
Avenue
11-06 10-17-2011
Old Oxford
Valley Road
Vacate portion Between the
properties of Kevin D.
Flynn, dba Flynn 1980
Partnership and Falls
Township
13-02 7-22-2013
Sumac Street Vacate portion Between the
properties of Chad
Stellato and Sumac
Street
14-01 3-31-2014
§ A510-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-9
A510:34
§ A510-9. Water.
Enactment Date Description
Ord. No. 72-4 6-30-1972 Water and sewer facilities leased from Municipal
Authority
Ord. No. 72-5 6-30-1972 Construction of facilities by Municipal Authority
Ord. No. 75-31 12-4-1975 Water District No. 1 established
Res. No. 80-11R 8-12-1980 Wells No. 8, 9 and 14 conveyed from Langhorne
Spring Water District to Water District No. 1 for
$48,125
Ord. No. 75-12 4-23-1975 Repealed Ord. No. 75-1 which issued revenue
bonds for water system improvements
Res. No. 80-12R 9-9-1980 Stormwater facilities in Old Mill Wood
Development accepted
Ord. No. 93-14 10-12-1993 Maple Point Water District (established by Ord.
No. 75-1) terminated
Ord. No. 97-11 6-10-1997 Accepting dedication of water easement known as
"water easement A"; accepting dedication of
drainage easements known as "storm/basin
easement B" and "storm/basin easement D"; and
accepting dedication of a sanitary sewer easement
know as "sanitary sewer easement C"; all located
in the Buck Hill Farms II Development
Ord. No. 97-12 6-10-1997 Accepting dedication of easements known as
"20-foot-wide water main, drainage and landscape
easement through Lots 17-24 and 29" and "20-foot
easement through Lot 28"; accepting dedication of
storm sewer easement known as "storm sewer
easement through Lot 25"; accepting dedication of
detention basin area known as "detention basin
area Lot 28"; all located in the Highland Pines
Development
Ord. No. 99-05 5-11-1999 Accepting dedication of a certain fifteen-foot-wide
water service easement in the Fairways
Development
§ A510-10. Zoning; prior ordinances.
Enactment Date Description
Ord. No. 5 2-23-1948 Zoning regulations
Ord. No. 8 12-8-1949 District reclassification
Ord. No. 10 3-21-1951 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 13 10-4-1951 District reclassification
Ord. No. 16 2-2-1953 District reclassification
§ A510-9 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-10
A510:35
Enactment Date Description
Ord. No. 17 2-2-1953 District reclassification
Ord. No. 19 8-21-1953 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 20 8-21-1953 District reclassification
Ord. No. 22 10-30-1953 District reclassification
Ord. No. 23 10-30-1953 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 24 10-30-1953 District reclassification
Ord. No. 25 10-30-1953 District reclassification
Ord. No. 26 1-22-1954 District reclassification
Ord. No. 28 3-5-1954 District reclassification
Ord. No. 30 5-7-1954 District reclassification
Ord. No. 31 5-7-1954 District reclassification
Ord. No. 33 5-28-1954 District reclassification
Ord. No. 34 5-28-1954 District reclassification
Ord. No. 35 7-16-1954 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 38 8-6-1954 District reclassification
Ord. No. 39 8-6-1954 District reclassification
Ord. No. 41 8-30-1954 District reclassification
Ord. No. 42 8-30-1954 District reclassification
Ord. No. 43 9-8-1954 District reclassification
Ord. No. 47 1-7-1955 District reclassification
Ord. No. 48 1-7-1955 District reclassification
Ord. No. 49 1-7-1955 District reclassification
Ord. No. 50 1-20-1955 District reclassification
Ord. No. 51 4-8-1955 District reclassification
Ord. No. 52 6-10-1955 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 54 9-6-1955 District reclassification
Ord. No. 55 9-6-1955 District reclassification
Ord. No. 61 5-21-1956 District reclassification
Ord. No. 62 6-15-1956 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 63 6-15-1956 District reclassification
Ord. No. 64 7-13-1956 District reclassification
Ord. No. 65 8-3-1956 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 66 8-3-1956 District reclassification
Ord. No. 67 8-3-1956 District reclassification
Ord. No. 68 8-3-1956 District reclassification
Ord. No. 69 10-3-1956 District reclassification
§ A510-10 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-10
A510:36
Enactment Date Description
Ord. No. 72 3-19-1957 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 73 3-19-1957 District reclassification
Ord. No. 74 3-19-1957 District reclassification
Ord. No. 75 3-19-1957 District reclassification
Ord. No. 76 3-19-1957 District reclassification
Ord. No. 77 3-19-1957 District reclassification
Ord. No. 83 5-21-1958 District reclassification
Ord. No. 85 6-18-1958 District reclassification
Ord. No. 86 7-9-1958 District reclassification
Ord. No. 87 7-9-1958 District reclassification
Ord. No. 88 10-8-1958 District reclassification
Ord. No. 89 10-22-1958 District reclassification
Ord. No. 59-1 2-23-1959 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 59-2R 2-23-1959 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 59-3 3-9-1959 District reclassification
Ord. No. 59-4 3-23-1959 District reclassification
Ord. No. 59-6 7-8-1959 District reclassification
Ord. No. 59-9 9-23-1959 District reclassification
Ord. No. 59-10 9-23-1959 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 59-12 10-14-1959 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 59-13 11-11-1959 District reclassification
Ord. No. 59-14 12-9-1959 District reclassification
Ord. No. 59-15 12-9-1959 District reclassification
Ord. No. 60-6 3-9-1960 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 60-8 4-13-1960 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 60-9 4-27-1960 District reclassification
Ord. No. 60-11 7-13-1960 District reclassification
Ord. No. 60-14 8-24-1960 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 60-18 12-14-1960 District reclassification
Ord. No. 61-10 4-26-1961 District reclassification
Ord. No. 61-11 5-24-1961 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 61-13 6-14-1961 District reclassification
Ord. No. 61-16 8-23-1961 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 61-18 9-30-1961 District reclassification
Ord. No. 61-19 11-8-1961 District reclassification
Ord. No. 62-1 2-14-1962 District reclassification
§ A510-10 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-10
A510:37
Enactment Date Description
Ord. No. 62-3 3-14-1962 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 62-5 4-18-1962 District reclassification
Ord. No. 62-8 7-25-1962 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 63-4 11-13-1963 District reclassification
Ord. No. 63-5 11-13-1963 District reclassification
Ord. No. 64-1 2-14-1964 District reclassification
Ord. No. 64-3 4-10-1964 District reclassification
Ord. No. 64-5 8-12-1964 District reclassification
Ord. No. 64-7 8-12-1964 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 64-10 12-23-1964 District reclassification
Ord. No. 65-1 1-3-1965 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 65-2 2-10-1965 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 65-5 2-24-1965 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 65-6 3-10-1965 District reclassification
Ord. No. 65-8 3-24-1965 District reclassification
Ord. No. 65-9 3-24-1965 District reclassification
Ord. No. 65-10 4-14-1965 District reclassification
Ord. No. 65-11 4-14-1965 District reclassification
Ord. No. 65-12 4-28-1965 District reclassification
Ord. No. 65-13 4-28-1965 District reclassification
Ord. No. 65-14 6-9-1965 District reclassification
Ord. No. 65-15 7-14-1965 District reclassification
Ord. No. 65-17 8-25-1965 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 65-18 8-25-1965 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 65-20 9-8-1965 District reclassification
Ord. No. 65-21 9-22-1965 District reclassification
Ord. No. 65-22 10-13-1965 District reclassification
Ord. No. 65-24 12-8-1965 District reclassification
Ord. No. 65-25 12-22-1965 District reclassification
Ord. No. 66-1 1-12-1966 District reclassification
Ord. No. 66-2 1-12-1966 District reclassification
Ord. No. 66-5 3-22-1966 District reclassification
Ord. No. 66-6 3-22-1966 District reclassification
Ord. No. 66-7 4-12-1966 District reclassification
Ord. No. 66-8 4-12-1966 District reclassification
Ord. No. 66-9 4-26-1966 District reclassification
§ A510-10 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-10
A510:38
Enactment Date Description
Ord. No. 66-10 6-1-1966 District reclassification
Ord. No. 66-11 6-22-1966 District reclassification
Ord. No. 66-12 7-13-1966 District reclassification
Ord. No. 66-14 11-9-1966 District reclassification
Ord. No. 66-15 12-14-1966 District reclassification
Ord. No. 67-5 4-12-1967 District reclassification
Ord. No. 67-6 4-12-1967 District reclassification
Ord. No. 67-7 4-12-1967 District reclassification
Ord. No. 67-8 5-24-1967 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 67-9 6-28-1967 District reclassification
Ord. No. 67-10 6-28-1967 District reclassification
Ord. No. 67-13 7-12-1967 District reclassification
Ord. No. 67-14 7-12-1967 District reclassification
Ord. No. 67-19 9-20-1967 District reclassification
Ord. No. 67-21 5-24-1967 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 67-27 12-27-1967 District reclassification
Ord. No. 68-2 4-8-1968 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 68-6 7-29-1968 District reclassification
Ord. No. 68-7 8-29-1968 District reclassification
Ord. No. 68-8 7-29-1968 District reclassification
Ord. No. 68-12 8-26-1968 District reclassification
Ord. No. 68-14 9-23-1968 District reclassification
Ord. No. 68-18 10-28-1968 District reclassification
Ord. No. 68-20 12-9-1968 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 68-23 12-20-1968 District reclassification
Ord. No. 69-2 2-10-1969 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 69-3 3-24-1969 District reclassification
Ord. No. 69-4 6-16-1969 District reclassification
Ord. No. 69-5 6-16-1969 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 69-8 7-28-1969 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 69-9 8-25-1969 District reclassification
Ord. No. 69-10 9-22-1969 District reclassification
Ord. No. 69-11 12-8-1969 District reclassification
Ord. No. 69-13 12-22-1969 District reclassification
Ord. No. 70-2 5-25-1970 District reclassification
Ord. No. 70-4 10-13-1970 District reclassification
§ A510-10 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-10
A510:39
Enactment Date Description
Ord. No. 70-5 11-9-1970 District reclassification
Ord. No. 71-1 2-8-1971 District reclassification
Ord. No. 71-4 5-10-1971 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 71-5 8-9-1971 District reclassification
Ord. No. 71-6 8-16-1971 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 71-7 8-30-1971 District reclassification
Ord. No. 71-10 12-27-1971 District reclassification
Ord. No. 72-1 4-24-1972 District reclassification
Ord. No. 72-2 5-22-1972 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 72-3 5-22-1972 District reclassification
Ord. No. 72-7 7-11-1972 District reclassification
Ord. No. 72-10 10-17-1972 District reclassification
Ord. No. 73-5 10-23-1973 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 73-6 12-11-1973 District reclassification
Ord. No. 73-7 12-11-1973 District reclassification
Ord. No. 73-8 12-27-1973 District reclassification
Ord. No. 74-2 2-24-1974 District reclassification
Ord. No. 74-5 6-13-1974 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 74-6 6-26-1974 District reclassification
Ord. No. 74-9 19-9-1974 District reclassification
Ord. No. 74-15 11-13-1974 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 74-16 11-25-1974 District reclassification
Ord. No. 74-17 12-14-1979 District reclassification
Ord. No. 74-18 1974 District reclassification
Ord. No. 75-6 5-5-1975 District reclassification
Ord. No. 75-14 5-5-1975 District reclassification
Ord. No. 75-19 8-7-1975 District reclassification
Ord. No. 75-24 9-4-1975 District reclassification
Ord. No. 75-25 9-4-1975 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 75-30 11-13-1975 District reclassification
Ord. No. 75-35 12-4-1975 District reclassification
Ord. No. 76-1 1-22-1976 District reclassification
Ord. No. 76-3 2-5-1976 District reclassification
Ord. No. 76-7 5-6-1976 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 76-11 6-3-1976 District reclassification
Ord. No. 76-12 6-3-1976 District reclassification
§ A510-10 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-10
A510:40
Enactment Date Description
Ord. No. 76-13 7-1-1976 District reclassification
Ord. No. 76-16 8-6-1976 District reclassification
Ord. No. 76-23 11-18-1976 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 76-24 11-18-1976 District reclassification
Ord. No. 76-25 11-18-1976 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 7-2 1-18-1977 District reclassification
Ord. No. 7-3 2-1-1977 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 7-3A 2-1-1977 District reclassification
Ord. No. 7-6 3-15-1977 District reclassification
Ord. No. 7-8 5-3-1977 District reclassification
Ord. No. 7-12 5-24-1977 District reclassification
Ord. No. 7-13 5-24-1977 District reclassification
Ord. No. 7-16 7-12-1977 District reclassification
Ord. No. 7-18 8-2-1977 District reclassification
Ord. No. 7-24 10-18-1977 District reclassification
Ord. No. 7-25 10-18-1977 District reclassification
Ord. No. 7-27 11-22-1977 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 7-28 12-6-1977 District reclassification
Ord. No. 78-4 3-28-1978 District reclassification
Ord. No. 78-5 4-18-1978 District reclassification
Ord. No. 78-9 6-28-1978 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 78-11 6-27-1978 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 78-12 6-27-1978 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 78-21 9-12-1978 District reclassification
Ord. No. 78-23 9-19-1978 District reclassification
Ord. No. 78-24 9-19-1978 District reclassification
Ord. No. 78-25 11-14-1978 District reclassification
Ord. No. 78-26 11-14-1978 District reclassification
Ord. No. 79-1 1-23-1979 District reclassification
Ord. No. 79-3 2-13-1979 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 79-4 2-13-1979 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 79-5 3-27-1979 District reclassification
Ord. No. 79-6 4-17-1979 District reclassification
Ord. No. 79-11 8-14-1979 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 79-17 9-18-1979 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 79-15R 10-9-1979 District reclassification
§ A510-10 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-10
A510:41
Enactment Date Description
Ord. No. 79-20 11-13-1979 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 79-23 12-4-1979 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 80-21 10-18-1980 District reclassification
Ord. No. 80-24 12-9-1980 District reclassification
Ord. No. 81-1 1-20-1980 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 81-3 2-3-1981 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 81-9R 2-17-1981 District reclassification
Ord. No. 81-6 4-28-1981 District reclassification
Ord. No. 81-8 5-5-1981 District reclassification
Ord. No. 81-11 7-14-1981 District reclassification
Ord. No. 81-16 9-15-1981 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 82-1 3-9-1982 District reclassification
Ord. No. 82-6 6-8-1982 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 82-9 8-24-1982 District reclassification
Ord. No. 82-10 9-2-1982 District reclassification
Ord. No. 82-12 12-14-1982 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 83-1 11-8-1983 District reclassification
Ord. No. 83-4 1-25-1983 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 83-6 7-12-1983 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 83-8 8-30-1983 District reclassification
Ord. No. 83-9 10-18-1983 District reclassification
Ord. No. 84-1 1-17-1984 District reclassification
Ord. No. 84-2 2-7-1984 District reclassification
Ord. No. 85-2 1-22-1985 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 85-3 1-22-1985 District reclassification
Ord. No. 85-4 2-5-1984 District reclassification
Ord. No. 85-6 4-30-1985 District reclassification
Ord. No. 85-13 7-23-1985 District reclassification
Ord. No. 85-15 8-14-1985 District reclassification
Ord. No. 85-16 9-3-1985 District reclassification
Ord. No. 86-1 2-11-1986 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 86-7 5-27-1986 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 86-9 6-24-1986 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 86-16 9-23-1986 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 86-18 10-14-1986 District reclassification
Ord. No. 87-5 2-24-1987 District reclassification
§ A510-10 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A510-10
A510:42
Enactment Date Description
Ord. No. 87-9 5-12-1987 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 87-13 6-30-1987 District reclassification
Ord. No. 87-17 9-1-1987 District reclassification
Ord. No. 87-23 11-24-1987 District reclassification
Ord. No. 87-27 12-15-1987 District reclassification
Ord. No. 88-9 4-5-1988 District reclassification
Ord. No. 88-11 5-3-1988 District reclassification
Ord. No. 88-12 5-24-1988 District reclassification
Ord. No. 88-13 6-2-1988 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 88-17 7-1988 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 88-18 7-19-1988 District reclassification
Ord. No. 88-21 7-19-1988 District reclassification
Ord. No. 88-23 9-27-1988 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 88-24 9-27-1988 District reclassification
Ord. No. 88-25 10-11-1988 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 88-29 11-15-1988 District reclassification
Ord. No. 88-30 12-29-1988 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 89-6 5-9-1989 District reclassification
Ord. No. 89-7 6-13-1989 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 89-14 11-21-1989 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 90-7 4-17-1990 District reclassification
Ord. No. 90-18 8-7-1990 District reclassification
Ord. No. 90-21 12-11-1990 District reclassification
Ord. No. 91-1 1-29-1991 Zoning amendment
Ord. No. 91-12 2-19-1991 District reclassification
Ord. No. 93-08 5-25-1993 District reclassification
Ord. No. 93-13 10-12-1993 District reclassification
§ A510-10 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-10
A510:43

Disposition List
§ A510-10 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS § A510-10
A510:45

Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
09-01 Bond refinance § A510-2
09-02 5-12-2009 Cable franchise agreement § A510-3
09-03 10-13-2009 Adoption of 2009 Code Ch. 1, Art. I
10-01 5-3-2010 Bond § A510-2
10-02 10-18-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 470
10-03 10-18-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 470
10-04 11-15-2010 Street vacation § A510-8
10-05 11-15-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 470
11-01 1-3-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 470
11-02 5-2-2011 Precious metal dealers
amendment
Ch. 358
11-03 Stormwater management Ch. 430
11-04 Bond refinance § A510-2
11-05 10-17-2011 Street acceptance § A510-8
11-06 10-17-2011 Utility easement; street
vacation
§ A510-6; § A510-8
11-07 10-17-2011 Retirement plan
amendment
Ch. 70, Art. I
12-01 2-6-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 470
12-02 2-6-2012 Utility easement vacation § A510-6
12-03 6-4-2012 Sex offender residency
restrictions repealer
Ch. 392, reference
only
12-04 10-15-2012 General obligation bond § A510-2
12-05 Not enacted
12-06 12-17-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 500
13-01 1-22-2013 Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust
§ A510-4
13-02 7-22-2013 Utility easement; street
vacation
§ A510-6; § A510-8
§ A510-10 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:1
Ordinance No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
13-03 11-25-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 470
13-04 11-25-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 470
13-05 12-30-2013 Taxation: earned income
tax amendment
Ch. 448, Art. VI
14-01 3-31-2014 Utility easement § A510-6
14-02 4-21-2014 Precious metal dealers
amendment
Ch. 358
14-03 5-19-2014 Bond § A510-2
14-04 6-30-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 470
14-05 9-22-2014 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
14-06 11-17-2014 Retirement plan
amendment
Ch. 70, Art. I
15-01 2-17-2015 Floodplain management Superseded by Ord.
No. 17-04
15-02 4-13-2015 Bamboo Ch. 155
15-03 4-13-2015 Throwing objects in public
thoroughfares amendment
Ch. 436, Art. IV
15-04 11-9-2015 Citizen Service Corps
Advisory Council
Ch. 20
15-05 12-14-2015 Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 70, Art. II
16-01 6-6-2016 Firesafety inspections
amendment; rental
property and transient
dwellings: status of
occupancy report
amendment; zoning
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
19-01; Ch. 377, Art. I;
Ch. 500
16-02 5-2-2016 Numbering of buildings
amendment
Ch. 167
16-03 5-2-2016 Responsibility of
contractors awarded public
contracts amendment
Ch. 196, Art. II
16-04 6-6-2016 Peddling, soliciting and
transient businesses
amendment
Ch. 345
16-05 8-15-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 470
§ DL-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § DL-1
DL:2
Ordinance No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
16-06 8-15-2016 Bond § A510-2
16-07 9-19-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 470
17-01 1-17-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 500
17-02 1-17-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 500, table only
17-03 1-17-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 500
17-04 3-6-2017 Floodplain management Ch. 254
17-05 8-21-2017 Streets and sidewalks:
rights-of-way management
Ch. 436, Art. VII
17-06 8-21-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 500
17-07 9-18-2017 Cats Ch. 145, Art. IV
17-08 12-11-2017 Construction Standards:
Sanitary Sewer
Connections
Ch. 190, Art. III
17-09 12-11-2017 Zoning Map Amendment Ch. 500, table only
18-01 2-5-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 470
18-02 5-7-2018 Contractors:
Responsibility of
Contractors Awarded
Public Contracts
Amendment
Ch. 196, Art. II
18-03 9-4-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 500
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
18-04 1-10-2018 Pensions: Police Early
Retirement Incentive
Program (PERIP)
Ch. 70, Art. III 6
19-01 2-19-2019 Construction Standards:
Fire Prevention Code
Amendment; Firesafety
Inspections Repealer
Ch. 190, Art. I; Ch.
249
6
19-02 3-18-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 470 6
19-03 3-18-2019 Solid Waste; Recycling Ch. 418 6
19-04 4-1-2019 Renaming Road § A510-8 6
19-05 7-15-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 500 6
19-06 9-3-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 470 6
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:3
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
19-07 10-7-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 500 6
20-01 2-3-2020 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 470 7
20-02 3-16-2020 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 470 7
20-03 6-15-2020 Pensions: Retirement Plan
Amendment
Ch. 70, Art. I 7
20-04 8-24-2020 Pensions: Police Pension
Fund Amendment
Ch. 70, Art. II 7
20-05 8-24-2020 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 470 7
20-06 9-8-2020 Boards: Disabled Persons
Advisory Board; Human
Relations Commission
Ch. 15, Art. IV; Ch.
15, Art. V
7
20-07 9-8-2020 Property Maintenance:
International Property
Maintenance Code
Ch. 363, Art. I 7
21-01 1-4-2021 Pensions: Police Early
Retirement Incentive
Program (PERIP)
Amendment
Ch. 70, Art. III 8
21-02 1-19-2021 Pensions: Police Pension
Fund Amendment
Ch. 70, Art. II 8
21-03 3-15-2021 Zoning Map Amendment NCM 8
21-04 3-15-2021 Construction Standards:
Fire Prevention Code
Amendment; Rental
Property and Transient
Dwellings: Apartment
Inspections
Ch. 190, Art. I; Ch.
377, Art. II
8
21-05 4-19-2021 General Obligation Bond NCM 8
21-06 10-4-2021 Massage Parlors Ch. 301 8
§ DL-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § DL-1
DL:4