Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 631]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 3301.5 of the Borough Code (53 P.S. § 48301.5), the
codification of a complete body of legislation for the Borough of Manheim,
County of Lancaster, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified
and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General Code,
and consisting of Chapters 1 through 220, together with an Appendix, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of
the Borough of Manheim, which shall be known and is hereby designated
as the “Code of the Borough of Manheim,” hereinafter referred to as the
“Code.”
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of
the prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued
in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by
the Borough Council of the Borough of Manheim, and it is the intention of
said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Except as provided in § 1-4, Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not
affected by repeal, below, all ordinances or parts ordinances inconsistent
with the provisions contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are
hereby repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-15; provided, however,
that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any
valid legislation of the Borough of Manheim which is not in conflict with the
provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and effect.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by
repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 1-31-2012.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
§ 1-4 MANHEIM CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Borough.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Borough for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. Nomenclature. The following outdated terms, where they appeared in
the Borough’s ordinances, have been changed:
(1) “Streets” to “Public Works.”
(2) “Zoning Officer” to “Codes Compliance Officer.”
(3) “Treasurer” to “Finance Director.”
(4) “Justice of the Peace,” “District Magistrate” or “Alderman” to
“Magisterial District Judge.”
(5) “Department of Environmental Resources” to “Department of
Environmental Protection,” where applicable.
(6) “Department of Community Affairs” to “Department of Community
and Economic Development.”
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with
the Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
or copies shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by
law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of
C. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A1 attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Borough Council, and it is
the intent of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes
and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of
the Code specified in § 1-15.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6C, the chapters, articles and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: “Amended (added, repealed) 11-13-2012 by Ord. No.
631.” Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 1-6 MANHEIM CODE § 1-9
1:6
the Borough Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Borough Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to
the effective date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances or resolutions
are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed,
held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the
Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after November 14, 2012.
§ 1-14 MANHEIM CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 5
AUDITOR
§ 5-1. Certified public accountant or firm to be appointed.
[Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 524]
A certified public accountant or a firm of certified public accountants shall
be appointed before the commencement of current approved contract to
audit the accounts and other evidences of financial transaction of the
Borough and the Borough officers for the fiscal year then closing. Such
auditor shall submit such audit report to Council.
§ 5-2. Compensation. [Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 524]
The compensation of the certified public accountant or firm of certified
public accountants appointed as Auditor for the Borough shall be fixed by
contract at the instance of employment and paid out of the General Fund,
Water/Sewer Funds, Park/Pool/Recreation Funds.
§ 5-3. Abolition of office of elected official.
When an auditor is appointed as herein provided, the office of elected
Borough Auditor is hereby abolished. The elected Borough Auditor shall
continue to hold office during the term to which elected and shall not audit,
settle or adjust accounts audited by the appointed auditor but shall perform
the other duties of his office.
Chapter 8
AUTHORITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 172. Water — See Ch. 210.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:9

ARTICLE I
Manheim Borough Authority
[Adopted 6-27-1939 (Ch. 1, Part 6A, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 8-1. Intention and desire to organize Manheim Borough Authority.
The said corporate authorities of the Borough of Manheim do hereby signify
and express their intention and desire to organize the Manheim Sewerage
Authority under the Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 463, as amended by the Act
of 1937, P.L. 739 (No. 200),2 for the purpose of constructing and operating
a sewerage system and sewage treatment works.
§ 8-2. Articles of Incorporation of Manheim Borough Authority.
[Amended 9-25-1939; 12-14-1965 by Ord. No. 362; 5-29-1991 by
Res. No. 3-1991]
The Burgess and Secretary of the Borough are hereby authorized and
directed to execute on behalf of the Borough of Manheim the Articles of
Incorporation of the said Manheim Sewerage Authority, which Articles of
Incorporation shall be as follows:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
To the Secretary of the Commonwealth, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 463,
entitled "Municipal Authorities Act of 1935," as amended by the Act of May
20, 1937, P.L. 739 (No. 200), the Borough of Manheim, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, desiring to incorporate the Manheim Sewerage Authority
(under said Act, does hereby certify:)
A. The name of the Authority is Manheim Borough Authority.
B. Said Borough of Manheim Authority, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
is formed under the Act of June 18, 1935, P.L. 463, as amended by Act
No. 85, approved May 17, 1939.
C. No other authority organized under said Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 463,
as amended by the Act of May 20, 1937, as further amended by Act
No. 85, approved May 17, 1939, or under the Act approved December
27, 1933 (Special Sessions–1933, P.L. 114), is in existence in or for the
Borough of Manheim, the incorporating municipality herein.
D. The name of the incorporating municipality is Borough of Manheim,
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, and the names and addresses of its
municipal authorities are as follows: (Hereafter followed the names
and addresses of said municipal authorities).
2. Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1935 (Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 463),
was superseded by the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382), which was repealed by Act 22 of 2001
(June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22). See now the Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. §
5601 et seq.
§ 8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-2
1:11
E. The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the
Board of said Authority are as follows: (Hereafter followed the names
and addresses of the first members of said Board).
F. The term of existence of the Authority shall be 50 years from the
date of approval of these Articles of Amendment to the Articles of
Incorporation.
§ 8-3. Publication of notice authorized. [Amended 9-25-1939]
The Burgess and the Borough Secretary are hereby directed to cause
a notice of this ordinance to be published one time in the "Lancaster
Law Review," being the legal periodical for the County of Lancaster,
Pennsylvania, and in the Manheim Sentinel, a newspaper published and of
general circulation in the County of Lancaster, as directed by the Act of June
28, 1935, P.L. 463, as amended.
§ 8-4. Effectuation of incorporation of Manheim Borough Authority.
[Amended 9-25-1939]
§ 8-5. Project to be undertaken by Manheim Borough Authority.
[Added 9-25-1939]
The project to be undertaken by the Borough of Manheim Authority,
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, shall be acquiring, holding, constructing,
improving, maintaining and operating, owning, leasing either in the
capacity of the lessor or lessee, sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof and
sewage treatment works.
A. The Burgess and the Borough Secretary are directed to file said Articles
of Incorporation, together with the necessary proofs of publication,
with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and to do all
other acts and things to effect the incorporation of the said Manheim
Sewerage Authority.
B. The Burgess, President of Council and Borough Secretary are directed
to file said amendment to the Articles of Incorporation, together with
the necessary proofs of publication, with the Secretary of the
Commonwealth, and do all other acts and things to effect the
amendment to the Articles of Incorporation as aforesaid. In the event
that the Manheim Sewerage Authority has received its charter and
organized prior to the filing of the amendment of the Articles of
Incorporation, the Board of the Authority will be requested to take
proper action to approve the above amendment and to indicate on the
amendment by the proper officers of the Authority such approval.
§ 8-2 MANHEIM CODE § 8-5
1:12
ARTICLE II
Manheim Water Authority
[Adopted by Ord. No. 322 of 1960 (Ch. 1, Part 6B, of the 1992
Code)]
§ 8-6. Intention.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Manheim, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, being the municipal authority of said municipality, hereby
signifies its intention and desire to organize an authority under the
provision of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, approved May 2,
1945, P.L. 382, as amended,3 for the purpose of buying, construction,
improving, maintaining, operating, owning or leasing water mains, water
systems or parts thereof and waterworks.
§ 8-7. Articles of incorporation of Manheim Borough Water
Authority.
The President and Secretary of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Manheim are hereby authorized and directed to execute on behalf of the
Borough of Manheim and under its municipal seal Articles of Incorporation
which are as follows:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
To the Secretary of the Commonwealth, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 463,
entitled "Municipal Authorities Act of 1935," as amended by the Act of May
20, 1937, P.L. 739 (No. 200), the Borough of Manheim, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, desiring to incorporate the Manheim Water Authority (under
said Act, does hereby certify:)
A. The name of the Authority is Manheim Borough Water Authority.
B. Said Borough of Manheim Water Authority, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, is formed under the Act of June 18, 1935, P.L. 463, as
amended by Act No. 85, approved May 17, 1939.
C. No other Authority organized under said Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 463,
as amended by the Act of May 20, 1937, as further amended by Act
No. 85, approved May 17, 1939, or under the Act approved December
27, 1933 (Special Sessions–1933, P.L. 114), is in existence in or for the
Borough of Manheim, the incorporating municipality herein.
D. The name of the incorporating municipality is Borough of Manheim,
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, and the names and addresses of its
municipal authorities are as follows: (Hereafter followed the names
and addresses of said municipal authorities).
3. Editor's Note: Repealed by Act 22 of 2001 (June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22). See now
Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 8-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-7
1:13
E. The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the
Board of said Authority are as follows: (Hereafter followed the names
and addresses of the first members of said Board).
F. The term of existence of said Authority shall be 50 years from the
date of approval of these Articles of Amendment to the Articles of
Incorporation.
§ 8-7 MANHEIM CODE § 8-7
1:14
Chapter 12
BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 100.
§ 12-1. Establishment of joint appeals board for Uniform
Construction Code.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Manheim hereby enters into an
agreement with Mount Joy Borough, Rapho Township and Penn Township
to establish a joint appeals board as provided by the Uniform Construction
Code.4
§ 12-2. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,
Act 177 of 1996, P.L. 1158, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq., and this authority
hereby granted shall continue from year to year for the lifetime of each
cooperative project undertaken by authority of this chapter.
§ 12-3. Purpose; objectives.
The purpose and objective of this chapter and the agreement entered into in
connection therewith is to provide for sharing in the establishment of a fivemember
joint appeals board to resolve any appeal issues that may arise in
the execution of the Uniform Construction Code by the four municipalities
that are party to this agreement.
§ 12-4. Membership.
A. The Joint Appeals Board shall consist of five members, representing the
construction industry, as defined under the Uniform Construction Code
guidelines.
B. Each municipality shall appoint one person as its representative to the
Appeals Board. The term of service will be four years. Wherever
possible, the representative for the municipality shall reside in that
municipality.
C. The fifth member of the Board of Appeals shall be an at-large member
agreed upon by the governing bodies of the participating
municipalities. The term for the at-large member will also be four years.
4. Editor's Note: See the Uniform Construction Code, Act 45 of 1999 (35 P.S. §§7210.101 to
7210.1103).
§ 8-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-5
1:15
§ 12-5. Actions of the Board.
All actions and activities of the Appeals Board will be governed by the
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code. It will be the responsibility
of the Building Code Official for each municipality to convene the Board
when appropriate. All advertising fees and other costs and procedures shall
be established at the first meeting of the Board.
Chapter 17
CIVIL SERVICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 53.
§ 12-5 MANHEIM CODE § 12-5
1:16
ARTICLE I
Definition of Terms
§ 17-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases,
wherever used in these Rules and Regulations, shall be construed to have
the meanings indicated herein:
APPLICANT — Any individual who applies in writing to the Commission in
response to a legally advertised notice of vacancy and/or examination for
any position in the Borough of Manheim Police Department.
APPLICANT WITH ACT 120 TRAINING — Any individual who applies in
writing to the Commission in response to a legally advertised notice of
vacancy and/or examination for any position in the Borough of Manheim
Police Department who has successfully completed training under
Pennsylvania Act 120 with satisfactory test scores.
ASSOCIATION — The Lancaster County Chiefs of Police Association, Inc.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Manheim, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Borough of Manheim,
Pennsylvania.
CERTIFICATION — The submission to the municipal governing body of
names taken from the eligible list.
CHAIRPERSON — The Chairperson of the Civil Service Commission of the
Borough of Manheim, Pennsylvania.
COMMISSION — The Civil Service Commission of the Borough of Manheim,
Pennsylvania.
ELIGIBLE — A person whose name is recorded on a current eligible list or
furlough list.
ELIGIBLE LIST — A list of names of persons who have passed an
examination for a particular position in the Police Department.
EXAMINATION — The series of tests given to applicants to determine their
qualifications for a position in the Borough of Manheim Police Department.
FURLOUGH LIST — The list containing the names of persons temporarily
laid off from positions in the Police Department because of a reduction in
the number of officers.
MEDICAL EXAMINATION — Any examination, procedure, inquiry or test
designed to obtain information about medical history or a physical or mental
condition which might disqualify an applicant if it would prevent the
applicant from performing, with or without a reasonable accommodation,
all of the essential functions of the position.
MUNICIPAL GOVERNING BODY — The Council of the Borough of
Manheim, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
§ 17-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-1
1:17
PHYSICIAN — Shall have the meaning given to it in 1 Pa. C.S.A. § 1991
(relating to definitions).
POLICE OFFICER — For purposes of these Rules and Regulations, an
entry-level sworn full-time position in the Borough of Manheim Police
Department.
PROBATIONER — An officer in the Police Department who has been
appointed from an eligible list but who has not yet completed his or her
probationary period.
QUALIFIED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL — An individual in collaboration
with or under the supervision or direction of a physician, as may be required
by law, who is licensed:
REDUCTION IN RANK — A change to a different position or rank which
results in a decrease in salary; provided, however, that a decrease in salary
without a change to a different position or rank shall not necessarily
constitute a reduction in rank.
REMOVAL — The permanent separation of a police officer from the Police
Department.
SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Civil Service Commission of the
Borough of Manheim, Pennsylvania.
SUSPENSION — The temporary separation of a member of the Police
Department from his or her position.
§ 17-2. Gender.
The words "he," "his," "him" and "men," when used in these Rules and
Regulations, represent both the masculine and feminine genders.
As a physician assistant pursuant to the Act of December 20, 1985 (P.
L. 457, No. 112), known as the "Medical Practice Act of 1985," or the
Act of October 5, 1978 (P. L. 1109, No. 261), known as the "Osteopathic
Medical Practice Act"; or
A.
As a certified registered nurse practitioner pursuant to the Act of May
22, 1951 (P. L. 317, No. 69), known as the "Professional Nursing Law."
B.
§ 17-1 MANHEIM CODE § 17-2
1:18
ARTICLE II
Civil Service Commission
§ 17-3. Appointments; terms; vacancies; oaths; alternate members.
§ 17-4. Offices incompatible with Civil Service Commissioner.
No Commissioner shall at the same time hold an elective or appointed office
under the United States government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
or any political subdivision of the commonwealth, except that one member
of the Commission may be a member of the Council of the Borough and
one may be a member of the teaching profession in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any political subdivision thereof.
§ 17-5. Organization of Commission; quorum.
The Commission first appointed shall organize within 10 days of its
appointment and shall elect one of its members as its Chairperson, one
as its Vice Chairperson, and one as the Secretary. The Commission shall
thereafter meet and organize on the first Monday of each even-numbered
A. The Commission shall consist of three Commissioners who shall be
qualified electors of the Borough of Manheim and shall be appointed by
the municipal governing body initially to serve for terms of two, four
and six years, and as terms thereafter expire shall be appointed for
terms of six years.
B. Any vacancy occurring in the Commission for any reason whatsoever
shall be filled by the municipal governing body for the unexpired term
within a period of 30 days after such vacancy occurs.
C. Each member of the Commission, before entering upon the discharge of
the duties of his/her office, shall take an oath or affirmation to support
the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to perform his/her official duties
with fidelity. No Civil Service Commissioner shall receive
compensation.
D. The Borough Council may appoint no more than three qualified electors
of the Borough to serve as alternate members of the Commission. The
term of office of the alternate members shall be six years. When seated
pursuant to § 17-5 hereof, an alternate shall be entitled to participate in
all proceedings and discussions of the Commission to the same and full
extent as provided by law for Commission members, including
specifically the right to cast a vote as a voting member during the
proceedings, and shall have all of the powers and duties set forth in this
chapter and as otherwise provided by law. Alternates shall hold no
other office in the Borough. An alternate may participate in any
proceeding or discussion of the Commission but shall not be entitled to
vote as a member of the Commission unless designated as a voting
alternate member pursuant to § 17-5.
§ 17-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-5
1:19
year. Each Commissioner shall be notified in writing of each and every
meeting. Three members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. If, by
reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not reached,
the Chair shall designate as many alternate members of the Commission to
sit on the Commission as may be needed to provide a quorum. An alternate
member of the Commission shall continue to serve on the Commission in
all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the alternate was
initially designated until the Commission has made a final determination
of the matter or case. Designation of an alternate member pursuant to
this section shall be made on a case-by-case basis in rotation according to
declining seniority among the alternates. No action of the Commission shall
be valid unless it shall have the concurrence of at least two members.
§ 17-6. Duties of Chairperson.
The Chairperson, or, in his/her absence, the Vice Chairperson, shall preside
at all meetings and hearings of the Commission, decide all points of order
or procedure and perform any duties required by law or these Rules.
§ 17-7. Duties of Secretary.
The Secretary shall, at the direction of the Commission, see to it that all
official correspondence of the Commission is done and all notices required
by law and these Rules of procedure are sent out, keep a record of each
examination or other official action of the Commission, and perform all
other duties required by law, by these Rules and by the Commission.
§ 17-8. Meetings.
Except for the biennial organization meeting, all meetings shall be held
either at the call of the Chairperson or at the call of two members of the
Commission. At least 24 hours' written notice of each meeting shall be
given each member. The Commission shall have the discretion to determine
whether meetings shall be open to the public when not specifically
regulated by existing law.
§ 17-9. Meeting agenda.
Regular meetings of the Commission shall be as follows:
A. Roll call.
B. Approval of minutes of previous meeting.
C. Unfinished business.
D. Hearing of cases.
E. New business.
F. Communications and reports.
§ 17-5 MANHEIM CODE § 17-10
1:20
§ 17-10. Minutes and records.
§ 17-11. Clerks and supplies; Solicitor.
The municipal governing body shall furnish to the Commission on its
requisition clerical assistance that may be necessary for the Commission.
The municipal governing body shall provide a suitable and convenient
room for the use of the Commission. The Commission shall order from the
municipal governing body as necessary stationery, postage, printing and
supplies. The municipal governing body shall also provide the services of
a Solicitor for the Commission, to be appointed by the Commission and
paid by the municipal governing body. The municipal governing body shall
have the authority to place a reasonable limit on the amount allowed each
year for the services of the Commission Solicitor. The elected and appointed
officials of every borough shall aid the Commission in all proper ways in
carrying out the provisions of this chapter relating to civil service.
§ 17-12. Amendment of Rules and Regulations.
The Commission shall have power to prescribe, amend and enforce Rules
and Regulations for carrying into effect the provisions of this chapter and
shall be governed thereby. Before the effective date of the Rules and
Regulations, or amendments thereto, the same shall be first approved by
the municipal governing body. When the Rules and Regulations, or
amendments, have been approved, they shall not be annulled, amended, or
added to, without the approval of Council. All Rules and modifications shall
be made available by the municipal governing body for public distribution
or inspection.
A. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings and records of
examinations and other official actions. All records of the Commission
shall be preserved and disposed of according to the Retention and
Disposition Schedule for Records of Pennsylvania Municipalities issued
by the Local Government Records Committee under the authority of the
Municipal Records Act, 1968, P.L. 961, No. 428, 53 P.S. § 9001. All
recommendations of applicants for appointment received by the
Commission shall be kept and preserved for a period of five years.
B. Any and all records related to any disciplinary action filed with the
Commission shall be open to public inspection, subject to reasonable
regulation. The Secretary shall keep minutes of the Commission's
proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question. If a
member is absent or fails to vote, the Secretary shall indicate that fact
in the minutes. All recommendations of applicants for appointment
received by the Commission shall be kept and preserved for a period of
five years, and all records and all written causes of removal filed with
the Commission, except as otherwise provided in § 17-57, shall be open
to public inspection and subject to reasonable regulation.
§ 17-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-13
1:21
§ 17-13. Investigations.
The Commission shall have the power to make investigations concerning all
matters relating to the administration and enforcement of these Rules and
Regulations. The Chairperson of the Commission is authorized to administer
oaths and affirmations in connection with such investigations.
§ 17-14. Subpoenas.
§ 17-15. Annual report.
The Commission shall make an annual report to the municipal governing
body containing a brief summary of its work during the year and a full
accounting for any expenditure of public moneys. The annual report shall
be available for public inspection.
A. The Commission shall have the power to issue subpoenas over the
signature of the Chairperson, or designee, to acquire and require the
attendance of witnesses and the production of records and papers
pertaining to any investigation or inquiry. The fees of such witnesses for
attendance and travel shall be the same as for witnesses appearing in
the courts and shall be paid from appropriations for the incidental
expense of the Commission.
B. All officers and public service employees of the Borough of Manheim
shall attend and testify when required to do so by the Commission.
C. If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena issued by the
Commission, upon conviction of such refusal or neglect in a summary
proceeding, that person shall be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed
$100 and in default of the payment of such fine and costs shall be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days.
D. If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena, the
Commission may apply by petition to the Court of Common Pleas of
Lancaster County for its subpoena, requiring the attendance of such
persons before the Commission or the court to testify and to produce
any records and papers necessary, and in default thereof shall be held
in contempt of court.
§ 17-13 MANHEIM CODE § 17-15
1:22
ARTICLE III
Applications and Qualifications
§ 17-16. Advertisements for vacant positions.
In seeking applicants for positions within its Police Department, the
Borough of Manheim may advertise for applicants or may limit its search
and advertising to applicants with Act 120 training, at the sole discretion of
the Borough of Manheim.
§ 17-17. General provisions relating to examinations.
A. The Commission shall make Rules and Regulations, to be approved as
provided in § 17-12, providing for the examination of applicants for
positions in the police force and for promotions, which rules and
regulations shall prescribe the minimum qualifications of all applicants
to be examined and the passing grades. All examinations for positions
or promotions shall be practical in character and shall relate to matters
and include inquiries as will fairly test the merit and fitness of the
persons examined to discharge the duties of the employment sought by
them. All examinations shall be open to all applicants who have the
minimum qualifications required by the Rules and Regulations. Each
applicant for an original position shall:
(1) Be subject to the regulations adopted by the Commission;
(2) Either before or after the written examination, be required to
submit to a physical fitness or agility examination that is job-related
and consistent with business necessity;
(3) If made a conditional offer of employment, be given a physical and
psychological medical examination as provided in § 17-31; and
(4) Be subject to a background investigation. Background
investigations may be restricted to those candidates on an
eligibility list or those to be certified to Borough Council for
appointment.
B. Each applicant for promotion shall be subject to the regulations
adopted by the Commission and to examination and selection in
accordance with these Rules and Regulations. Physical fitness or agility
examinations that are job-related and consistent with business
necessity and physical and psychological medical examinations may,
but need not, be required for promotions.
C. Public notice of the time and place of every examination, together with
the information as to the kind of position or place to be filled, shall be
given by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation, at least
two weeks prior to each examination, and a copy of the notice shall be
prominently posted in the office of the Commission or other public
place.
§ 17-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-17
1:23
§ 17-18. Eligibility for examination.
D. The Commission shall post in its office the eligibility list, containing the
names and grades of those who have passed the examination.
A. Each person desiring to apply for examination shall file with the
Commission a formal application in which the applicant shall state,
under oath or affirmation:
(1) His full name and residence or post office address;
(2) His citizenship, place and date of birth;
(3) His condition of health and physical capacity for public services;
(4) His business or employment and his residence for the past five
years;
(5) In cases where the municipal governing body has advertised for
applicants with Act 120 training, proof that such training has been
satisfactorily completed;
(6) Other information as may be required by the Commission's Rules
and Regulations, showing the applicant's qualifications for the
position for which the applicant is being examined.
B. The applicant must make an oath or affirmation that the application is
completely truthful, and the applicant is subject to the penalties of 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 54904 relating to unsworn falsification to authorities. The
application shall be substantially in the same form as that attached
hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibit A.5
C. The applications shall contain no falsification, omission or concealment
of material fact. Should any investigation of the Commission disclose
any willful misstatement, falsification or concealment with respect to an
application:
(1) The application shall be invalid and the application applicant shall
be disqualified from examination; or
(2) If the applicant shall have been examined and certified as eligible,
the name of such applicant shall be removed from the eligibility
list; or
(3) If the applicant shall have been appointed to a position within the
Borough of Manheim Police Department, such willful misstatement,
falsification or concealment shall constitute grounds for dismissal
from the Borough of Manheim Police Department. Further, no
person who shall make any willful false application shall be
permitted to make future application for any position in the Police
Department of the Borough of Manheim.
5. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 17-17 MANHEIM CODE § 17-19
1:24
§ 17-19. Discrimination.
§ 17-20. Filing applications.
Applications for positions in the Police Department may be received only
at the times designated by the Civil Service Commission when available
positions in the Police Department exist. They can be obtained during
normal business hours in the office of the Municipal Secretary and by such
other offices and officers as the Commission may designate. The receipt of
such applications shall be subject to the following conditions:
§ 17-21. Age requirements.
All applicants for the position of police officer must be no less than 18 years
of age before the deadline for submitting completed applications. Each
applicant shall present satisfactory evidence of date of birth, if requested.
§ 17-22. General qualifications for all applicants.
Every applicant for any position in the Borough of Manheim Police
Department shall possess a diploma from an accredited high school or
graduate equivalency diploma. In addition, every applicant must be a
United States citizen, be of good moral character, be physically and
mentally fit to perform the full duties of a police officer, and, prior to
A. The Borough of Manheim is an equal opportunity employer. It is the
Borough of Manheim's and the Commission's policy to grant equal
employment opportunities to qualified persons without regard to race,
religion, color, national origin, gender, age, veteran status, marital
status or disability. The Borough of Manheim and the Commission will
provide equal opportunities in employment and promotion.
B. No question in any form of application for examination or in any
examination shall be so framed as to elicit information concerning the
political or religious opinions or affiliations of any applicant, nor shall
inquiry be made concerning the opinion or affiliations, and all
disclosures of opinion or affiliation shall be ignored. No discrimination
shall be exercised, threatened or promised by any person against or in
favor of any applicant or employee because of the political or religious
opinions or affiliations or race, and no offer or promise or reward, favor
or benefit, directly or indirectly, shall be made to or received by any
person for any act done or duty omitted or to be done under this
chapter.
A. No application received after 12:00 noon on any day that is 14 calendar
days prior to the date fixed for the written examination in the public
announcement shall be considered for such examination; and
B. An application shall become invalid one year after the date upon which
it was received.
§ 17-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-22
1:25
appointment, possess a valid motor vehicle operator's license issued by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 17-23. General qualifications for applicants for promotion.
§ 17-24. Rejection of applicant.
The Commission may refuse to examine or, if examined, may refuse certify
as eligible after examination any applicant who is found to lack any of
the minimum qualifications for examination prescribed in these Rules and
Regulations for the particular position for which the applicant has applied.
In addition, the Commission may refuse to examine or, if examined, may
refuse to certify any applicant who is physically unfit for the performance of
A. Promotions shall be based on merit to be ascertained by examinations
to be prescribed by the Commission. All questions relative to
promotions shall be practical in character and will fairly test the merit
and fitness of persons seeking promotion. The municipal governing
body shall notify the Commission of a vacancy in the police force in the
Borough which is to be filled by promotion and shall request the
certification of an eligibility list. The Commission shall certify for each
vacancy the names of three persons on the eligibility list who have
received the highest average in the last preceding promotional
examination held within a period of two years preceding the date of the
request for the eligibility list. If three names are not available, the
Commission shall certify the names remaining on the eligibility list. The
municipal governing body shall make an appointment from the names
certified, based solely on the merits and fitness of the candidate, unless
Council makes objections to the Commission regarding one or more of
the persons so certified for any reason provided under § 17-24 of these
Rules and Regulations. If the Commission sustains an objection, the
provisions of § 17-26 shall be applicable. The municipal governing body
shall have the power to determine in each instance whether an increase
in salary shall constitute a promotion.
B. In addition to meeting the qualifications in § 17-23A above, all
applicants for a promotional position (a promotion) shall not have been
suspended without pay for more than five days in the three years prior
to the deadline for submitting applications. Any suspension which the
applicant has timely appealed pursuant to a contractual grievance
procedure shall be disregarded unless the appeal is resolved prior to
the creation of the eligibility list.
C. In addition to meeting the qualifications fixed for each applicant for a
position in the Police Department, all applicants for the position of
Detective, Sergeant and Lieutenant shall have been continuously
employed in a municipal police service for at least five years on the date
of application in the case of Sergeant and at least seven years for all
other officers, and completed their one-year probationary period in the
Borough Police Department.
§ 17-22 MANHEIM CODE § 17-24
1:26
the duties of the position applied for, or who is illegally using a controlled
substance, as defined in Section 201 of the Controlled Substances Act
(Public Law 91-513, 21 U.S.C. § 802), or who has been guilty of any crime
involving moral turpitude, or of infamous or notoriously disgraceful
conduct, or who has dismissed from public service for delinquency or
misconduct in office, or who is affiliated with any group whose policies
or activities are subversive to the forms of government set forth in the
Constitutions and laws of the United States of America and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 17-25. Recording applications.
Applications will be received by the Municipal Secretary, who shall be
designated to receive such applications in the public advertisement.
Applications may also be received by the Municipal Secretary's official
designee. The Municipal Secretary, or the Municipal Secretary's official
designee, shall record the receipt of all applications and provide the
applicant with notice of the time and place for the first portion of the testing
procedure, the written examination. Any application containing material
errors or omissions may, at the discretion of the Commission, be returned
to the applicant for correction prior to the deadline for filing applications,
after which no new applications or amended applications will be accepted.
§ 17-26. Hearing for disqualified applicant.
If any applicant or person is aggrieved by refusal of the Commission to
certify the applicant as eligible after examination, or a person is aggrieved
by refusal of the Commission to examine the person, the Commission shall,
at the request of the applicant or person aggrieved, within 10 days, appoint
a time and place for a public hearing. At the hearing, the applicant or
person aggrieved may appear with or without counsel, and the Commission
shall take testimony and review its refusal to provide examination or
certification. The deliberations of the Commission, including interim rulings
on evidentiary or procedural issues, may be held in the nature of a closed
executive session. The Commission's disposition of the matter shall
constitute official action which shall occur at a public meeting held pursuant
to 65 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 7 (relating to open meetings). The decision of the
Commission shall be final.
§ 17-27. Public notice.
The Commission shall conspicuously post in the Borough Municipal Building
an announcement of the hiring or promotional testing and set forth the
time and place of every examination, together with the information as to
the type of position to be filled, the requirements for that position, where
applications may be obtained, and the deadline for filing those applications.
In addition, at least two weeks prior to the close of the application,
publication of the notice shall occur in at least one newspaper of general
circulation or a newspaper circulating generally in the Borough of
Manheim.
§ 17-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-28
1:27
§ 17-28. Investigation of applicants.
A background investigation of the character and reputation of the applicant
may be made by the Commission or its agent and may include *credit
reports and reports of investigations from recognized agencies.
*Credit reports are not sufficient to disqualify an applicant. If information
from credit reports or criminal record investigations forms a part of the
basis for disqualification of an applicant, the applicant will be so notified.
§ 17-28 MANHEIM CODE § 17-28
1:28
ARTICLE IV
Announcement of Examinations
§ 17-29. Public notice.
Public notice of time and place of the examination, together with
information as to the position(s) to be filled, shall be given by publication
in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. The public notice
shall be published at least two weeks prior to an examination, and a copy
of the notice shall be posted in the Municipal Building. Additional public
notice by publication, posting or otherwise may be given at any time at the
discretion of the Commission.
§ 17-30. Notice of oral examination.
In addition to the public announcement of the examination, the Borough
Secretary shall give written notice to each applicant deemed eligible after
successfully completing the written examination as follows:
A. By mailing or otherwise delivering to each applicant who has scored
among the top in the written examination the date, time, and place of
the interview.
B. The maximum number selected to be interviewed shall be determined
by multiplying the number of vacancies by six. Those selected will
include the applicants scoring at the top of the written examination plus
others who have Act 120 certification and a passing score.
C. Each notice shall be mailed or otherwise delivered at least five days
prior to the date fixed for the interview.
D. Failure to report for the oral interview in accordance with the written
instructions shall disqualify the applicant.
§ 17-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-30
1:29

ARTICLE V
Medical, Psychological and Polygraph Examinations
§ 17-31. Medical and psychological examinations.
§ 17-32. Polygraph examinations.
Polygraph examinations will be completed on the individual or individuals
being extended an offer of employment by the municipal governing body, or,
if previous polygraph examinations have been given to the applicant within
three years, they may be used, provided that the examination record can be
obtained.
A. An applicant selected from the eligibility list shall receive a conditional
offer of employment. The offer of employment shall be conditioned upon
the conditional appointee undergoing a physical and psychological
medical examination and a determination that the conditional
appointee is capable of performing all of the essential functions of the
position. Physical medical examinations shall be under the direction of
a physician or other qualified medical professional. Psychological
medical examinations shall be under the direction of a psychiatrist or
psychologist.
B. The physician or other qualified medical professional and the
psychiatrist or psychologist shall be appointed by the municipal
governing body and shall render an opinion as to whether the
conditional appointee has a physical or mental condition which calls
into question the person's ability to perform all of the essential
functions of the position for which the person was conditionally
appointed.
C. If the opinion rendered by the physician, other qualified medical
professional, psychiatrist or psychologist calls into question the
conditional appointee's ability to perform all essential functions of a
position, a person designated by the municipal governing body shall
meet with the conditional appointee for the purpose of having one or
more interactive discussions on whether the conditional appointee can,
with or without reasonable accommodation, perform all of the essential
functions of the position.
D. If, at the conclusion of the interactive discussion under Subsection C,
the municipal governing body determines that the conditional
appointee does not qualify, the municipal governing body shall give
written notice to the conditional appointee and the Commission.
E. There shall be no physical or psychological medical examinations prior
to conditional appointment.
§ 17-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-32
1:31

ARTICLE VI
Examination Elements
§ 17-33. Examination for police positions.
§ 17-34. Passing grade.
A. The examination for the position of police officer shall consist of the
following parts:
Step Element Passing Score Points
1. Application P/F —
2. Written examination 70% 4-20
3. Oral interview — 80
4. Background
investigation
P/F —
100
B. The number of points an applicant can receive on the written
examination is based on the following scale:
Score Points
Score of 100 - 96
=
20 points
Score of 95 - 91
=
18 points
Score of 90 - 86
=
16 points
Score of 85 - 81
=
12 points
Score of 80 - 76
=
8 points
Score of 75 - 70
=
4 points
C. The examination for promotion to the positions of Sergeant and
Lieutenant shall consist of the following parts:
Step Element Passing Score Points
1. Performance rating — 35
2. Written examination 70% 30
3. Oral interview — 35
100
§ 17-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-34
1:33
§ 17-35. Notice of applicant's grade.
When the grading of the written examination is completed, the grades shall
be filed in the office of the Municipal Secretary. A list of names and scores of
those who passed the examination shall be posted at the Municipal Building.
§ 17-36. Ineligibility for future examinations for six months.
If an applicant fails to obtain a passing grade in the written examination, he
or she shall not be eligible for a subsequent examination for any position in
the Police Department of the municipality for a period of six months.
§ 17-37. Administering examinations.
The Commission may designate the individual responsible as the examiner
for the written examination. The oral interview and evaluation of the service
or performance record of any applicant shall be the responsibility of the
Commission; provided, however, that the Commission may designate, from
time to time, such persons qualified in oral examining procedures and
techniques, or qualified to evaluate performance or service records, as are
considered necessary to assist in such examinations and evaluations.
§ 17-38. Conduct of written examinations.
The Commission shall prepare a statement of instructions and rules for
the conduct of written examinations. The regularly appointed examiner
shall administer each examination in accordance with the instructions of
the Commission and be responsible for enforcing the rules of conduct for
written examinations.
§ 17-39. Delegation of authority.
As an alternative to the examination and grading procedures set forth in
Article VI, the Borough of Manheim may delegate to the Lancaster County
Chiefs of Police Association, Inc., the tasks of recruiting, advertising, and
testing of applicants and/or applicants with 120 training and certification
of the eligibility list to the Borough of Manheim. This delegation will take
place in accordance with a memorandum of understanding of June 16,
A. The minimum passing grade for the written examination for the
positions of police officer, Sergeant or Lieutenant shall be a score of
70% Any candidate receiving a deficiency in a subtest of the written
examination must have Act 120 certification.
B. Every applicant for the position of police officer who receives a passing
score in the written examination and who is entitled by law to additional
10 points' credit for service in the Armed Forces of the United States
shall have his or her written examination score adjusted accordingly by
10 points. Applicants claiming veterans' preference shall submit
additional satisfactory proof of active service and honorable discharge
whenever the Commission shall so demand.
§ 17-34 MANHEIM CODE § 17-39
1:34
2010, between the Lancaster County Chiefs of Police Association, Inc., and
member agencies.
§ 17-40. Penalty for improper conduct.
Should an applicant be found guilty of any act tending to defeat the proper
conduct or the result of any examination, his or her name shall be removed
from the eligible list resulting from the examination and the applicant shall
not be permitted to make future application for any position in the Police
Department.
§ 17-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-40
1:35

ARTICLE VII
Eligible Lists
§ 17-41. Creation of eligible list.
At the completion of the examination requirements set forth in Article VI
hereof (written examination, oral examination, background investigation,
physical fitness test and polygraph examination), the Commission shall rank
all passing applicants on a list, with the applicant receiving the highest
score at the top of the list and the applicant receiving the lowest passing
score at the bottom of the list. Applicants who qualify for veterans'
preference points shall have those points added to their passing score
prior to being ranked on the eligibility list testing process, including any
physical agility or other examination, with the exception of any background
investigation to be conducted after the establishment of an eligibility list
and physical and psychological medical examination pursuant to § 17-31,
The Commission shall rank the candidates who have satisfied the minimum
requirements for appointment on an eligibility list. The eligibility list shall
contain the names of individuals eligible for appointment listed from highest
to lowest based on their scores on the examinations administered by the
Commission and any points for which the applicant was entitled by virtue of
51 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 71, relating to veterans' preference.
§ 17-42. Filing of eligibility list.
As soon as possible after the completion of the ranking process, the eligible
list shall be filed in the office of the Municipal Secretary and a copy posted
at the Municipal Building. The names on the eligible list shall be arranged,
from highest to lowest, in the order of the final score received by each
eligible applicant.
§ 17-43. Promotional requirements.
For positions of promotion, fulfilling the performance requirements set forth
in § 17-23 is also required.
§ 17-44. Breaking tie scores.
When two or more eligible applicants shall receive the same final score,
the order in which the names of such persons shall appear on the eligible
list shall be determined by their respective scores on that part of the
examination assigned the greatest weight. In the event that two or more
qualifying applicants also receive identical scores on that part of the
examination assigned the greatest weight, the order of the listing shall
be determined by the order in which the applications were numbered for
recording purposes.
§ 17-45. Life of eligible lists.
The eligibility list will be valid for one year from the date the Commission
formally adopts the eligibility list. Prior to the expiration of the one-year
§ 17-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-45
1:37
period, the Commission may extend the validity of the eligibility list for up
to an additional 12 months by a majority vote of the Commission at a duly
authorized Commission meeting. In the absence of a lawful extension by the
Commission, the list shall expire.
§ 17-46. Furlough lists.
Whenever the municipal governing body shall determine the need for a
reduction in the number of police officers, the Commission shall prepare
and maintain a list of the names of all such furloughed officers, together
with the position held by each such officer at the time of furlough. The
names on the furlough list shall be arranged in priority order based on the
length of service of each furloughed officer.
§ 17-45 MANHEIM CODE § 17-46
1:38
ARTICLE VIII
Certification and Appointments
§ 17-47. Filling vacancies.
When a vacancy is to be filled in the Police Department, the municipal
governing body shall submit a written request to the Commission for
certification of eligibles. In making the request, the title of the position to
be filled shall be specified.
§ 17-48. Furlough list to fill appointments.
Upon receipt of a request from the municipal governing body, the
Commission shall first certify the names of those eligible who were
furloughed because of a reduction in force. In filling a vacancy from the
furlough list, the Commission shall certify the top name only. If more than
one vacancy is to be filled, the Commission shall certify from the top of
the list a number of names equal to the number of vacancies to be filled.
No examination, other than a physical examination as directed by the Civil
Service Commission, shall be required in any case of reappointment or
reinstatement.
§ 17-49. Certification from eligible lists.
If no furlough list exists or if the total number of vacancies cannot be
filled from the available names on the furlough list, the Commission shall
certify for each vacancy from the eligibility list the names of three persons,
or a lesser number where three are not available, who have received the
highest average. The municipal governing body shall make a conditional
appointment from the three names certified, based solely on the merits
and fitness of the candidates, unless Borough Council makes objection to
the Commission regarding one or more of the certified persons for any of
the reasons stated in § 17-24. Should the objections be sustained by the
Commission, or if the conditional appointee is determined to be unqualified
in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 17-26, the Commission
shall strike the name of the person from the eligibility list and certify
the next-highest name for each name stricken from the eligibility list. As
each subsequent vacancy occurs in the same or another position, precisely
the same procedure shall be followed. The number of available eligibles
certified from the eligible list shall exceed by two for each vacancy to be
filled from such eligible list. If there are fewer than three available eligibles
on the eligible list, the municipal governing body may make a selection
from such lesser number of available eligibles or may request that the
Commission hold another examination.
§ 17-50. Removal of names from furlough and eligible lists.
A. In addition to the other reasons stated as grounds for removal in these
Rules, the name of any person appearing on a furlough list or an eligible
list shall be removed by the Commission if such person:
§ 17-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-50
1:39
§ 17-51. Appointment procedures.
Whenever the name of a person is certified from either the furlough list
or the eligible list, the person shall be notified immediately of such
certification. The notice shall include the title of the position and the
compensation to be paid and shall request a written reply within seven days
from the date of mailing.
§ 17-52. Probationary period.
All initial appointments to positions in the Police Department shall be for
a probationary period of one year from the date of appointment. During
the probationary period, an appointee may be dismissed only for a cause
specified in § 17-54 or because of incapacity for duty due to the use of
alcohol or drugs. The Chief of Police shall review the adjustment,
performance and general acceptability of each probationer quarterly to
determine whether such probationer is fully qualified for permanent
appointment. The Chief of Police shall make a report to the municipal
governing body recommending termination of employment of a police
officer found not to be acceptable in his or her position and/or shall submit
a final probationary report, not less than 10 nor more than 15 calendar
days before the next regular meeting of the municipal governing body
immediately preceding the end of the probationary period. Each final
probationary report shall include the recommendation of the Chief of Police
to retain the probationer. Each report shall be submitted in writing to
the municipal governing body. Within five calendar days after receiving a
probationary report from the Chief of Police recommending retention or
rejection of a probationer, the municipal governing body shall notify the
Commission, in writing, of its decision to retain or remove the probationer.
The Commission, in turn, shall notify the probationer of such decision within
(1) Is appointed to a position in the Police Department; or
(2) Declines an appointment to a permanent position in the Police
Department; or
(3) Fails to make written reply to the Commission seven calendar days
from the date of mailing of a notice of certification; or
(4) Indicates availability for appointment and is appointed to fill a
vacancy but fails to report for duty at the time prescribed, unless,
in the opinion of the municipal governing body, such person can
show good and sufficient reasons for failure to report.
B. The name of any person on an eligible list also shall be removed by the
Commission if certified for appointment consideration three times as
the top name and not appointed. Nothing in this section, however, shall
be construed as authorizing the removal of the name of a person from a
furlough list or eligible list who refuses or accepts a position of a lower
rank than that from which furloughed or for which eligible on a
Commission list.
§ 17-50 MANHEIM CODE § 17-52
1:40
five calendar days and in no event beyond the last day of the probationary
period.
§ 17-53. Appointment of Chief of Police.
A. In the case of a vacancy in the office of Chief of Police, the municipal
governing body has full discretion in selecting the individual to fill the
position of Chief of Police. If the municipal governing body requests the
Commission to subject that person to a noncompetitive examination,
and if that person successfully passes the noncompetitive examination,
then the Commission shall notify the municipal governing body of the
results of the examination, and that person may only be removed from
the position of Chief of Police for reasons set forth in § 17-54.
B. A Police Chief may be appointed by the municipal governing body
without civil service status. If the municipal governing body takes this
route, the individual appointed to Police Chief may be returned to a
prior rank within the Borough of Manheim Police Department if
promoted within or dismissed from an outside appointment, without
implicating civil service hearing rights.
§ 17-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-53
1:41

ARTICLE IX
Suspensions, Removals and Reduction in Rank
§ 17-54. Grounds for disciplinary action.
§ 17-55. Furloughs.
If, for reasons of economy or other reasons, it shall be deemed necessary
by the municipal governing body to reduce the number of full-time police
officers in the Department, then the municipal governing body shall
furlough the person or persons, including probationers, last appointed to
the force. Such removal shall be accomplished by furloughing in numerical
order commencing with the person last appointed until such reduction shall
have been accomplished. In the event the said police force shall again be
increased, the employees furloughed shall be reinstated in the order of their
A. No person appointed to a position in the Police Department pursuant to
these Rules and Regulations may be suspended without pay or removed
and no person promoted in rank pursuant to these Rules and
Regulations may be reduced in rank except for the following reasons:
(1) Physical or mental disability affecting the officer's ability to
continue in service, in which case the officer shall receive an
honorable discharge from service;
(2) Neglect or violation of an official duty;
(3) A violation of any law which provides that such violation constitutes
a misdemeanor or felony;
(4) Inefficiency, neglect, intemperance, immorality, disobedience of
orders or conduct unbecoming an officer;
(5) Intoxication while on duty;
(6) Engaging or participating in or conducting of any political or
election campaign while on duty or in uniform or while using
Borough property otherwise than to exercise the person's own
right of suffrage; or
(7) Engaging or participating in the conduct of a political or election
campaign for an incompatible office as provided in Section 1104(f)
of the Civil Service Law for boroughs.
B. No officer shall be removed for religious, racial or political reasons.
C. A written statement of any charges made against any officer so
employed shall be furnished to the officer within five days after those
charges have been adopted by the municipal governing body. The
person so employed shall have 10 days from the date of receiving the
notice in which to submit a written request for a hearing to the Civil
Service Commission under § 17-57.
§ 17-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-55
1:43
seniority in the service. The provisions of this section as to reduction in
force are not applicable to the Chief of Police.
§ 17-56. Notice of suspension, removal or reduction in rank.
§ 17-57. Hearings on suspensions, removals and reductions in rank.
A. Whenever a police officer is suspended, removed or reduced in rank,
the specific charges warranting such action shall be stated in writing by
the municipal governing body. The charges shall be stated clearly and in
sufficient detail to enable the officer to understand the charges and to
allow the officer an opportunity to respond to those charges. The
charges shall specify the subsection of § 17-54 which provides the basis
for the disciplinary action as well as an explanation of the factual
circumstances upon which the municipal governing body relied in
finding a violation of § 17-54.
B. Within five days after the municipal governing body has voted to impose
the disciplinary action, a written statement of the charges shall be
delivered to the officer either by personal service or by certified and
registered mail. In addition, the charges shall notify the officer of the
right to appeal under § 17-57 of these Rules and Regulations. A copy of
the statement of charges shall also be served upon the members of the
Commission.
A. The officer who has been suspended, removed or reduced in rank may
appeal the decision of the municipal governing body by written notice
to the Secretary at the Manheim Borough Municipal Office requesting a
hearing. This request shall be received by the Commission within 10
days after the officer received notice of the discipline. The officer may
make written answers to any charges filed not later than the date fixed
for the hearing. Failure of the officer to provide written answers to any
of the charges shall not be deemed an admission by the officer.
B. The Commission shall grant the officer a hearing within 10 days from
the officer's written request for a hearing unless continued by the
Commission for cause at the request of the Commission, the municipal
governing body or the officer. Notwithstanding this provision, the
failure of the Commission to hold a hearing within 10 days from the
filing of the charges in writing shall not result in the dismissal of the
charges filed. The Council may suspend the person, without pay,
pending the determination of the charges against the person; but in the
event the Commission fails to uphold the charges, then the person
sought to be suspended, removed or reduced in rank shall be reinstated
with full pay for the period during which the person was suspended,
removed or reduced in rank, and the charges shall be sealed and not be
available for public inspection in the event the charges are dismissed.
At any such hearing, the officer against whom the charges have been
made may be present and represented by counsel, may call witnesses
and may present testimony and documentation in defense. The
§ 17-55 MANHEIM CODE § 17-57
1:44
§ 17-58. Hearing procedure.
municipal governing body may also be represented by counsel, call
witnesses and present evidence as is necessary to support the charges.
A stenographic record of all testimony shall be taken at every hearing
and preserved by the Commission. In the event the charges are
dismissed, the record shall be sealed and shall not be available for
public inspection. Notice of the date, time and place for each hearing
shall be given in the following manner:
(1) Either by personal service or certified or registered mail to each of
the principals involved in the case; and
(2) By regular, first-class mail to all other persons who have stated an
interest in the hearing; provided, however, that any failure to give
the notice required by this subsection shall not invalidate any
subsequent action taken by the Commission.
C. In conducting the hearing, the Commission's standard of review shall
be to determine whether sufficient evidence has been presented to
support the statutory reason for the disciplinary action. If the
Commission finds that sufficient evidence has been introduced to
support the charge, the Commission shall not modify the penalty
imposed by the municipal governing body unless it finds that the
penalty imposed was arbitrary, discriminatory or an abuse of the
municipal governing body's discretion. In considering the
appropriateness of the discipline, the Commission shall not substitute
its judgment for that of the municipal governing body. The Commission
may request post-hearing briefs and shall issue a written decision
containing specific findings of fact and conclusions of law within 60
days of receipt of the hearing transcript.
D. Unless the municipal governing body or the person sought to be
suspended, removed, or reduced in rank requests that the proceedings
before the Commission be open to the public, the proceedings before
the Commission pursuant to this section shall be held in the nature of a
closed executive session that shall not be open to the public. Any such
request shall be presented to the Commission before the civil service
hearing commences. The deliberations of the Commission, including
interim rulings on evidentiary or procedural issues, may be held in
private and shall not be subject to request for being open to the public,
the municipal governing body or to the person sought to be suspended,
removed, or reduced in rank. The Commission's disposition of the
disciplinary action shall constitute official action which shall occur at a
public meeting held pursuant to 65 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 7 (relating to
open meetings). All parties concerned shall have immediate right of
appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of the county, and the case shall
there be determined as the court deems proper. No order of suspension
made by the Commission shall be for a longer period than one year. The
appeal shall be taken within 30 days from the date of entry by the
Commission of its final order and shall be by petition.
§ 17-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-58
1:45
A. All testimony shall be given under oath administered by the
Chairperson or, in the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson
of the Commission. The Commission shall have the power to issue
subpoenas as set forth in § 17-14 hereof. The hearing shall be open to
the public unless, prior to the commencement of the hearing, a written
or oral request to close the hearing is made by either the charged
officer or the municipal governing body.
B. Each hearing shall be conducted in substantially the same format as
follows:
(1) The Chairman shall state the general purpose of the hearing;
(2) Upon direction from the Chairman, the Secretary shall read the
written charges against the accused, together with the record of
action taken against such police officer;
(3) The Secretary shall read any written reply of the accused;
(4) The Chairman shall afford each person making charges, or that
person's counsel, an opportunity to make further statements in
support of the charges and to produce witnesses;
(5) The Chairman shall afford the accused, or the accused's counsel, an
opportunity to question or cross-examine the person making
charges and to question or cross-examine any witnesses produced
by such person;
(6) The Chairman shall afford each person making charges an
opportunity to examine the person accused;
(7) The Chairman shall permit each person making charges, or his/her
counsel, to make a summation;
(8) The Chairman shall permit the person accused, or the accused's
counsel, an opportunity to produce any witnesses, who may be
cross-examined by the person making the charges or such person's
counsel;
(9) The Chairman shall permit the person accused or the accused's
counsel to make summation; and
(10) The Commission, at any time during the course of the hearing, may
question or cross-examine the person making charges, the accused
or any witness.
(11) If the Commission sustains the charges, the officer who was
suspended, removed or reduced in rank may file an appeal with the
Court of Common Pleas within 60 days of the date of entry by the
Commission of its final order. No order of suspension shall be made
by the Commission for a period longer than one year. In the event
that the Commission fails to uphold the charges, then the person
sought to be suspended, removed or demoted shall be reinstated
§ 17-58 MANHEIM CODE § 17-58
1:46
with full pay for the period of suspension, removal or demotion, and
no charges related to the suspension, removal or reduction in rank
shall be officially recorded in the officer's record.
§ 17-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-58
1:47

ARTICLE X
Records, Reports and Examination Materials
§ 17-59. Inspections in general.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all of the records of the
Commission shall be open to the public and available for inspection during
normal business hours. A member of the Commission, or any person who
may, from time to time, be designated by the Commission, shall be present
at all times during any inspection of any record of the Commission.
§ 17-60. Character and reputation of reports.
The initial application and all reports of investigations and inquiries into
the character and reputation of applicants shall be kept in the strictest
confidence and shall not be open to public inspection.
§ 17-61. Examination material.
All examination materials shall be confidential and shall not be open to
general public inspection.
§ 17-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-61
1:49

ARTICLE XI
Commission Forms
§ 17-62. Official forms.
The following forms and their titles become the official forms of the
Commission and a part of the Rules and Regulations of the Commission, a
copy of which may be obtained from the Borough Secretary:
A. Application for Examination.
B. Minimum Qualifications of Applicants.
C. Report of Medical Examination.
D. Report of Psychological Examination.
E. Confidential Inquiry Letter.
F. Confidential Inquiry Form.
G. Instructions to Applicants.
H. Notice of Medical Examination.
I. Notice of Psychological Examination.
J. Notice of Oral Examination.
K. Rating Form - Oral Interview.
L. Letter of Conditional Employment Amendments.
§ 17-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-62
1:51

ARTICLE XII
Amendments
§ 17-63. Amendments.
The Commission, with the approval of the municipal governing body, may,
from time to time, amend any part of these Rules and Regulations, insofar
as such amendments do not run contrary to the applicable Municipal Code.
§ 17-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-63
1:53
Chapter 25
FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
§ 25-1. Recognition of Firemen's Relief Association.
§ 25-2. Certification to Auditor General.
The Borough Council shall annually certify to the Auditor General of the
Commonwealth, the name of the active association and the percentage of
service it contributes to the protection of the Borough of Manheim. Such
certification shall be on forms prescribed by the Auditor General.
§ 25-3. Annual appropriation.
There is annually appropriated from the Borough of Manheim treasury
all such sums of money that may hereafter be paid into the Borough of
Manheim treasury by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania on account
of taxes paid on premiums of foreign fire insurance companies in pursuance
of the Act of December 18, 1984, No. 205, 701 et seq.,6 as hereafter
amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania. Such monies received by the Borough of Manheim Finance
Director from the State Treasurer shall be distributed to the duly
recognized association within 60 days of receipt. The funds shall be
distributed on the basis of the percentage of service established in the
certification to the Auditor General and with other provisions of the Act.
A. The following association is hereby recognized as actively engaged in
providing fire protection and/or emergency services in the Borough of
Manheim:
(1) Manheim Firemen's Relief Association of Hope Fire Engine and
Hose Co. No. 1.
B. The above-named association has been formed for the benefit of its
members and their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or
permanent disability or accident suffered in the line of duty.
C. The above-named association of the Borough of Manheim is designated
the proper association to receive such funds as are due and payable to
the Borough of Manheim Finance Director by the Treasurer of the State
of Pennsylvania from the tax on premiums from foreign fire insurance
companies.
6. Editor's Note: Firemen's Relief Foreign Tax Distribution Law, 53 P.S. § 895.701 et seq.
§ 17-63 MANHEIM CODE § 25-3
1:54
Chapter 34
HISTORIC COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 49. Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 34-1. Creation of Commission.
§ 34-2. Organization.
The Commission shall annually elect, from its own membership, a Chairman
who will direct the activities of the Commission and such other officers
as may be required to conduct its business. A quorum shall be a majority
or more of its membership. The Commission may make, alter and rescind
rules and forms for its procedures consistent with the ordinances of the
Borough of Manheim and laws and regulations of the commonwealth. The
Commission shall conduct business at regular public meetings. An agenda
for each public meeting shall be available for inspection prior to the start of
each meeting.
§ 34-3. Records and reporting.
The Commission shall keep full public records of its business and shall
submit a report of its activities to Borough Council annually. The report shall
include, at a minimum, a list of all regular and special meetings, a listing
of all cases handled and the decision in each case, a list of all Commission
A. The Borough Council of the Borough of Manheim hereby creates a
Historic Commission, which shall report to Borough Council and which
consist of five members who shall be appointed by Borough Council.
The membership of the Commission shall include individuals who have
professional expertise or a demonstrated interest in cultural history,
architectural history, archaeology, historic preservation or knowledge
in a field related to the objectives of the Commission, such as real
estate, construction, grant writing, fund-raising, local business,
economic development and the like.
B. Each Commission member shall serve for a term of five years. The
creation of the Commission shall be established so that one term shall
expire each year. The Commission shall notify the President of Borough
Council of any vacancies in the Commission, and Borough Council shall
act within 90 days to fill those vacancies. Appointments to fill vacancies
for unexpired terms shall only be filled for the unexpired portion of the
term vacated. Members shall serve without pay but shall be reimbursed
for any personal expenditures in the conduct of Commission business
when authorized by Borough Council.
§ 25-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-3
1:55
members and a list of all expenditures and a proposed budget. All records
and papers shall be kept on file in the Borough office building.
§ 34-4. Expenditures for services.
Within the limits of funds appropriated by Borough Council, the Commission
may employ staff or contract for clerical, consulting or other technical
services.
§ 34-5. Conflict of interest.
Historic Commission members are required to recuse themselves from
any discussion and disqualify themselves from voting on any project in
which their own financial interest or those of their immediate families are
involved.
§ 34-6. Functions and duties.
In accordance with the purposes of this chapter, the Commission shall have
the following functions and duties:
A. Participate in the preparation of Comprehensive Plan updates and
assist with development of the historic preservation component of said
Comprehensive Plan update.
B. Participate in the periodic review and update to Borough ordinances to
ensure against provisions which may conflict with historic preservation
goals.
C. Make proposals to Borough Council for the creation of historic
preservation ordinances and/or their revision as may be required to
implement the goals of the historic preservation plan.
D. Preparation of design guidelines for historic buildings to serve as an aid
to owners of historic buildings.
E. Preparation and maintenance of maps and historic resource inventories
in accordance with survey information either gathered by the
Commission or provided by a consultant.
F. Provide information on historic preservation issues to the Borough
Council.
G. Review and comment on proposals for demolition of historic structures.
H. Review and comment on proposals for additions and alterations to
buildings or structures designated as historic resources.
I. Review and comment on proposals for infill and/or new construction in
neighborhoods which support historic resources.
J. Work with the Planning Commission in review of land development and
subdivision plans to determine if they will have an impact on historic
§ 34-3 MANHEIM CODE § 34-6
1:56
§ 34-7. Letter of appropriateness.
All Commission reviews provided to the applicant, Codes Compliance
Officer, Planning Commission and/or Borough Council shall be in the form of
a "letter of appropriateness," which shall include an outline of the proposal
along with any Commission recommendations and shall further note all
points where the Commission and applicant agreed on the implementation
of either the proposal and/or modification to the proposal.
§ 34-8. Bylaws.
The Commission shall establish bylaws for the purpose of directing its
activities. Said bylaws shall be created in accordance with the provisions
herein. Copies of any bylaws, policies or guidelines shall be provided to the
Planning Commission and Borough Council as they are developed for public
distribution.
resources and, if so, propose alternatives to mitigate any negative
impact for presentation and consideration by the developer/builder/
owner.
K. Review and comment on potential impact of proposed state and federal
agency actions on historic resources.
L. Conduct research on and propose the nomination of significant
resources to the National Register of Historic Places and other
appropriate lists or programs.
M. Advise the Zoning Hearing Board and/or Borough Council on all
requests for special exceptions, variances or conditional uses affecting
historic resources.
N. Develop informational brochures and educational materials about the
Borough's history and historic resources.
O. Develop a resource file or library to guide citizens in their preservation
efforts.
P. Promote, conduct or participate in activities which educate or enhance
the community's understanding of the Borough's history and historic
resources.
Q. Develop a walking tour brochure and map which features Class I and
Class II historic resources.
R. Actively pursue funding through grants, gifts, donations and other
sources for the purposes stated herein.
S. Perform any other lawful activities which shall be deemed necessary to
further the purposes of the historic preservation effort, stated in the
intent, policy, goal or mission statements contained in the preface of
this Ordinance No. 562.
§ 34-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-8
1:57
Chapter 40
MANAGER
§ 40-1. Office created.
The office of the Borough Manager has been created by the Borough of
Manheim and is hereby amended, subject to the right of the Borough, by
ordinance, at any time to abolish such office.
§ 40-2. Filling office; term.
As soon as practicable after the enactment of this chapter, the Borough
Council shall elect, by a majority vote of all its members, one person to fill
the office of Borough Manager. In the case of a vacancy, the Council shall
fill said office by majority vote of all its members. The Borough Manager
shall, however, be subject to removal at any time by a majority vote of all
the members of the Council.
§ 40-3. Qualifications.
The Borough Manager shall be a citizen of the United States and at least
21 years of age. The Borough Manager shall have technical and executive
ability and such training and experience as to enable him/her to perform the
duties imposed upon the office in a businesslike manner.
§ 40-4. Bond.
Before entering upon the duties of the office, the Borough Manager shall
give a bond to the Borough, with a bonding company as surety, in the sum
to be set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 40-5. Compensation.
The Borough Manager shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed
from time to time by the Council.
§ 40-6. General duties.
The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Borough and
shall be responsible to the Council as a whole for the proper and efficient
administration of the affairs of the Borough. His/her powers and duties shall
relate to the general management of all Borough business not expressly,
by statute or ordinance, imposed or conferred upon other Borough officers.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to delegate to the Borough Manager,
subject to recall by written notification at any time, any of his/her
nonlegislative and nonjudicial powers and duties.
§ 34-8 MANHEIM CODE § 40-7
1:58
§ 40-7. Specific duties.
Subject to recall by ordinance, the powers and duties of the Manager
include the following. He/she shall:
A. Supervise and be responsible for the activities of municipal
departments, except such departments the supervision of which shall
not have been delegated to the Manager by the Mayor or by Council, as
the case may be.
B. Hire and, when he/she shall deem it necessary for the good of the
Borough, suspend or discharge all employees under his/her
supervision; provided, further, that the Manager shall report, at the
next regularly scheduled meeting thereafter of Council, any action
taken by authority of this subsection as directed in the established
personnel policy between Council and the nonuniformed employees.
C. With the cooperation and aid of the Budget Committee appointed by
Borough Council, prepare and submit to Council before the close of the
fiscal year, or on such alternative date as Council shall determine, a
budget for the next fiscal year and an explanatory budget message. In
preparing the budget, the Manager or the Budget Committee shall
obtain from the head of each department, agency, board or officer
estimates of revenues and expenditures and other supporting data as
requested. The Manager and the Budget Committee shall review such
estimates and may revise them before submitting the budget to the
Council.
D. Be responsible for the administration of the budget after its adoption by
the Council.
E. Under the direction of the Mayor, execute and enforce the laws of the
commonwealth and ordinances, resolutions and bylaws of the Borough.
F. Attend all meetings of the Borough Council and of its committees, with
the right to take part in the discussion, and he/she shall receive notice
of all special meetings of Council and of its committees.
G. Keep the Council informed as to the conduct of Borough affairs, submit
periodic reports on the condition of the Borough finances and such
other reports as the Council shall request, and shall make such
recommendations to the Council as he/she deems necessary.
H. See that the provisions of franchises, leases, permits and privileges
granted by the Borough are observed.
I. Attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law and supervise the
performance and faithful execution of the same except insofar as such
duties are expressly imposed upon some other Borough officer by
statute.
§ 40-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-7
1:59
Chapter 45
PENSIONS
Chapter 49
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 49-1. Creation of Planning Commission.
A Borough Planning Commission, to be composed of five members
appointed as provided by law (53 P.S. § 10202), is hereby created in and for
the Borough of Manheim. The Planning Commission shall perform all duties
and may exercise all powers conferred by law upon planning agencies,
provided the Planning Commission previously created in and for the said
Borough of Manheim shall constitute the tenure of any of the members
thereof, but any and all vacancies in the said Commission hereafter
occurring shall be filled in the manner and for the term provided in the law
J. See that all money owed the Borough is promptly paid and that proper
proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all of the
Borough's claims.
K. Be the purchasing officer of the Borough and purchase, in accordance
with the provisions of the Borough Code, all supplies and equipment for
the various agencies, boards, departments and other offices of the
Borough. Keep an account of purchases and, from time to time or when
directed by Council, make a full written report thereof. Issue rules and
regulations, subject to the approval of Council, governing the
requisition and purchasing of all municipal supplies and equipment.
Have the power to purchase all supplies and equipment for various
departments and offices of the Borough; provided, however, that no
single article shall be purchased without Council's authorization in
excess of a specified dollar amount, as shall be determined by Council
from time to time.
L. Cooperate with the Borough Council at all times and in all matters to
assure that the best interests of the Borough and of the general public
may be maintained.
M. All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Borough shall be
referred to the office of the Manager. The Manager or an officer
designated by the Manager shall investigate and dispose of such
complaints, and the Manager shall report thereon to Council.
§ 40-7 MANHEIM CODE § 49-1
1:60
governing planning commissions in effect at the time of the happening of
the said vacancy.
Chapter 53
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil Service Commission — See Ch. 17.
§ 53-1. Office of Commissioner of Police established.
The office of Commissioner of Police is hereby established in the Borough of
Manheim.
§ 53-2. Status of office of Commissioner of Police.
The office of the Commissioner of Police shall be an office equivalent to the
office of Chief of Police, but the duties and powers of the Commissioner of
Police shall be only as set forth in this chapter.
§ 53-3. Salary of Commissioner of Police.
The salary of the Commissioner of Police shall be established by resolution
of Borough Council and may be changed by resolution of Borough Council.
§ 53-4. Duties and powers of Commissioner of Police.
The Commissioner of Police shall have the following duties and powers:
A. Personnel. The Commissioner of Police shall be responsible for
personnel functions, to include:
(1) Policy.
(2) Departmental public relations.
(3) Records.
(4) Training.
B. Budget administration. The Commissioner of Police shall be responsible
for preparation of proposed budgets and the budget administration of
the Police Department. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
reduce or alter any duties Borough Council may have concerning
budget approval nor remove from Borough Council any powers it may
have concerning budget preparation and administration.
§ 49-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-4
1:61
§ 53-5. Manner of appointment of Commissioner of Police.
The Commissioner of Police shall be appointed by Borough Council. The
person recommended by Borough Council for appointment shall be
nominated to the Civil Service Commission of the Borough of Manheim.
It shall thereupon be the duty of the Civil Service Commission to subject
such person to a noncompetitive examination, and if such person shall be
certified by the Civil Service Commission as qualified, he shall then be
appointed to the office of Police Commissioner by Borough Council.
Chapter 60
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
C. Public relations. The Commissioner of Police shall develop and maintain
a public relations program and shall be responsible for all matters
concerning public relations, including but not limited to:
(1) Complaints.
(2) Communications.
(3) Coordination between Borough Council and the Police Department.
D. Policy. The Commissioner of Police shall assist Borough Council and the
Chief of Police with:
(1) Development and implementation of departmental policy.
(2) Coordination of enforcement of Borough ordinances.
§ 53-4 MANHEIM CODE § 53-5
1:62
ARTICLE I
Mayor
[Adopted 12-29-1970 by Ord. No. 410 (Ch. 1, Part 3, of the 1992
Code)]
§ 60-1. Salary of Mayor. [Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 524]
The Mayor of the Borough of Manheim shall be paid a salary of $240, to
be paid from the Borough treasury in one annual payment to be made in
January of each year.
§ 60-2. Restrictions on increase or decrease of Mayor's salary.
The salary of the Mayor shall not be increased or decreased more often than
once in two years.
§ 60-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-2
1:63
Chapter 64
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 64-1. Creation of Commission.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Manheim hereby creates a Shade
Tree Commission, to be composed of three residents of the Borough of
Manheim who shall be appointed by the Borough Council and shall serve
without compensation for their terms of office and with all the rights,
powers, duties and obligations provided for by law.
§ 64-2. Appointments; term of office.
The members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Borough Council
for terms of five years, in such order that at least one member's term
shall expire annually. The aforesaid appointments for a specified term
notwithstanding, a Commission member may stay in office until a successor
qualifies or is appointed or the Borough Council may remove any member
of the Commission at the pleasure of the Borough Council.
§ 64-3. Express authority of Shade Tree Commission.
The collection of assessments, the filing of liens, the levying of taxes and
the collection of penalties, whether by the Commission or on behalf of the
Borough Council, are expressly authorized as provided for in the law.
§ 64-4. Authority to prescribe rules, regulations and penalties
The Commission is hereby authorized to prescribe such rules and
regulations and to impose such penalties for the violation of same as it
may deem necessary and proper, provided that the rules and regulations
are approved by the Borough Council and are not in conflict with other
ordinances of the Borough of Manheim.
§ 64-5. Annual report.
The Shade Tree Commission shall report annually to the Borough Council
on all transactions and expenses for the preceding fiscal year.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 80
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 60-2 MANHEIM CODE § 64-5
1:64
ARTICLE I
Public Consumption and Possession
[Adopted 6-26-1979 by Ord. No. 464; amended in its entirety
7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 524 (Ch. 6, Part 4, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 80-1. Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, as used in this article the following
words or phrases shall be construed according to the definitions set forth
below:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid
containing more than 1/2% of alcohol by volume which is fit for beverage
purposes.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can or other vessel in which alcoholic beverages
are contained.
§ 80-2. Consumption.
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage in any quantity upon
any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, stairway, thoroughfare, or other public
property within the Borough of Manheim, nor shall any person consume any
alcoholic beverage within five feet of any public way or thoroughfare while
on a private stairway, doorway or other private property open to public view
without the express or implied permission of the owner, his agent or other
party in lawful possession thereof.
§ 80-3. Possession.
No person shall possess any container of alcoholic beverage, whether
wrapped or unwrapped, which has been opened or on which the seal has
been broken in any manner on any public street, avenue, alley, thoroughfare
or other public property within the Borough of Manheim, nor shall any
person possess any container of alcoholic beverage within five feet of
any public way or thoroughfare while on a private stairway, doorway or
other private property open to public view without the express or implied
permission of the owner, his agent, or other person in lawful possession
thereof.
§ 80-4. Exceptions.
Provided, however, that the provisions of §§ 80-2 and 80-3 above shall not
apply to interior portions of any private dwelling, habitat or building, nor
to the consumption or possession by persons in the areas herein designated
of any duly prescribed and dispensed medication having alcoholic content
as set forth in § 80-1 hereof; and provided, further, that the provisions of
said §§ 80-2 and 80-3 above shall not apply to premises duly licensed by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board and to persons then and there patrons
of said licensee.
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-5
1:65
§ 80-5. Violations and penalties.
Whosoever violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and, in
default of payment thereof, to be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30
days.
§ 80-5 MANHEIM CODE § 80-5
1:66
Chapter 84
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 145.
§ 80-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-5
1:67

Part 1
[ADdoogp tCeodn6t-r3o0l;- 1N9o8is1eB DyisOtrudr.b Nanoc. e4;7 P6e; tA Omwennedre dR eIsnp Iotns sEibnitliirteyty
7-14-1992 By Ord. No. 524 (Ch. 2 Of The 1992 Code)]
ARTICLE I
Prohibiting Dogs Running at Large
§ 84-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
OWNER — Any person having a right of property in any dog or having
custody of any dog, or any person who harbors or permits a dog to remain
on or around his or her property.
RUNNING AT LARGE — Being upon any public highway, street, alley, park
or any other public land, or upon property of another person other than the
owner, and not being accompanied by and under the control of the owner or
any other person having custody of said dog.
§ 84-2. Appointment and duties of Dog Warden.
A Dog Warden may be appointed by the Borough Council to serve during its
pleasure. Such Dog Warden, along with the Police Department, shall have
concurrent responsibility for the enforcement of this article and of the Dog
Law of 1982, (3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq., as hereafter amended, supplemented,
modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania), provided
that he shall not have the power to make arrests under this Act of Assembly
or any other Act of Assembly or ordinance of the Borough of Manheim.
§ 84-3. Unlawful to allow dogs to run at large.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or dogs to allow or permit such
dog or dogs to run at large in the Borough of Manheim.
§ 84-4. Leashing of dogs.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog while traveling
on the streets, alleys or public grounds to fail to have the dog on a leash at
all times and to prevent the dog from entering upon the property of another
without the property owner's consent.
§ 84-5. Seizing of dogs.
The Dog Warden or any police officer or constable may seize any dog found
at large in the Borough of Manheim. Such dogs are to be impounded in a
licensed kennel.
§ 84-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-6
1:69
§ 84-6. Licensed dogs.
The Dog Warden or Police Department that seizes any licensed dog shall
notify the owner that the dog is impounded and will be transferred to the
Lancaster County Humane League Kennel or to a similar animal protection
agency if not claimed within 24 hours of notice of seizure.
§ 84-7. Unlicensed dogs.
Unlicensed dogs or licensed dogs whose owner cannot be contacted at the
address and phone listed on the license information shall be transferred to
the kennel listed in § 84-6, at the convenience of the Police Department.
§ 84-8. Threatening dogs.
Dogs that, in the opinion of any police officer or dog warden, constitute
a threat to public health and welfare may be killed by the police or dog
warden.
§ 84-9. Violations and penalties.
The first two times a dog is seized, the owner shall pay a fine of $15 to the
Borough of Manheim as well as reasonable fees for keeping the animal in a
kennel as fixed pursuant to a resolution of the Borough Council. Any person
allowing a dog to run at large a third time in violation of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
and, in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30
days.
§ 84-6 MANHEIM CODE § 84-9
1:70
ARTICLE II
Animal Noise Control
§ 84-10. Intent and purpose.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Manheim, finding that excessive
levels of sound are detrimental to the physical, mental and social well-being
of the people as well as to their comfort, living conditions, general welfare
and safety, and being, therefore, a public health and welfare hazard, hereby
declares it to be necessary to provide for the greater control and more
effective regulation of excessive sound and the sources of excessive sound
within the Borough of Manheim.
§ 84-11. Noise disturbance.
It shall be illegal within the Borough of Manheim for any person or persons
to own, possess, harbor or control any animal or bird which makes any noise
continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 10 minutes or makes such
noise intermittently for 1/2 hour or more to the disturbance of any person
at any time of the day or night regardless of whether the animal or bird is
physically situated in or upon private property, said noise being a nuisance,
provided that at the time the animal or bird is making such noise no person
is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon
which the animal or bird is situated nor is there any other legitimate cause
which justifiably provoked the animal or bird.
§ 84-12. Exceptions.
This article shall not be deemed to prohibit or otherwise declare unlawful
any agricultural operations protected from nuisance suits by Act No. 133 of
1982.7
§ 84-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and, in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days.
7. Editor's Note: See the Right to Farm Law, 3 P.S. § 951 et seq. (Act 133 of 1982).
§ 84-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-13
1:71

ARTICLE III
Care and Cleaning of Animals
§ 84-14. Clean and free of odor.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, handler, custodian or keeper of any dog
to fail to keep the dog and the dog's living area clean at all times and free
of odor, flies and rodents.
§ 84-15. Proper shelter and feeding of dogs.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, handler, custodian or keeper of any dog
to fail to reasonably provide for proper food and water for a dog, or to fail
to keep any dog properly warm in the winter, or to fail to provide a shaded
area for any dog in the summer.
§ 84-16. Animal defecation on public and private property
restricted.
No person having possession, custody or control of any animal shall,
knowingly or negligently, permit any dog or other animal to commit any
nuisance (i.e., defecation or urination) upon any gutter, street, driveway,
alley, curb or sidewalk in the Borough of Manheim, or upon the floors or
stairways of any building or place frequented by the public or used in
common by the tenants, or upon the outside walls, walkways, driveways,
alleys, curbs or stairways of any building abutting on a public street or park,
or upon the grounds of any public park or public area, or upon any private
property other than the property of the owner of such animal.
§ 84-17. Disposal of animal feces.
Any person having possession, custody or control of any dog or other animal
which commits a nuisance (i.e. defecation or urination) in any area other
than the private property of the owner of such dog or other animal, as
prohibited in § 84-16, shall be required to immediately remove any feces
from such surface, and either:
§ 84-18. Dogs accompanying blind or handicapped persons
exempted.
The provisions of §§ 84-16 and 84-17 hereof shall not apply to a guide
dog accompanying any blind persons or to a dog used to assist any other
physically handicapped person.
A. Carry same away for disposal in a toilet; or
B. Place same in a nonleaking container for deposit in a trash or litter
receptacle.
§ 84-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-19
1:73
§ 84-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and, in default of payment thereof, to imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 30 days.
§ 84-19 MANHEIM CODE § 84-19
1:74
Chapter 88
BICYCLE REGISTRATION
§ 88-1. License required.
All two-wheeled bicycles operated on the streets and alleys of the Borough
of Manheim shall be licensed in a manner hereinafter provided in § 88-3.
§ 88-2. Application. [Amended 12-1-1978 by Ord. No. 461]
Application for a bicycle license and license tag shall be made upon a form
provided by the Borough and shall be made to the Police Department or to
such persons or places of business that the Mayor so authorizes to act as
agents for the sale of bicycle licenses. A license fee of $1 shall be paid to the
Borough before each license is granted. Such agents authorized to collect
fees for the sale of bicycle licenses shall receive $0.15 for each license
issued.
§ 88-3. Issuance of license. [Amended 12-1-1978 by Ord. No. 461]
§ 88-4. License tag. [Amended 12-1-1978 by Ord. No. 461]
§ 88-5. Enforcement.
A. Upon proper application, the Police Department or an authorized agent
designated by the Mayor shall issue a bicycle license which shall be
valid for the useful service life of the bicycle.
B. The Police Department and authorized agents shall make an accurate
record of each license issued in the manner specified by the Mayor.
C. No license shall be transferred from one bicycle to another. In the event
that ownership of a bicycle is transferred, the new owner shall report
such transfer to the Police Department and shall pay a license transfer
fee of $1.
D. No license shall be issued to any applicant who is not the rightful owner
or entitled to the possession of his bicycle.
A. The Police Department or authorized agent, upon issuing a bicycle
license, shall also issue a license tag bearing such information as
specified by the Mayor.
B. The Police Department or authorized agent shall attach the tag to the
front of the bicycle on the area where the fork and handlebars are
attached.
C. Every holder of a bicycle license shall promptly replace any license tag
issued to him which may become lost or disfigured to such an extent as
to be illegible. Replacement of license tags shall be in the same manner
as provided for in § 88-3 at the cost of $1.
§ 84-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-5
1:75
§ 88-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No.
524]
Any person or any parent or guardian who shall permit a minor to violate
the provisions of this chapter after receiving notice of a prior violation shall,
upon conviction before a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a
fine to the Borough of Manheim of not less than $2 nor more than $600 for
each and every offense and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
of such fines and costs, to undergo imprisonment for a period of one day for
each dollar of fine that such person is in default thereunder, but such period
shall not exceed a total of 30 days.
Chapter 100
CONSTRUCTION CODES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Appeals — See Ch. 12.
Geothermal boreholes for heat pump
systems — See Ch. 132, Art. I.
Rental property — See Ch. 166.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
A. It shall be the duty of the Police Department to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
B. The parent or guardian of any minor under the age of 18 years shall be
responsible for the acts of such minor that result in a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter.
C. For the first violation by a minor of any of the provisions of this chapter,
the Chief of Police shall forward to the parent or guardian of such minor
a printed notice of such violation, either by mail or in person, and the
parent or guardian of such minor shall not be prosecuted.
D. For the second or subsequent violation by a minor of any of the
provisions of this chapter, the parent or guardian shall be notified as
provided in Subsection C and may be prosecuted for permitting such
violation.
§ 88-5 MANHEIM CODE § 88-6
1:76
ARTICLE I
Property Maintenance Code
[Adopted 9-24-2013 by Ord. No. 6358]
§ 100-1. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Borough of Manheim, being marked and designated as the International
Property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition, as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance
Code of Manheim Borough, in the State of Pennsylvania for regulating and
governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and
structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities
and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures
are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation
of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the
demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor. Each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property
Maintenance Code on file in the office of the Borough of Manheim are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 100-2 of this article.
§ 100-2. Deletions, additions and insertions.
Changes to the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition, are
as follows:
A. Section 101.1. The name of the jurisdiction shall be "Manheim
Borough."
B. Section 103.5. Manheim Borough shall adopt a fee schedule as it is
related to inspections and legal action to be taken against those parties
who are in violation of this ordinance from time to time by resolution.
C. Section 106.4 shall provide as follows:
8. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. I, Property Maintenance Code,
adopted 9-24-1996 by Ord. No. 544, as amended.
§ 100-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-2
1:77
Section 106.4. Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate
a provision of this code or who shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof, or who shall use, maintain or alter a lot, building
or structure in violation of any approved plan or directive of the
Code Official or of any order, permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code or who shall violate any order of the Code
Official, or who shall fail to completely implement or improperly
remedy any health hazard, or who shall fail to completely implement a
plan to remedy a health hazard which has been reviewed and approved
by the Code Official shall be liable, upon summary convictions therefor,
to fines and penalties not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 plus
all cost of prosecution, which fines and penalties may be collected as
provided by law. All fines and penalties collected for violation of this
code shall be paid over to the Borough treasurer. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
D. Insert new Sections 107.3.1 through 107.3.5, which shall provide as
follows:
Section 107.3.1. Notice to abate health hazards or public
nuisance. It shall be the duty of the Code Official to cause a notice to
be served upon the owner or occupant of any premises upon which any
such weeds or other objectionable vegetation are permitted to grow
in violation of the provisions of this chapter or whenever property is
maintained so as to constitute a health hazard or a public nuisance and
require abatement of the health hazard or public nuisance within 10
days from the date of service of such notice or such other time period
as may be set forth in the notice. Service of such notice shall be as
provided in Section 107.3.
Section 107.3.2. Performance of work upon noncompliance with
notice. In the event that the owner or occupant shall refuse or neglect
to abate such health hazard or public nuisance with the time period
as required by such notice or in the event that the owner or occupant
shall perform actions necessary to eliminate the health hazard in a
negligent or incomplete fashion, the Code Official may cause such
weeds or other objectionable vegetation to be cut, eradicated and/or
removed or take action necessary to eliminate such health hazard or
nuisance of which the owner or occupant has been notified, keeping
an account of the expenses of inspecting the premises, service of
notice and abating the health hazard and nuisance. All such costs and
expenses shall be charged to and paid by such owner or occupant.
Section 107.3.3. Collection of costs. All costs and expenses
incurred by the Borough in the abatement of such health hazard and
public nuisances shall be a lien upon the premises, and whenever a
bill there for remains unpaid for a period of 30 days after it has been
rendered, the Borough solicitor shall file a municipal claim or civil
action for such costs and expenses, together with a penalty of 10%
of the costs and expenses, in the manner provided by law for the
collection of municipal claims.
§ 100-2 MANHEIM CODE § 100-2
1:78
Section 107.3.4. Service fees for reoccurring violations. When
a property has been declared a "public nuisance" due to refuse
accumulation, insect, vermin or rodent infestation, lack of required
utilities, facilities, equipment or other property maintenance
violations, deemed a detriment to the occupants of a property or the
public-at-large and/or cause a blighting condition, the Borough Code
Official will notify the responsible party. In the event of a reoccurrence
of the violation within a twelve-month period, the following service
charge will be assessed against the responsible party:
(1) First reoccurrence: $75.
(2) Second reoccurrence: $150.
(3) Third through sixth reoccurrence: $200 per occurrence.
(4) Seventh or subsequent reoccurrence: $300 per occurrence.
Repeat offender service fees shall be payable to the Borough within
15 days of receipt of the Borough invoice setting forth the service fee.
Failure to timely pay said fee will result in the Borough instituting
appropriate action against the offender to recover both the service fee
and any related administrative fees.
Section 107.3.5. Public safety official notice and quick ticket
citation procedures. In addition to other enforcement mechanisms
available to the Borough under this chapter, the Borough Code Official
is authorized to issue public safety official notices for Property
Maintenance Code violations and quick ticket citations for code
violations regarding high weeds and grass, garbage, rubbish, animal
waste, and snow and ice removal from sidewalks. The fines for the
above-referenced violations shall be payable within 15 days. Repeat
offenders shall be subject to additional penalties. Failure to pay the
citation within 15 days may result in a summary citation being issued
through the local Magisterial District Judge's office. [Amended
11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 660]
The forms of the public safety official notice and the quick ticket
citation are attached to this ordinance.9 The forms of the public safety
official notice and the quick ticket citation may be changed by
resolution by Borough Council from time to time.
E. Section 108.4.1. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation
placard without the approval of the Code Official shall be subject to a
penalty of $500.
F. Section 110.3 shall provide as follows:
9. Editor's Note: Said forms are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 100-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-2
1:79
Section 110.3. Failure to comply. Whenever the owner of the
property fails to comply with a demolition order within the time period
prescribed, the Code Official shall request the Borough solicitor to
institute an action at law or in equity against the property owner to
obtain an order authorizing the Code Official to raze and remove such
structure or contract for the razing and removal of such structure at
the expense of the owner of the property. At the completion of such
razing and removal, the Borough solicitor shall file a municipal claim
as a lien against the property in the amount of the Borough's cost plus
a penalty of 10% of such costs. The Borough solicitor may also institute
any proceedings at law or in equity to provide for the collection of the
Borough's costs.
G. Section 110.4 shall be deleted in its entirety.
H. Section 111, Means of appeal, shall be deleted in its entirety. A new
Section 111 appeals shall be inserted, which shall provide as follows:
An appeal from any decision of the Code Official may be taken to
Borough Council. Such appeal shall be made in writing within 10 days
after such decision has been made. The appeal shall be verified by
an affidavit, shall state the grounds there for, and shall be filed with
the Borough secretary. The appellant or his representative shall have
the right to appear and be heard, if such right is requested in the
written appeal. Borough Council shall make a prompt decision of such
appeal. In making a decision, Borough Council may vary or modify any
provision of its Code where there are practical difficulties in the way of
executing the strict letter of the law so that the spirit of the law shall
be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. Such
variation or modification shall be the minimum necessary in order to
grant relief. Every action of the Borough Council on such appeal shall
be by resolution, copies of which shall be certified to the Code Official
and the appellant.
I. Section 112.4. The fine to be imposed shall be no less than $100 or
more than $1,000.
J. Section 302.1, Scope, shall be amended by inserting the following
definition:
BLIGHT PROPERTY/PUBLIC NUISANCE —
Any premises which, because of physical condition or use, is
regarded as a public nuisance and has been declared as a public
nuisance in accordance with the local housing, building, plumbing,
fire and related codes;
(1)
Any premises which, because of physical condition, use or
occupancy, is considered an attractive nuisance to children,
including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements,
excavation, unsafe fences or structures;
(2)
§ 100-2 MANHEIM CODE § 100-2
1:80
Any dwelling which, because it is dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe,
insect or vermin infested or lacking in the facilities and equipment
required by this chapter, and had been designated by the Code
Official as unfit for human habitation or occupancy;
(3)
Any structure which is a fire hazard or is otherwise dangerous to
the safety of person or property;
(4)
Any structure from which the utility, plumbing, heating, sewage
or other facilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed or
rendered ineffective so that the property is unfit for its intended
use.
(5)
Any vacant or unimproved lot or parcel of ground in a
predominantly built-out neighborhood, which by reason of neglect
or lack of maintenance has become a place for accumulation of
trash and debris or a haven for rodents and other vermin;
(6)
Any unoccupied property which has been tax delinquent for a
period of two years prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and
those in the future having a two-year tax delinquency; and
(7)
Any property which is vacant but is not tax delinquent which has
not been rehabilitated within one year of the receipt of notice to
rehabilitate from either the Code Official or Borough Council.
(8)
K. Section 202.0, General definitions, shall be amended by inserting the
following definitions:
VEHICLE, HAZARDOUS — A motor vehicle which:
COUNCIL — A governing body of a Borough.
Contains one or more broken windows or one or more missing
doors or a missing trunk or hood which allows entry into the vehicle
by children or vermin.
(1)
Is structurally unstable or supported by blocks, jacks or other
devices which may slip or move, presenting danger to passersby.
(2)
Is parked upon property in such a manner as to obstruct the vision
of drivers or interfere with the free movement of pedestrians or
traffic.
(3)
L. Section 301.1, General, shall be amended by inserting the following
definitions:
ABATE/ABATEMENT — When used in connection with lead-based
coating, the reduction of, removal of or encapsulation of lead, followed
by the thorough cleanup and post-cleanup treatment from the surfaces
and sources that promote exposure resulting in the possibility of lead
toxicity or poisoning, which abatement shall be in a manner approved
or determined to be appropriate by the Code Official. The methods of
abatement and subsequent disposal of lead shall not present a hazard
§ 100-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-2
1:81
to health from fumes, dust or vapors by inhalation, ingestion or
absorption through the skin and mucous membranes and shall be in
accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances, regulations and safety
standards of the Borough, the state and federal agencies.
EXPOSED SURFACE — When used in connection with lead-based
coatings, all interior surfaces of a dwelling or other structure which
may be occupied by children and those exterior surfaces of such
dwelling or structures which are readily accessible to children under
six years of age, such as stairs, decks, porches, railings, windows, doors
and sidings. Any yard or other area in the vicinity of a dwelling or
structure, including, without limitation, any soil, yard or other area
which may be subject to contamination from flaking or peeling lead
based coatings or any other source of lead is also considered an
exposed surface.
LEAD-BASED COATING — Any paint, varnish, glaze or other applied
liquid surface coating and putty or plaster which contains a quantity of
lead in excess of 0.6 milligrams per square centimeter of surface.
RECOGNIZED METHOD OF ANALYSIS — Any recognized method of
lead detection and analysis which result in measurement of lead in
milligrams in a square centimeter of particular area, including, without
limitation, a radio isotype x-ray fluorescent analyzer for in-place
determination of lead content.
M. Section 302.4 shall provide as follows:
302.4. Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained
free from weeds or plant growth in excess of six inches. All noxious
weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses,
annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided,
however, that this term shall not include cultivated flowers and
gardens. The Borough Council, the Code Official or any officer or
employee of the Borough designated thereby for the purpose is hereby
authorized to give notice, by personal service, by United States Mail
or by posting on the property, to the owner of any premises whereon
grass, weeds or other vegetation is growing or remaining in violation
of the provisions of this code, directing and requiring such owner to
remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation so as to conform
to the requirements of this article within 10 days after the issuance of
such notice. In case any person shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply
with such notice, within the period of time stated herein, the Borough
authorities may remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation,
and the cost thereof, together with a penalty of 10% of such cost, may
be collected by the Borough from such person in the manner provided
by law.
N. Section 302.8 shall be amended to provide as follows:
§ 100-2 MANHEIM CODE § 100-2
1:82
Section 302.8 Motor vehicles. Except as provided in other
regulations, the parking and storage of motor vehicles shall be limited
as provided herein.
Section 302.8.1. Licensed and inspected vehicles. Motor vehicles
which have a current license and inspection may be stored upon a
premise in accordance with the requirements of the Manheim Borough
Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 220, and other applicable ordinances and
regulations, unless such vehicles are hazardous vehicles as defined
herein.
Section 302.8.2. Unlicensed or uninspected vehicles. Only one
currently unregistered or uninspected motor vehicle shall be parked,
kept or stored on any premises in the Borough, and in no event for
more than 10 days. Motor vehicles that do not have a current license,
current inspection or current registration must be stored within a
completely enclosed structure, unless a vehicle storage permit is
issued by the Code Official. A vehicle storage permit shall be valid for
90 days and may be extended by the Code Official for an additional 90
days if special circumstances exist. The permit fee for a vehicle storage
permit shall be $75, and such fee may be adjusted from time to time
by resolution of Borough council. However, no motor vehicle shall at
any time be in state of major disassembly, disrepair or in the process
of being stripped or dismantled. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to the storage of motor vehicles on premises which otherwise
comply with applicable zoning regulations, such as automobile repair
garages or motor vehicle towing establishments. Such establishments
shall be permitted to store unlicensed or uninspected motor vehicles
for a period of not more than 60 days.
Section 302.8.3. Hazardous vehicles. No person who owns a
hazardous vehicle shall park, place, deposit or permit the parking,
placement or depositing of the hazardous vehicle on any property.
No property owner shall permit any hazardous vehicle to remain on
the premises. If any hazardous vehicle is parked or placed upon a
premises, the Code Official and/or the police department shall notify
the owner or occupant of the premises of the duty to remove the
hazardous vehicle. The Code Official and/or the Police Department
shall post upon the hazardous vehicle in a conspicuous place a notice
directing the removal of the hazardous vehicle within 10 days. Should
the vehicle not be removed, the Code Official or Police Department
shall serve a second notice, which shall be in writing and shall provide
a time limit not to exceed five days within which the hazardous vehicle
has to be removed. Said notice shall be served as provided in Section
107.3 herein and shall additionally be posted upon the hazardous
vehicle. If the owner of the premises fails to remove the hazardous
vehicle, the Borough may take action to abate the health hazard
resulting from the hazardous vehicle as provided in Sections 107.3.1
through 107.3.3 herein.
§ 100-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-2
1:83
O. Section 304.14, Insect screens, shall be amended by inserting "April
15" to "October 1" into the appropriate places.
P. Section 602.3, Heat supply, shall be amended by inserting "October 1"
to "April 15" into the appropriate places.
Q. Section 602.4, Occupiable work spaces, shall be amended by inserting
"October 1" to "April 15" into the appropriate places.
R. A new Chapter 9, Leasing of Residential Dwelling Units, shall be added,
which shall provide as follows: [Amended 7-31-2018 by Ord. No.
659]
Section 900.0. General.
Section 900.1. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the
following terms shall have the following meanings:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Manheim, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
CHAPTER 166 — Chapter 166 of the Manheim Borough Code of
Ordinances, entitled "Rental Property," as may be amended and/or
restated from time to time.
OWNER — Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others shall
have:
(1) Legal or equitable title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
(2) Charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit as
owner or manager of owner, or as executor, administrator,
trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
limited-liability company or any other entity.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT — A rooming unit, or a dwelling unit let
for rent, or a residential unit occupied by any person other than one
occupied solely by the owner and members of the owner's immediate
family. Each individual townhouse dwelling, each individual apartment
unit, each individual unit in a multifamily building, and each rooming
unit shall be considered a separate residential rental unit. If a
structure contains a rooming unit or if any portion of the structure is
let for rent, it shall be considered a residential rental unit, whether or
not the owner or a relative of the owner also resides in the structure.
A residential rental unit shall not include a hotel unit or a hospital
room utilized for medical services. A residential rental unit includes a
dwelling unit under a lease-purchase agreement or long-term (greater
than six months) agreement of sale.
Section 900.2. Scope. The provisions of this article and Chapter
166 shall govern the leasing of all residential rental units, rooming
houses, multiple-family dwellings, rooming units and one- and twofamily
dwellings in the Borough.
§ 100-2 MANHEIM CODE § 100-2
1:84
Section 900.3. Responsibility. Each owner of each structure located
in the Borough shall be responsible for compliance with the
requirements of this article and the requirements of Chapter 166.
If any structure is managed by a person other than the owner, that
person shall also be responsible for compliance with the requirements
of this article and Chapter 166.
§ 100-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-2
1:85

ARTICLE II
Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 584 (Ch. 5, Part 1, of the 1992
Code)]
§ 100-3. Purpose.
§ 100-4. Scope.
§ 100-5. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within Manheim Borough shall
be undertaken in any of the following ways, as determined by the Borough
Council from time to time by resolution:
A. The purpose of this article is to promote the general health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Borough of Manheim and to conform to the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of
1999 (hereinafter the "Act")10 and regulations related to the Act as
promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
(hereinafter "Department").
B. The Act requires the enactment of an appropriate ordinance by
municipalities electing to administer and enforce the provisions of the
Building Code adopted under the Act, in accordance with the rules and
regulations promulgated by the Department.
A. From and after the effective date of this article, it shall be known and
understood that the Borough of Manheim, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, elects to administer and enforce the provisions of the Act,
as enacted and amended from time to time, and its regulations.
B. In addition, the Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code,
Chapters 401 to 405 (hereinafter the "code"), as amended from time to
time, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the
Municipal Building Code of the Borough of Manheim.
A. By the designation of an employee of the Borough to serve as the
Building Code Official to act on behalf of the Borough.
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Borough.
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of the Act and/or Code provisions
through an intermunicipal agreement.
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the joint
administration and enforcement of the Act and/or code provisions on
behalf of the Borough.
10.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
§ 100-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-5
1:87
§ 100-6. Board of Appeals.
For the purpose of addressing disputes, a Board of Appeals shall be
established by resolution of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Manheim in conformity with the rules and regulations provided for in the
code, for the purposes set forth therein, as they may be amended from
time to time. Within the Borough of Manheim, the Board of Appeals shall
be established in one of the following ways, as determined by the Borough
Council.
§ 100-7. Adopted codes.
E. By entering into an agreement with the Department for plan review,
inspections and enforcement of the Act and/or code provisions as they
relate to structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units,
utility and miscellaneous-use structures.
A. By the appointment of no fewer than three nor more than seven
qualified individuals who are residents of the Borough or who own
property within the Borough.
B. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the
establishment of a Joint Board of Appeals to be created by the
appointment of no less than one resident from each municipality in
accordance with the provisions of an intermunicipal agreement.11
A. The list of codes to be hereby adopted shall be consistent with the
listing provided in the Act and code. Section 403.21(a) of the code
provides as follows: "The Department adopts and incorporates by
reference the following codes as the Uniform Construction Code:
Chapters 2 through 29 and 31 through 35 of the International Building
Code, the ICC Electrical Code, the International Mechanical Code, the
International Fuel Gas Code, the International Plumbing Code, the
International Residential Code, the International Fire Code, the
International Energy Conservation Code, the International Existing
Building Code and the International Urban-Wildland Interface Code.
B. In addition, the following specific appendixes are adopted as a part of
the Uniform Construction Code: Sections AE501 through AE503,
inclusive, and AE601 through AE605, inclusive, of Appendix E
(Manufactured Housing) and Appendix G (Swimming Pools, Spas and
Hot Tubs), of the International Residential Code, along with Appendix E
(Supplemental Accessibility Requirements) and Appendix H (Sign
Construction and Installation Requirements) of the International
Building Code.
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 12, Board of Appeals.
§ 100-5 MANHEIM CODE § 100-8
1:88
§ 100-8. Additional appendix adopted.
The Act and code provide that the municipality, as part of its ordinance, may
adopt other specific appendixes. As such, the following appendixes shall be
incorporated as a part of this article as if they were fully stated herein.
§ 100-9. Permit required; exemptions. [Added 4-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 589]
In addition to all types of construction, placement of structures, repairs
and alterations for which the Uniform Construction Code requires a permit,
the Borough, pursuant to the authorization of Act 92 of 2004, shall require
persons to obtain permits under the Manheim Borough Construction Code
for all of the following:
A. Appendixes from the International Residential Code for one- and twofamily
dwellings shall be adopted as follows:
(1) Appendix E: Manufactured Housing Used as Dwellings, except
wherein these provisions would be in conflict with the Act or code.
(2) Appendix F: Radon Control Measures.
(3) Appendix H: Patio Covers.
A. The construction, erection or placement of any accessory structure
which is equal to or greater than 400 square feet, whether or not such
accessory structure is connected to any utility.
B. The construction, erection or placement of any accessory structure
which is less than 400 square feet, if such accessory structure is
provided with any utility service. The applicant shall obtain a permit
only for the purpose of inspection for the utility or utilities being
installed or provided to the accessory structure.
C. All alterations or repairs to residential buildings which are exempt from
the Uniform Construction Code by Act 92 of 2004; provided, however,
that the following types of alterations and repairs shall continue to be
exempt, and no permit will be required:
(1) Replacement of windows and doors when there is no change in the
size of the existing opening.
(2) Re-roofing of less than 25% of the total existing roof square
footage.
(3) Replacement of a hot-water heater, HVAC equipment, boiler or
furnace, or the replacement of any part of a hot-water heater, boiler
or furnace with the same or improved efficiency rating, electrical
and plumbing requirements.
(4) Addition or replacement of siding on the exterior of the residential
structure.
§ 100-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-9
1:89
§ 100-10. Geographic and climatic design criteria.
Table R301.2(1) of the International Residential Code provides for the
insertion of certain values that are directly related to the location of the
jurisdiction adopting the standard code. These insertions must be included
within the adopting ordinance in order to make the code enforceable. As
such, values shall be inserted as follows:
§ 100-11. Fees.
Borough Council shall establish permit, plan review, inspection and other
assessable fees for the administration and enforcement undertaken
pursuant to this article, the act and/or code from time to time by resolution.
(5) Repair or replacement of any nonstructural portion of a deck, porch
or stoop.
(6) Replacement of an appliance switch or receptacle with a switch or
receptacle which is the same or has a like rating.
(7) The addition of one appliance switch or receptacle.
(8) The repair or replacement of any interior nonstructural member.
(9) The repair or replacement of any sink, toilet, tub, shower or similar
plumbing fixture without relocation of any drain or venting device.
A. Ground snow load: 30 pounds per square foot (psf). Source: Figure
R301.2(5). Note: The thickness of the snow, moisture content and
freeze thaw will increase the design weight substantially.12
B. Wind speed: 90 mph. Source: Figure R301.2(4).
C. Seismic design category: B. Source: Figure R301.2(2).
D. Weathering: Severe. Source: Figure R301.2(3).
E. Frost line depth: 36 inches bottom of footing below final grade. Source:
historic data.
F. Termite: moderate to heavy. Source: Figure R301.2(6).
G. Decay: slight to moderate. Source: Figure R301.2(7).
H. Winter design temperature: +10° F. Source: Figure R301.2(1).
I. Flood Hazards: Floodplain Ordinance No. 486, 2-22-1983, FEMA Flood
Insurance Study, September 2,1982; FIRM Community Panel No.
420555 001 B, March 2, 1983; and FBFM Community Panel No. 420555
0001, March 2, 1983; as may be amended.13 Verify with Borough
Floodplain Administrator.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
13.Editor's Note: See now Chapter 124, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 100-9 MANHEIM CODE § 100-11
1:90
Chapter 105
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 156, Art. II.
§ 105-1. Legislative intent.
Borough Council, being cognizant of the problem of juvenile delinquency
and believing that it can be dealt with more effectively by regulating the
hours during which minors less than 18 years of age may remain in public
places and certain establishments without adult supervision and by defining
more clearly certain duties and responsibilities upon those who have the
custody and responsibility of the care of such minors, direct that in the
administration and enforcement of this chapter the fundamental purpose of
reducing juvenile delinquency shall be foremost.
§ 105-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AFTER HOURS — The period of time between 11:00 p.m. prevailing time
and 6:00 a.m.[Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 524]
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately-owned place of business carried on for
profit, any place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is
invited, and any similar place.
MINOR or MINORS — Any persons less than 18 years of age. For the
purpose of this chapter, any person shall be deemed to be 18 years of age
on the date of his or her 18th birthday and not before this time.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
owning, operating, managing or conducting any establishment; and
whenever used in any clause prescribing a penalty, the word "operator,"
as applied to associations or partnerships, shall include the members,
partners, officers and managers thereof or any of them and, as applied
to corporations, shall include the officers and managers thereof or any of
them.
PARENT — The natural parent, guardian or adult person 21 years of age or
over responsible for the custody or care of any minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground,
vacant lot, public building or similar place.
REMAIN — Loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or play, or be.
§ 100-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-3
1:91
§ 105-3. Unlawful conduct of minors.
It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain in or upon any public place or
establishment in the Borough of Manheim after hours unless accompanied
by a parent or upon an errand or other legitimate business directed by
a parent or unless engaged in gainful, lawful employment after hours, in
which case said minor shall carry written identification and evidence of such
employment.
§ 105-4. Unlawful conduct of parents.
No parent shall knowingly permit any minor to remain in or upon any public
place or establishment after hours unless the parent shall accompany the
minor or shall direct the minor in writing to perform an errand or engage in
other legitimate business, which writing shall be kept in the possession of
such minor, or unless such minor is engaged in gainful, lawful employment
after hours, in which case said minor shall carry written identification and
evidence of such employment.
§ 105-5. Unlawful conduct of operators of establishment.
It shall be unlawful for any operator of an establishment knowingly to
permit any minor to remain upon the premises of said establishment after
hours.
§ 105-6. Rules and regulations.
The Chief of Police is authorized from time to time to promulgate such rules
and regulations, including the extension of hours for special occasions, as
in his sole and uncontrolled discretion shall be necessary or useful in the
enforcement of this chapter.
§ 105-7. Duties of police.
Any police officer who finds a minor violating any provision of this chapter
shall endeavor to obtain the name, age, date of birth and address of the
minor and the names of the minor's parents. The minor shall thereupon
either be brought to the Police Station and the parents notified, or taken or
instructed to proceed directly to his home. The information obtained from
the minor, together with a full report, shall be transmitted to the Chief of
Police, who shall cause written notice to be delivered, by mail or otherwise,
to the parents of the minor advising them of the violation of this chapter. A
record of all violations shall be kept.
§ 105-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No.
524]
A. Parents and minors.
(1) Any parent who shall permit a minor to violate the provisions of this
chapter after receiving notice of a prior violation shall, upon
§ 105-3 MANHEIM CODE § 105-8
1:92
Chapter 116
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
§ 116-1. Discharge of firearms prohibited.
Except in necessary defense of person and property and except as provided
in § 116-3 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to use, fire or
discharge any gun or other firearm within the Borough of Manheim.
§ 116-2. Use of air rifles, bow and arrows, or similar devices
restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle, air pistol,
spring gun, spring pistol, B-B gun, bow and arrow, or similar device, or
any implement that is not a firearm but which impels a pellet of any kind
with a force that can reasonably be expected to cause bodily harm, at any
place within the Borough of Manheim, except as provided in § 116-3 of this
chapter.
conviction, be fined not less than $1 and, after more than one
conviction, not less than $5 nor more than $600 for each offense
and, in default of payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment in
the Lancaster County Prison for a period not exceeding 24 hours
for the first offense and not exceeding 30 days for all subsequent
offenses.
(2) Any minor who is at least 14 years of age and violates the
provisions of § 105-3 of this chapter after having received notice of
a prior violation shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $100
for each offense and, in default of payment thereof, shall be
referred to the juvenile authorities. Any fine imposed on a minor for
a violation of this chapter may be converted to hours of community
service work at the discretion of the Magisterial District Judge.
B. Any operator who shall violate this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $10 for the first
offense, not less than $25 for any subsequent offense, nor more than
$600 for any violation and, in default of payment thereof, may be
sentenced to undergo imprisonment in the Lancaster County Prison for
a period of not less than five days for the first offense, not less than 15
days for any subsequent offenses, and not more than 30 days for any
offense.
C. Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense. However, when a minor is found in violation and is
subject to prosecution pursuant to § 105-3, either the minor or the
minor's parents may be prosecuted, but not both.
§ 105-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-3
1:93
§ 116-3. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:
§ 116-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus
costs and, in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed
30 days.
Chapter 120
FIREWORKS
§ 120-1. General provisions.
A. Members of any organization incorporated under laws of this
commonwealth engaged in target shooting upon the grounds or
property belonging to or under the control of such organization; and
B. Any law enforcement officers when used in the discharge of their
official duties.
A. Scope. The manufacture of fireworks is prohibited within the Borough
of Manheim. The display or discharge of fireworks shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
B. Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the Borough Council
for the display or discharge of fireworks.
C. Permit applications. Application for permits shall be made in writing at
least 15 days in advance of the date of the display or discharge of
fireworks. The possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such
display shall be lawful under the terms and conditions approved with
the permit and for that purpose only. A permit granted hereunder shall
not be transferable, nor shall any such permit be extended beyond the
dates set out therein.
D. Definition. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FIREWORKS — Includes any combustible or explosive composition or
any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for
the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion,
explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank
cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which
explosives are used; the type of balloons which require fire underneath
to propel the same; firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman
candles, dago bombs, sparklers or other devices of like construction;
and any device containing any explosive substance, except that the
term "fireworks" shall not include auto flares, paper caps containing
§ 116-3 MANHEIM CODE § 120-1
1:94
§ 120-2. Display and discharge.
§ 120-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600 and, in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this chapter continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 124
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 100.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 187.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
not in excess of an average of 0.25 grain (16.2 milligrams) of explosive
content per cap, and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices
for use of such caps, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all
times.
A. General. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to store or
use or explode any fireworks, except as provided in the rules and
regulations issued by the Fire Official for the granting of permits for
supervised public displays of fireworks by the Borough of Manheim, fair
associations, amusement parks and other organizations.
B. Bond for display. The permitted shall furnish a bond in an amount
deemed adequate by the Borough Council but not less than $500,
conditioned for the payment of all damages which may be caused either
to a person or persons or to property by reason of the permitted display,
and arising from any acts of the permittee, the permittee's agents,
employees or subcontractors.
C. Disposal of unfired fireworks. Unfired fireworks and trash that remain
after the display is concluded shall be immediately disposed of in a safe
manner approved by the Chief of Police of the Borough of Manheim or
his designated representative.
D. Seizure of fireworks. The Fire Official shall seize, take, remove or cause
to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks
offered or exposed for display, stored or held in violation of this chapter.
§ 120-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-3
1:95
Chapter 132
HEATING EQUIPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 100.
§ 120-3 MANHEIM CODE § 120-3
1:96
ARTICLE I
Geothermal Boreholes for Heat Pump Systems
[Adopted 8-11-2009 by Ord. No. 612]
§ 132-1. Permit required.
As of the effective date of this article it will be necessary for any property
owner owning property within Manheim Borough to obtain a permit from
the Borough Building Code Official prior to installation of any type of
geothermal boreholes for heat pump systems on said land within the
Borough. The application for said permit shall state the kind of system
to be installed, the name, address and telephone number of the proposed
installer, the plot plan of the lot indicating the size of lot and location of the
geothermal boreholes for heat pump systems. Said site shall be available for
inspection prior to completion.
§ 132-2. Fee.
The fee for a permit hereunder shall be $100.
§ 132-3. Permitted types.
Types of geothermal boreholes for heat pump systems which will be
permitted to be installed within the Borough are:
§ 132-4. Not permitted.
Types of geothermal boreholes for heat pump systems not permitted to be
installed within the Borough is the open loop system.
§ 132-5. Regulations.
Where a closed loop system is installed, the following regulations shall
apply:
A. Air to air.
B. Closed loop (horizontal).
C. Closed loop (vertical). May only be installed on lots where the Codes
Compliance Officer determines that the lot is too small for a closed loop
(horizontal) system or in cases in which rock hinders the excavation
and/or installation process.
A. The only antifreeze solution to be used in said system is methanol.
B. The only pipe which may be used for installation is geothermal
polyethylene (black) pipe. No other color pipe may be used.
C. Pipes must be heat fused and the joints water pressure tested, with a
minimum test pressure of 200 pounds per square inch, by a contractor
§ 132-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-5
1:97
§ 132-6. Supersession.
The article supersedes any requirements set forth in Ordinance No. 584
adopted on May 11, 2004.14
§ 132-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation who or which shall fail to
comply with any of the provisions of this article or shall violate any of
the duly approved rules and regulations of the Borough as in this article
provided shall be liable, upon conviction, to a fine not exceeding $100 or
to imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days,
or both, in the discretion of the Magisterial District Judge, together with
cost of prosecution, and whenever such person or persons shall have been
notified by the Borough or by service of a summons in prosecution or in any
other way that he is committing such violation, each day thereafter that he
continues and persists in such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 132-8. Prosecution.
All prosecutions for violation of this article shall be by summary
proceedings brought in the name and for the use of Manheim Borough
before a Magisterial District Judge in said Borough. All fines shall be paid
to the Finance Director of Manheim Borough to apply to general funds.
who is certified in the proper method of heat fusion specified by the
pipe manufacturer.
D. All bore holes must be backfilled (preferably with bentonite), capped
and sealed.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 100, Art. II, Uniform Construction Code.
§ 132-5 MANHEIM CODE § 132-8
1:98
Chapter 145
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 84.
Construction codes — See Ch. 100.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 145-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Manheim Borough
Noise Nuisance Ordinance."
§ 145-2. Intent and purpose.
The Borough Council, finding that excessive levels of sound are detrimental
to the physical, mental and social well-being of Borough residents as well
as to their comfort, living conditions, general welfare and safety, and being
therefore a public health and welfare hazard, hereby declares it to be
necessary to provide for the greater control and more effective regulation
of excessive noise within the Borough.
§ 145-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound which:
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, corporation or other
legally recognized entity. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and
imposing a penalty, "person" includes the individual members, partners,
officers and managers, or any of them, of partnerships and associations and,
as to corporations, the officers and managers thereof or any of them.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound which clearly can be heard at a distance
of 50 or more feet. Words or phrases need not be clearly discernible for a
sound to be plainly audible from the source.
PROPERTY LINE (BOUNDARY) — An imaginary line drawn through the
points of contact of adjoining lands, apartments, condominiums,
A. Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals;
B. Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or
C. Endangers or injures personal or real property.
§ 132-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-3
1:99
townhouses and duplexes owned, rented or leased by different persons; a
demarcation or a line of separation of properties; and also, for any two or
more buildings sharing common grounds, the line drawn midway between
any two said buildings. All areas devoted to public right-of-way shall be
deemed to be across the property line. For the purpose of this regulation,
the property line includes all points on a plane formed by projecting the
property line in a manner deemed appropriate by the enforcing Borough
official or employee.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk, alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon which are owned
or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY — All land, whether publicly or privately owned, whether
improved or not improved, with or without structures, exclusive of any
areas devoted to the public right-of way.
SOUND — An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity, or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces, that
causes compression and rarefaction of that medium, or the superposition
of such propagated oscillation which evokes an auditory sensation. The
description of sound may include any characteristics of such sound,
including duration, intensity and frequency.
SOUND-AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM — Any radio, tape player, compact disc
player, loudspeaker, or other electronic device used for the amplification of
sound.
§ 145-4. Prohibited acts.
A. Noise disturbance prohibited. No person shall make, continue or cause
to be made or continued any noise disturbance, nor shall any person
suffer, allow or permit any noise disturbance to be made or continued
from or at any property, whether real or personal, that is subject to such
person's right to control.
B. Specific prohibitions. The following acts and the causing thereof are
declared to be noise disturbances and therefore in violation of this
chapter:
(1) Radios, televisions, sound-amplification devices, musical
instruments and similar devices.
(a) Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of
any radio, television, drum, musical instrument, audio
equipment, sound-amplification device or similar device which
produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound:
[1] At any time in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance across a property line (boundary), or between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through
§ 145-3 MANHEIM CODE § 145-4
1:100
§ 145-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be liable,
upon conviction therefor, to fines and penalties of not less than $50 nor
more than $600 plus costs of prosecution, which fines and penalties may be
collected as provided by law.
Chapter 152
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
Thursday, or between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. on Friday or Saturday, so as to be plainly audible
across a property line (boundary); or
[2] In such a manner as to be plainly audible when the device
is operated in or on a motor vehicle or hand-carried on a
public right-of-way or public space.
(b) Exceptions: Notwithstanding the foregoing, the operation of a
musical instrument or a sound-amplification system within a
vehicle operated by a police, fire or emergency medical service
agency or within a vehicle responding to an emergency or by a
person participating in a public activity, such as a parade or
civic celebration authorized by the Borough or the operation of
a musical instrument or a sound amplification system due to a
special event that has been approved by the Borough which
produces plainly audible sounds shall not be in violation of this
chapter.
(2) Yelling and shouting, etc. Engaging in loud or raucous yelling,
shouting, hooting, whistling or singing:
(a) On the public streets and in public places between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; or
(b) At any time or place in such a manner as to create a noise
disturbance.
(3) Truck idling. Truck idling that is not in compliance with the
requirements of the Diesel-Powered Motor Vehicle Idling Act (Act
124 of 2008).15
(4) Trash/garbage/recycling collection and pickup. Collecting or
picking up dumpsters or roll-offs associated with the disposal of
trash, garbage and/or recycling by licensed trash haulers between
10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. Special pickups, if approved within
contract(s) between haulers and the Borough, shall be exempt from
these time limit requirements.
15.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 4601 et seq.
§ 145-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-1
1:101
§ 152-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
PARK or PARKS — Unless specifically limited, shall be deemed to include
all parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, tennis courts, beaches, recreation
structures and facilities, and also entrances and approaches thereto, and all
other land or property or structures under the jurisdiction of the Park/Pool/
Recreation Committee, now or hereafter owned or acquired by the Borough
for park or recreational purposes.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, organization of persons,
company, association or partnership.
RULES AND REGULATIONS — Any rules and regulations hereby or
hereafter promulgated by the Borough Council under the authority herein
conferred.
§ 152-2. Park hours.
All parks shall be opened daily to the public at such hours as the Park/Pool/
Recreation Committee may from time to time designate, but in no event
shall any person be permitted to be in attendance in any park between 9:00
p.m. and sunrise unless special permission be granted by the Park/Pool/
Recreation Committee.
§ 152-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person in attendance at a park shall:
A. Injure, deface, remove, cut or damage any of the trees, plants, shrubs,
turf, buildings, structures, signs or fixtures, or any other property of the
Borough located within the park.
B. Litter any area of the park with garbage, paper, bottles, cans or other
waste material; nor dispose of the same in any way except in
receptacles designated for such purpose.
C. Kindle or maintain any fire in the park except in fireplaces or areas
specially designated for that purpose and located by authority of the
Park/Pool/Recreation Committee.
D. Remove any bench, seat, table or other appliance without permission of
the Park/Pool/Recreation Committee.
E. Injure, deface, destroy or remove any notice, rule or regulation posted
at any place within the park by authority of the Park/Pool/Recreation
Committee; nor shall any notice or placard be posted within the park
other than by authority of said Board.
F. Set up any booth, table or stand for the sale of any article or service
whatsoever within the limits of the park without permission of the Park/
Pool/Recreation Committee; distribute, sell, service or rent any services
§ 152-1 MANHEIM CODE § 152-3
1:102
or commodity or solicit for any purpose without permission of the Park/
Pool/Recreation Committee.
G. Operate, stop or park any vehicle, bicycle or other means of conveyance
except in areas where permitted or designated by proper authority of
the Park/Pool/Recreation Committee, or operate the same in a reckless
or negligent manner or in excess of any posted speed limit or in such a
manner as to become a nuisance to other area users.
H. Operate commercial vehicles, unless providing authorized services.
I. Bring onto the premises, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage or
illegal drugs of any kind; no person shall enter the park in an
intoxicated state or otherwise be under the influence of alcohol or
illegal drugs.
J. Carry or discharge any firearms, slingshots, firecrackers, fireworks or
other missile-propelling instruments or explosives or arrows, or other
dangerous weapons which have such properties as to cause annoyance
or injury to any person or property, unless permission has been granted
by the Borough Council in designated areas; police officers in the
performance of their duties will be exempt from these provisions.
K. Play ball, swim, golf, pitch horseshoes, engage in archery, camp, or
launch, dock or land any boat, engage in finding buried objects with
special detectors, or participate in any other form of recreation,
sporting endeavor or pastime, except in those areas which may be
designated from time to time for that purpose by the Borough Council.
L. Disrobe or change clothing except in buildings or facilities made
available for that purpose.
M. Disturb the peace by any conduct so as to annoy any other person using
the park for recreational purposes.
N. Operate a snowmobile, minibike, motorcycle, or any vehicle,
recreational or otherwise, except on designated roads, trails or areas
set aside for their use.
O. Use threatening, abusive, insulting, profane or obscene language or
words.
P. Commit any disorderly or immoral acts.
Q. Hold any public meeting or rally with more than five persons or engage
in any marching or driving as members of a military, political or other
organization without permission of the Borough Council, which
requires a statement of information, including the name of the
organization, its purpose, number of persons expected to be invited,
expected duration and name(s) of person(s) in charge.
R. Disobey a proper order of a police officer or Borough Council member,
or disobey or disregard or fail to comply with any rule or regulation,
§ 152-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-3
1:103
§ 152-4. Fishing.
All laws pertaining to fishing in the commonwealth shall apply to fishing in
parks and recreation areas, and provisions thereof are hereby incorporated
by reference.
§ 152-5. Reservation for specific uses.
The use of all parks shall be on a first-come, first-served basis unless
otherwise reserved:
§ 152-6. Authority to close areas.
Recreation facilities which become hazardous for public use due to weather,
water, fire or unforeseeable conditions may be closed only at the discretion
of the Borough Council.
§ 152-7. Enforcement.
The police officers of the Borough are charged with enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter and of rules and regulations promulgated by the
Borough Council.
warning, prohibition, instruction or direction given by an authorized
person and posted or displayed by sign, notice, bulletin, card, poster,
or when notified or informed as to its existence by the Park/Pool/
Recreation Committee or an authorized person.
S. Hunt for, capture or kill, or attempt to capture or kill, or aid or assist in
the capturing or killing of, in any manner, any wild bird or wild animal
of any description, either game or otherwise, and to that end, it is
unlawful for any person to carry onto or possess in any park a shotgun
or rifle or pistol or firearm of any make or kind unless specific
permission is granted for a designated area by authority of the Borough
Council.
T. Allow pets in any part of the parks, except those specifically designated,
to run at large out of control.
A. By annual permission granted by the Park/Pool/Recreation Committee
for the scheduling of various league games, etc.
B. For school or college athletic games, practice, contests or exhibitions.
C. For regularly scheduled school district or municipal recreation
programs.
D. By permission granted by the Park/Pool/Recreation Committee for a
specific requested use.
§ 152-3 MANHEIM CODE § 152-8
1:104
§ 152-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more
than $600 and, in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days.
Chapter 156
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
§ 152-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-8
1:105

ARTICLE I
Throwing Objects in Streets
[Adopted by Ord. No. 6-10-1889A; amended in its entirety
7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 524 (Ch. 6, Part 2, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 156-1. Prohibited acts.
The throwing, kicking or knocking of any ball, snowballs, stones or any
other missile upon or into any of the public streets, alleys or sidewalks in
the Borough of Manheim is hereby prohibited.
§ 156-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and, in
default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
§ 156-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-2
1:107

ARTICLE II
Loitering
[Adopted 11-29-1966 by Ord. No. 375; amended in its entirety
7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 524 (Ch. 6, Part 1, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 156-3. Unlawful loitering prohibited.
Any person who shall be guilty of any act, word or conduct causing or
tending to cause a disturbance of the peace and good order of the Borough,
or causing or tending to cause any danger, discomfort or annoyance to any
of the inhabitants of the Borough or users of the Borough thoroughfares;
or who shall unlawfully make any loud, boisterous or unseemly noise or
disturbance; or who shall fight or quarrel or incite others to fight or quarrel;
or who shall publicly make use of obscene or indecent language; or who
shall loaf or loiter or congregate upon any of the public streets or alleys
or public grounds in the Borough of Manheim to the annoyance of peaceful
residents nearby or traveling upon any street or alley or being lawfully upon
any of the public ground in the Borough, whereby the public peace is broken
or disturbed or the traveling public annoyed, shall be guilty of unlawful
loitering.
§ 156-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine for the use of the Borough of
not more than $600 and the costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days in the
Lancaster County Prison.
§ 156-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-4
1:109
Chapter 160
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Retrictions on pushcarts — See § 205-27. Solid waste — See Ch. 184, Art. II.
§ 156-4 MANHEIM CODE § 156-4
1:110
ARTICLE I
Registration and Licensing
[Adopted 10-28-1975 by Ord. No. 443; amended in its entirety
7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 524 (Ch. 13, Part 1, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 160-1. Unlawful activity.
It shall be unlawful for any individual to solicit funds, peddle, canvass, or
take orders, either by sample or otherwise, upon the streets, public streets,
public alleys, sidewalks or from house to house in the Borough of Manheim,
or to solicit funds, sell or take orders for any goods, wares or merchandise
from a fixed location within the Borough of Manheim on a temporary basis,
which shall include, but not be limited to, such activities conducted at the
time of special occasions or celebrations, for seasonal purposes or for yearly
holidays.
§ 160-2. Exemptions.
Section 160-1 shall not apply to the following:
§ 160-3. Registration and licensing.
A. To farmers selling their own products.
B. To the solicitation of funds or the sale of goods, wares and merchandise
donated by the owner thereof, wherein the funds or the proceeds are to
be applied exclusively to any charitable or philanthropic purpose.
C. To any member of a local community service group, local athletic
association for youths, school or church group, Boy Scouts or Girl
Scouts, or similar organizations who solicit funds, sell goods or take
orders, wherein the proceeds are to be used exclusively for the group
represented.
D. To any individual who has registered with the Police Department and
paid a license fee in accordance with § 160-3 of this article.
A. Every individual desiring to engage in those acts prohibited in § 160-1
of this article must register and obtain a license from the Police
Department.
B. Upon payment of the prescribed fee and compliance with § 160-3D,
where applicable, the Police Department, if it finds that the application
is in order, shall issue a license which shall be valid for not more than 30
days. The Police Department shall have a reasonable amount of time to
issue said license in order to verify the information set forth in the
application. The prescribed fee, which shall be required of each
individual solicitor, shall be set from time to time by resolution of
Borough Council.
C. Said license shall be in the individual's possession while engaged in the
act of solicitation.
§ 160-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-3
1:111
§ 160-4. Prohibited acts.
No person, while engaged in business as described in this article, shall:
§ 160-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provision of this article shall, upon conviction by
a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine to the Borough of
Manheim of not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution for each and
every offense and, in default of payment of such fines and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days.
D. Where P.L. 744, No. 241, enacted November 25, 1970,16 is applicable
pertaining to solicitation of magazine subscriptions by the use of doorto-
door salesman, no license shall be issued until satisfactory proof is
provided by the applicant that he or his organization is registered with
the Office of the Attorney General of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and is currently licensed under this Act. Nothing provided
hereinabove shall prohibit the Police Department from taking a
reasonable amount of time to verify such proof of registration with the
Office of the Attorney General before the issuance of license.
E. Upon expiration of such license, the license may be renewed upon
payment of the prescribed fee for the period of time requested.
A. Sell any product or type of product not mentioned in his license.
B. Hawk or cry his wares upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or
public grounds in the Borough.
C. When operating from a vehicle, stop or park such vehicle upon any of
the streets or alleys in the Borough for longer than necessary in order
to sell therefrom to persons residing or working in the immediate
vicinity, or to cause traffic congestion by stopping whereby traffic lanes
are blocked.
D. Park any vehicle upon any of the streets or alleys in the Borough for the
purpose of sorting, rearranging or cleaning any of his goods, wares or
merchandise or of disposing of any carton, wrapping material, or stock,
wares or foodstuffs which have become unsalable through handling,
age or otherwise.
E. Engage in any business activity, except by prior appointment, at any
time on a Sunday or legal holiday or at any time before 9:00 a.m. or
after 9:00 p.m. on any day of the week other than a Sunday or legal
holiday.
16.Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 2011.
§ 160-3 MANHEIM CODE § 160-5
1:112
ARTICLE II
Food Vendors in Market Square
[Adopted 3-29-2011 by Ord. No. 620]
§ 160-6. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings subscribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COMMUNITY EVENT PERMIT — The approved application of a nonprofit
organization to conduct a community event under the conditions of this
article. A community event permit provides a nonprofit organization with
a license to sell, distribute or display merchandise, and to promote the
purposes of nonprofit organizations within a designated public right-of-way
in the Borough.
EVENT — A community event in the Borough that uses and occupies a
portion of a public right-of-way designated by the Borough for the sale of
merchandise by commercial retailers or for other promotions by nonprofit
organizations.
FIRE CHIEF — The Chief of the Hope Fire Engine and Hose Co. No. 1.
FIRE COMPANY — The Hope Fire Engine and Hose Co. No. 1.
MARKETER — Any person participating in a community event owning,
operating, managing or supervising a stand to sell merchandise or promote
any nonprofit organization purposes.
MERCHANDISE — Any food or beverage items offered for sale to the public,
but not including newspapers, magazines, pamphlets, and handbills.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — Any association or organization that
qualifies for nonprofit status under the applicable rules and regulations of
the United States Internal Revenue Service.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, partnership, association, club
or society or any other form of association or organization.
POLICE CHIEF — The Chief of the Manheim Police Department.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The entire area legally open for public use within
the boundary lines of any government or municipally owned or maintained
road, street, alley, sidewalk, walkway, parking lot, square or mini park.
SHOPKEEPER — Any person owning or operating a store, restaurant or
shop from a permanent structure in the Borough.
STAND — A self-contained handcart, pushcart or towable device used for
the purpose of displaying, distributing, storing or transporting
merchandise.
TEMPORARY OUTLET — Those locations in the Borough designated as
"Market Square" and Borough "Mini Park," at which a vendor shall be
permitted to sell, distribute or display merchandise.
§ 160-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-6
1:113
VENDOR PERMIT — The approved application of a person under the
conditions as set forth in this article. A vendor permit provides a person
with a license to sell, distribute or display merchandise at a designated
temporary outlet in the Borough. The fee for a vendor permit shall be as
established in the Borough's current Fees Resolution.
§ 160-7. Vendor permit required.
No person shall sell, display or distribute merchandise upon a public rightof-
way in the Borough without first obtaining a valid vendor permit. Each
vendor permit shall designate the location and dates and times during
which a person may sell, distribute or display merchandise.
§ 160-8. Shopkeeper exclusion.
No shopkeeper shall be required to obtain a vendor permit to sell, distribute
or display merchandise in the public way immediately in front of the store,
restaurant or shop that he/she owns or operates. However, all shopkeepers
shall be subject to all other Borough ordinances and to regulations on the
use of temporary outlets set forth in this article.
§ 160-9. Community event permit required.
Any nonprofit organization seeking to conduct an event shall apply for
a community event permit at least 60 days prior to the proposed date
for the event. All events require a valid community event permit granted
by Borough Council, subject to the regulations for conducting community
events as set forth in this article.
§ 160-10. Shopkeeper exclusion suspended.
On the days that events are held the shopkeeper exclusion under § 160-8 is
partially suspended as follows, in that no shopkeeper shall sell, display or
distribute merchandise upon a public right-of-way in the Borough on those
days without first coordinating the placement and selection of merchandise
offered for sale with the nonprofit organization conducting the event.
§ 160-11. Location of temporary outlets.
There shall be two locations for temporary outlets in the Borough (parking
spaces shall not be allowable locations):
A. Market Square (two total vendors allowed at any one time).
B. Borough Mini Park on the west side of the Manheim Borough Building
(two total vendors allowed at any one time).
§ 160-6 MANHEIM CODE § 160-12
1:114
§ 160-12. Application form for vendor permit.
Any person seeking the issuance of a vendor permit shall file an application
with the Borough office on the forms provided. An application form for a
vendor permit shall include the following information:
§ 160-13. Bidding procedures for temporary outlets with a specific
term.
A. Name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address of the person
seeking to obtain a vendor permit;
B. A brief description of the nature of the person's business and the
merchandise to be sold, displayed or distributed;
C. A statement describing the dimensions, construction and appearance of
the person's stand;
D. A certificate of insurance shall be attached, issued to the applicable
vendor, for public liability, personal injury, and property damage
insurance in the amount of not less than $500,000 each occurrence, and
purchased from an insurance company authorized to do business in the
State of Pennsylvania and which carries an industry financial rating of
A- or better. The certificate of insurance shall indicate that Manheim
Borough is an additional named insured for the insurance coverage
provided.
E. The applicant shall indemnify and hold the Borough harmless from any
and all liability, loss or damage, including but not limited to bodily
harm, injury or death, that the Borough becomes legally obligated to
pay, including reasonable attorneys' fees and court costs, as a result of
any claim, demand, cost or judgment against the Borough arising out of
any intentional or negligent act or omission of the vendor; and
F. A statement as to the specific term desired between April 1 and
September 30.
A. Submission of bids. Should the number of applicants seeking a vendor
permit for a temporary outlet exceed the number of temporary outlet
locations available, the Borough may require that all persons seeking to
obtain a vendor permit for a temporary outlet shall submit a sealed bid
in addition to an application for a vendor permit. Such applications and
bids shall be submitted to the Borough office in accordance with
deadlines established by the Borough Manager.
B. Opening of bids. Bids shall be opened in a public area of the Borough
Building by the Borough Manager or his designee not more than four
nor less than two working days prior to the start of the temporary outlet
term.
C. Award of temporary outlet for specific term. The minimum acceptable
bid for a temporary outlet with a term shall be the amount established
§ 160-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-13
1:115
§ 160-14. Issuance of vendor permit.
Upon receipt of a complete and accurate application and accepted bid (for
a specific term temporary outlet), the Borough Manager may issue a vendor
permit to the person named in the application. The Borough Manager may
withdraw any vendor permit if he determines that the information contained
in the vendor permit application is false or nonexistent in any material detail
or if a vendor is determined to have violated the provisions of this article.
§ 160-15. Vendor permits nontransferable and nonassignable.
All vendor permits issued by the Borough Manager shall be
nontransferable, nonnegotiable and nonassignable.
§ 160-16. Limited absences permitted at temporary outlets with
specific terms.
After obtaining a specific term temporary outlet vendor permit, a vendor
may be absent from his or her assigned temporary outlet for a maximum
of seven days per month due to illness, vacation or other circumstances.
Any vendor that is absent or fails or neglects to utilize a temporary outlet
for more than seven days per month shall notify the Borough Manager and
obtain written permission to avoid having his or her vendor permit revoked.
§ 160-17. Payment for vendor permit.
The following payment options shall be required:
§ 160-18. Display of vendor permit.
Upon issuance of a vendor permit, a vendor shall attach the vendor permit
to the front of his/her stand in such a manner so that it is easily visible for
the public to view.
§ 160-19. Stand regulations.
in the Borough's current Fees Resolution for a vendor permit. The
Borough Manager shall have the authority to reject any and all bids.
A. Temporary outlets. The charge for a vendor permit for a temporary
outlet, payable upon receipt of the vendor permit, shall be as
established in the Borough's current Fees Resolution.
A. Maximum dimensions. Length: eight feet, by width: four feet, by height:
eight feet.
B. Construction. All carts must be self-contained and towable or pushcart
in nature. Primary vehicle used to deliver the cart to the area business
may not remain attached to the cart or within the vicinity of the
business space.
§ 160-13 MANHEIM CODE § 160-19
1:116
C. Umbrellas/canopies. An umbrella or canopy may be attached to the
stand so as to shelter the vendor. However, no umbrella or canopy shall
obstruct unreasonably the sight of pedestrians upon the public right-ofway.
All umbrellas or canopies must be securely attached to the stand
and must not exceed eight feet in height or six feet in diameter.
Canopies must not extend more than two feet in any direction beyond
the width or length of the stand.
D. Removal at end of business day. All stands and belongings shall be
removed from the temporary outlet and the public right-of-way by
sunset of each business day.
E. Inventory and business practices:
(1) All inventory or supplies of the vendor shall be stored inside or
under the stand so as not to obstruct travel upon the public right-ofway.
(2) Trash and solid waste. No vendor shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any trash, grease, ash or other form of solid waste onto
any public right-of-way or into any storm drain or public trash
receptacle. Each vendor shall make a trash receptacle and a
recycling receptacle available to the public at the temporary outlet
location that he or she operates and shall be responsible for
collecting, removing and properly disposing of all solid waste from
his/her designated temporary outlet at the end of each business
day.
(3) Open fires restricted. No vendor shall make or cause to be made an
open fire in any temporary outlet.
(4) Health and food regulations. No vendor shall sell, display or
distribute alcoholic beverages. All vendors selling, distributing or
displaying food shall comply with all state, county and Borough
health and food laws and regulations, including, but not limited to,
Pennsylvania Food Safety Certification, Pennsylvania Eating and
Drinking License, and Pennsylvania Public Health Services
Administration rules regarding mobile food units and pushcarts.
(5) Noise restrictions. No vendor shall make unreasonably loud
outcries, ring bells, blow horns, or use any noisy device for the
purpose of attracting attention to his or her stand or merchandise.
No vendor shall operate or cause to be operated any fuel-driven
engine used to generate electricity or heat.
(6) Stands. Stands may not be left unattended at any time during the
hours of operation.
(7) Signage. All signage must be professionally-designed and selfcontained,
incorporated onto the stand and any umbrella or canopy,
and meet all other sign regulations currently in place. Total signage
must not exceed 24 square feet, and no one sign can be larger than
§ 160-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-19
1:117
§ 160-20. Vendor permit suspension and revocation.
four square feet. Sandwich board signs shall be permitted up to
two signs per business for daily use, provided that each such sign
shall not exceed two feet by four feet, and provided the placement
of such signs do not limit clear site triangles or negatively impact
other adjoining vendors. [Amended 6-12-2012 by Ord. No. 629]
(8) Parking. All vendor and employee vehicles shall be parked in
municipal parking lots and shall not be parked in Market Square.
A. Suspension of vendor permit. The Borough Manager may suspend,
without any refund of permit fees, the vendor permit of any person
found to be in violation of this article. On the day that a vendor permit is
suspended, the Borough Manager shall provide the vendor with written
notification informing him/her of the violations or reasons for the
suspension. Thereafter, the vendor shall have five working days to
correct the violations.
B. Revocation of vendor permit. In the event a vendor does not correct the
violations outlined in the notice of suspension, the Borough Manger
may revoke the vendor permit. The Borough Manager shall provide a
vendor with written notification on the day the vendor permit is
revoked.
C. Temporary suspension of vendor permit for special events. The Borough
Manager shall temporarily suspend all vendor permits for the Manheim
Farm Show Parade, Market on the Square, Taste of Manheim,
Christmas Tree Lighting, New Year's Eve Dancing in the Streets, and
Cruisin' the Square Car Show. Interested vendors will be required to
seek temporary permits from the Manheim Community Farm Show
Parade Committee or Manheim Downtown Development Group, both of
which have temporary vendor-permitting authority for their respective
events.
D. Appeal procedure. Any vendor whose vendor permit has been revoked
shall have the right to appeal to Borough Council. The appeal request
shall be filed with Borough Council within five days after the revocation
of the vendor permit and shall be acted upon by the Borough Council
within 20 days after the receipt of the appeal notice. Upon such appeal,
Borough Council may reverse, affirm or modify in any regard the
determination of the Borough Manager. Borough Council shall issue a
written decision to the vendor aggrieved within 15 days of the
conclusion of the appeal hearing.
E. Penalty. Any vendor determined to be in violation of this article shall
have his vendor permit revoked for a period of one year. Any person not
holding a vendor permit and found to be in violation of this article shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed $50 per day.
§ 160-19 MANHEIM CODE § 160-21
1:118
§ 160-21. Emergency regulations.
The Borough Manager may suspend the vendor permit provisions and
regulations set forth in this article for a period not to exceed 24 hours if he
anticipates an event or combination of events to occur in the Borough that
he believes will cause significant traffic congestion or possibly jeopardize
the public safety and convenience.
§ 160-22. Regulations for conducting community events.
Any nonprofit organization may apply to the Borough for a community event
permit to conduct an event for no more than one day, including, but not
limited to, the sale of merchandise by commercial retailers or promotions
by nonprofit organizations. A community event permit gives a nonprofit
organization the right to use Market Square, including setting up boxes,
shelves, stands and other devices to conduct sales and promotions. The
community event permit also gives the nonprofit organization the right to
require fees from commercial retailers that participate in the event. All
community event permits are subject to the following terms and conditions:
A. Application form. Any nonprofit organization seeking a community
event permit shall file an application with the Borough office on the
forms provided by the Borough.
B. Issuance of community event permit. Borough Council may issue a
community event permit upon receipt of a complete and accurate
application from a nonprofit organization if the proposed event does not
threaten the health, safety and welfare of the public. Any community
event permit may be withdrawn by Borough Council if it is determined
that the information contained in the community event permit
application is false or nonexistent in any material detail or if a nonprofit
organization is determined to have violated any provisions of this
article. All community event permits issued by the Borough shall be
nontransferable, nonnegotiable and nonassignable.
C. Certificate of insurance required: a certificate of insurance issued to
the applicable organization for public liability, personal injury and
property damage insurance in the amount of not less than $500,000
each occurrence and purchased from an insurance company authorized
to do business in the State of Pennsylvania which carries an industry
financial rating of A- or better. The certificate shall indicate that
Manheim Borough is an additional insured for the insurance coverage
provided. As a condition of the issuance of the community event permit,
the nonprofit organization shall file with the Borough within 20 days of
the issuance of the community event permit, a certificate of insurance
issued to the nonprofit organization for public liability insurance for
personal injury and property damage with limits and coverage as
required by the Borough.
D. Fees. Community event permits shall be granted to nonprofit
organizations without payment of fees to the Borough. The nonprofit
§ 160-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-22
1:119
§ 160-23. Gender and plural forms of words.
Whenever masculine, feminine or neuter pronouns appear, each shall
include all genders. Whenever a word in the singular form appears, it shall
include the plural form and vice versa, when the context and facts so permit.
organization may seek payment of fees from marketers that participate
in the event for fund-raising purposes.
E. Fire Chief approval required. The nonprofit organization that is granted
a community event permit shall submit a written plan and sketch to the
Fire Chief at least seven days prior to the date of the community event
to show the proposed location of stands. The nonprofit organization
shall cooperate and coordinate with the Fire Chief in the planning of the
community event and in the location of stands so as to promote public
safety. No marketer shall make or cause to be made an open fire in any
stand without first obtaining a valid permit from the Fire Company.
F. Chief of Police approval required. The nonprofit organization that is
granted a community event permit shall submit a written plan and
sketch to the Chief of Police at least seven days prior to the date of the
event to show the proposed location of stands. The nonprofit
organization shall cooperate and coordinate with the Chief of Police in
the planning of the event and in the location of stands so as to promote
public safety.
G. Trash and solid waste. No marketer shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any trash, grease, ash or any other form of solid waste onto
any public right-of-way or any storm drain. Each marketer shall make a
trash receptacle available to the public at the stand location that he or
she operates and owns and shall be responsible for collecting and
removing all solid waste from his/her designated stand at the end of
each business day of the event.
H. Stand regulations. All stands used by marketers shall be constructed in
a sturdy manner so that there is no risk to the public of having the stand
collapse or break. All stands shall be removed from the public right-ofway
by the end of the last day of the street fair.
I. Health and food regulations. No marketer shall sell, display or
distribute alcoholic beverages. All marketers selling, distributing or
displaying food shall comply with all state and county health and food
laws and regulations, including but not limited to Pennsylvania Public
Health Services Administration rules regarding mobile food units and
pushcarts.
J. Noise restrictions. No marketer shall make unreasonably loud outcries,
ring bells, blow horns, or use any noisy device for the purpose of
attracting attention to his or her stand. No marketer shall operate or
cause to be operated any fuel-driven engine used to generate electricity
or heat.
§ 160-22 MANHEIM CODE § 160-23
1:120
Chapter 166
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 100, Art. I. Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 160-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-23
1:121

ARTICLE I
Residential Rental Units
[Adopted 3-29-2011 by Ord. No. 619; amended in its entirety
7-31-2018 by Ord. No. 659]
§ 166-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article and the policy of the Borough shall be to
protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare of its residents,
to establish rights and obligations of owners and occupants relating to
residential rental units in the Borough and to encourage owners and
occupants to maintain and improve the quality of rental housing within the
Borough. As a means to these ends, this article provides for a systematic
inspection program, registration and permitting of residential rental units,
and penalties for failure to comply with this article. In considering the
adoption of this article, the Borough makes the following findings:
§ 166-2. Definitions and word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this article, have the meanings indicated as follows:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Manheim, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
CODES — Any state or local code or ordinance adopted, enacted or in effect
in and for the Borough.
COUNTY — The County of Lancaster.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT — Any act by an occupant of a residential rental
unit or by a person present at a residential rental unit involving public
drunkenness, consumption of an alcoholic beverage in public, public
urination or defecation, the unlawful deposit of trash or litter on public or
private property, damage to or destruction of public or private property,
the obstruction of public roads, streets, highways or sidewalks, interference
with emergency or police services, unreasonable noise that disturbs other
persons of reasonable sensibility in their peaceful enjoyment of their
premises, use of profane or obscene language or gestures, indecent
exposure, fighting or quarreling, or any other act defined as "disorderly
A. There is a growing concern in the Borough with the failure of some
landowners to properly maintain residential rental units.
B. Borough records indicate there is a greater incidence of problems with
the maintenance and upkeep of residential properties which are not
owner-occupied as compared to those that are owner-occupied.
C. Borough records indicate there are a greater number of disturbances at
residential rental units than owner-occupied units.
D. Borough records indicate that violations of the Borough's ordinances
are generally less severe at owner-occupied units as compared to
residential rental units.
§ 166-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-2
1:123
conduct" in the Pennsylvania Crimes Code or any act prohibited by the
ordinances of the Borough or which otherwise injures the health, safety
or welfare of the residents of the Borough residing in the neighborhood
or vicinity of the gathering. It is not necessary that such conduct, action,
incident or behavior constitute a criminal offense, nor that criminal charges
be filed against any person, in order for said person to have perpetrated,
caused or permitted the commission of disruptive conduct, as defined
herein; provided, however, that no disruptive conduct shall be deemed
to have occurred unless a police officer shall investigate and make a
determination that such did occur and keep written records, including a
disruptive conduct report, of such occurrences. The occupant and the owner
and, if applicable, the manager shall be notified of any such occurrences in
writing.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT — A written report of disruptive conduct
to be completed by a police officer who actually investigates an alleged
incident of disruptive conduct and which shall be maintained by the
Housing Officer.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof arranged or designed for
occupancy by not more than one family and having separate cooking and
sanitary facilities.
HOTEL UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a hotel or motel,
forming a single habitable unit, used or intended to be used for living and
sleeping only on a transient basis for a period of less than 30 days.
HOUSING OFFICER — The person designated by the Borough Manager of
Manheim Borough to administer and enforce this article.
LANDLORD — A person who owns or manages and who leases or offers for
lease a residential rental unit to occupant(s) for a consideration, monetary
or otherwise.
MANAGER — A person retained by an owner to be responsible for one or
more residential rental units within the Borough.
OCCUPANT — Any person over one year of age living and sleeping in a
residential rental unit or having actual possession of said residential rental
unit.
OWNER —
Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others shall have:
Legal or equitable title to any structure upon which a residential
rental unit is erected or maintained, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof; or
(1)
Charge, care or control of any residential rental unit as owner
or manager of owner, or as executor, administrator, trustee or
guardian of the estate of the owner.
(2)
A.
If more than one person owns the residential rental unit as joint
tenants, tenants in common, tenants by the entireties, or tenants in co-
B.
§ 166-2 MANHEIM CODE § 166-2
1:124
PERSON — A natural individual, unincorporated association, partnership,
limited-liability company, corporation, estate, trust or any other legally
recognized entity, and the partners of such partnership, the members and
managers of such limited-liability company, the representatives of such
estate, the trustees of such trust, and the officers of such corporation,
unincorporated association or other legally recognized entity.
PREMISES — Any parcel of real estate within the Borough, including the
land and all buildings and appurtenant structures, on which one or more
residential rental units are located.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE — The Property Maintenance Code of
the Borough of Manheim, as adopted by Borough Council and set forth in
the Manheim Borough Code of Ordinances, as it may be amended from time
to time. (See Chapter 100, Article I.)
RENTAL OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A document issued by the Housing
Officer to the owner of a residential rental unit pursuant to this article.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT — A rooming unit, or a dwelling unit let
for rent, or a residential unit occupied by any person other than one
occupied solely by the owner and members of the owner's immediate family.
Each individual townhouse dwelling, each individual apartment unit, each
individual unit in a multifamily building, and each rooming unit shall be
considered a separate residential rental unit. If a structure contains a
rooming unit or if any portion of the structure is let for rent as a dwelling
unit or rooming unit, it shall be considered a residential rental unit, whether
or not the owner or a relative of the owner also resides in the structure.
A residential rental unit shall not include a hotel unit or a hospital room
utilized for medical services. A residential rental unit includes a dwelling
unit under a lease-purchase agreement or long-term (greater than six
months) agreement of sale.
ROOMING UNIT — A portion of a dwelling unit, including any room or
group of rooms forming a single habitable unit, used or intended to be used
for living and sleeping but not for cooking purposes. Granting of permission
to use shared or common cooking facilities may be associated with the
leasing of a rooming unit.
§ 166-3. Scope.
The provisions of this article and § 100-2R of the Manheim Borough Code
of Ordinances pertaining to leasing of residential rental units shall govern
the leasing of all residential rental units, rooming houses, multiple-family
dwellings, rooming units and one- and two-family dwellings in the Borough.
§ 166-4. Responsibility.
Each owner of each structure located in the Borough shall be responsible
for compliance with the requirements of this article. If any structure is
partnership, each such person shall be considered an owner and shall
have all of the duties of an owner under this article.
§ 166-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-4
1:125
managed by a person other than the owner, that person shall also be
responsible for compliance with the requirements of this article.
§ 166-5. Duties of owners and managers of residential rental units.
It shall be the duty of each owner and each manager to:
§ 166-6. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Housing Officer shall administer and enforce the provisions of this
article and may make rules and regulations necessary for its administration.
Such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with this article and shall
be submitted to Borough Council for approval. If the rules and regulations
so submitted to Borough Council are approved by Borough Council, the
same shall be filed in the office of the Housing Officer and in the office of
the Secretary of the Borough as an addendum to this article. Such rules and
regulations as may be adopted from time to time shall then be deemed to be
a part of this article and to have the same effect as this article.
§ 166-7. Reports.
A. Keep and maintain all residential rental units in compliance with all
applicable codes, ordinances and provisions of all applicable federal,
state and local laws and regulations, including but not limited to this
article, as amended and/or restated from time to time, the Manheim
Borough Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 220, Zoning, as amended and/or
restated from time to time, and the Property Maintenance Code,
Chapter 100, Construction Codes, Article I, Property Maintenance
Code, as amended and/or restated from time to time;
B. Keep and maintain all premises containing a residential rental unit in
good and safe condition.
A. Required reports.
(1) Each landlord who owns, rents or has available one or more
residential rental units to let for occupancy in the Borough shall
submit to the Housing Officer, on a form provided by the Housing
Officer, a report containing the following information:
(a) Each residential rental unit owned by the owner located within
the Borough let for occupancy, whether presently occupied or
unoccupied.
(b) The number of residential rental units located within any
premises, which number shall in no event exceed the number
of residential rental units provided for on the rental occupancy
permit issued to the owner or manager on behalf of the owner.
(c) The complete street address and mailing address (if different
from the street address) of each residential rental unit and a
description of such residential rental unit.
§ 166-4 MANHEIM CODE § 166-7
1:126
§ 166-8. Permitting of residential rental units.
(d) Whether or not such residential rental unit is occupied and, if
so occupied, the name of each occupant of the residential
rental unit, specifying whether each such occupant is over 18
years of age. Submission of a copy of the lease agreement, if it
includes all such information, shall be satisfactory.
(e) The period of time for which the rental is made.
(2) Such information shall be supplied to the Housing officer annually
and, in addition, such information pertaining to any residential
rental unit shall also be supplied to the Housing Officer within 10
days after the occupancy of such residential rental unit shall
change.
B. Reports by person upon becoming landlord. Any person who becomes a
landlord who owns, rents or has available one or more residential rental
units let for occupancy shall submit to the Code Official, on a form
provided by the Housing Officer, within 10 days after such person
becomes a landlord who owns, rents or has available one or more
residential rental units let for occupancy, and annually thereafter, the
information set forth in Subsection A of this section.
C. Reports by landlord upon change in occupancy. Each time there is a
change in the occupancy of any residential rental unit owned or leased
by any landlord, the landlord shall submit to the Housing Officer, on a
form provided by the Housing Officer, within 10 days of such change of
occupancy, the information set forth in Subsection A of this section. A
change in occupancy shall include the residential rental unit becoming
vacant.
A. Requirement to obtain rental occupancy permit. No person shall let,
rent or have available for let or rent, or cause to be occupied, any
residential rental unit without first obtaining a rental occupancy permit
from the Housing Officer; and thereafter, each owner shall obtain a
rental occupancy permit from the Housing Officer on an annual basis,
for each residential rental unit which is let for occupancy in any
structure. Each annual rental occupancy permit shall be valid for a
period of one year, commencing on January 1 of each year and ending
on December 31 of such year. Upon expiration of any rental occupancy
permit, a new rental occupancy permit shall be required for the further
period of one year. Failure to obtain a rental occupancy permit for any
residential rental unit in any structure as required by this section shall
be a violation of this article.
B. Rental occupancy permit fee. The landlord of each residential rental
unit which is let for occupancy shall pay to the Borough the annual
rental occupancy permit fee, as established by resolution or ordinance
of Borough Council from time to time, for each residential rental unit
§ 166-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-8
1:127
§ 166-9. Issuance or revocation of rental occupancy permit.
upon submission to the Housing Officer of the annual rental occupancy
permit application form for such residential rental unit.
C. Display of rental occupancy permit. Each rental occupancy permit
issued pursuant to this section shall be maintained upon the premises
where such residential rental unit is located and shall be posted in a
conspicuous place where it may be seen at all times; and the same shall
not be transferable in the event of a change in ownership of the
permitted residential rental unit.
D. Inspection required before issuance of a residential rental permit. No
residential rental permit shall be issued for a residential rental unit
unless and until the landlord of such residential rental unit has caused
such residential rental unit to be inspected pursuant to § 166-11 of this
article and has obtained the required inspection certificate for such
residential rental unit as set forth in § 166-11 of this article.
A. The Housing Officer shall deny and may revoke a rental occupancy
permit if the owner:
(1) Fails to provide the name, address and telephone number of a
manager (if applicable);
(2) Fails to pay the annual rental occupancy permit fee;
(3) Fails to cause each residential rental unit to be inspected in
accordance with the provisions of this article;
(4) Fails to pay when due any and all inspections fees;
(5) Fails to pay when due any real estate tax, water charge, sewer
charges and/or municipal service fee for each residential rental
unit;
(6) Fails to correct a code violation within the time period cited by the
Housing Officer; and/or
(7) Fails to comply with all of the disruptive conduct provisions set
forth in this article.
B. The Housing Officer shall deny and may revoke a rental occupancy
permit if any of the following occurs within the residential rental unit or
on the premises:
(1) Failure to abate any violation of the Property Maintenance Code
within the time period specified in the notice of violation, unless an
appeal is pending.
(2) Failure to take any action to evict occupant(s) of a residential rental
unit when the disruptive conduct provisions of this article require
such action.
§ 166-8 MANHEIM CODE § 166-9
1:128
§ 166-10. Sale or transfer of residential rental units.
A rental permit shall not be transferred. In the case of permitted residential
rental units that are sold or transferred, the new owner shall secure a
rental occupancy permit for each residential rental unit at the premises
and cause each residential rental unit to be inspected in accordance with
the provisions of this article. Failure to obtain a rental occupancy permit
for each residential rental unit within 10 days of the date of purchase
or transfer of ownership or to cause each residential rental unit at the
premises to be inspected in accordance with the terms of this article shall
result in the revocation of each rental occupancy permit at the premises.
§ 166-11. Inspections.
(3) The occurrence of three violations of this article and/or of any other
Borough code or ordinance that applies to the residential rental
unit or the premises during the term of the rental occupancy
permit.
C. The Housing Officer shall forward written notice to the owner if the
Housing Officer denies, refuses to renew or revokes a rental occupancy
permit. The notification shall:
(1) Identify the residential rental unit(s);
(2) Include the grounds for the denial, nonrenewal or revocation,
including the factual circumstances and the section of this article
supporting such determination; and
(3) Inform the owner of the right to appeal the denial, nonrenewal or
revocation of the rental occupancy permit to Borough Council in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
D. The Housing Officer may reinstate a rental occupancy permit if the
owner or manager corrects the reason(s) for the revocation of the
rental occupancy permit and has paid the rental occupancy permit
reinstatement fee, as established by resolution or ordinance of Borough
Council from time to time.
A. The Housing Officer is authorized and directed to inspect each
residential rental unit located within the Borough to determine the
condition, occupancy and/or use of each residential rental unit in order
to safeguard the health and safety of the occupants thereof and the
general public and enter each residential rental unit for the purposes of
examining and surveying all areas of any such residential rental unit at
reasonable times, which shall be deemed to be between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., prevailing time, for the purpose of examining
and surveying all areas of each residential rental unit. Each owner or
occupant of each residential rental unit shall extend the Housing
Officer access to such residential rental unit for the purpose of making
any inspection, examination or survey thereof.
§ 166-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-11
1:129
B. Each residential rental unit shall be subject to inspection by the
Housing Officer:
(1) Prior to initial occupation of any residential rental unit; and
(2) In accordance with a schedule for regular inspections of all
residential rental units at least once every three years; and
(3) Upon receipt by the Housing Officer of a complaint concerning
such residential rental unit; and
(4) Upon determination by the Housing Officer that a violation of this
article may exist; and
(5) Whenever the tenant of such residential rental unit changes;
provided, however, that a residential rental unit shall not be
inspected solely as a result of the changing of tenant(s) more
frequently than once during each twelve-month period.
C. The landlord of each residential rental unit shall make suitable
arrangements with the Housing Officer for each such inspection. A
rental inspection certificate shall be issued by the Housing Officer upon
completion of satisfactory inspection of a residential rental unit that
complies with all applicable requirements.
D. In the event permission to enter any such residential rental unit for the
purpose of inspection, examination or survey is denied, the Housing
Officer may apply to the appropriate authority for a search warrant.
E. Probable cause shall mean:
(1) That inspection of said residential rental unit is part of a routine
area inspection being conducted as part of a systematic or
concentrated code enforcement program;
(2) That the affiant has knowledge of a violation of housing or health
codes or other Borough codes that may endanger or otherwise
affect the health and safety of the citizens of the Borough; or
(3) That said entry is for the purpose of reinspecting a previous notice
of violation where no prior warrant was issued.
F. A warrant shall not be required:
(1) When entry is by permission or at the request of the occupant;
(2) Where an imminent danger to health or safety exists; or
(3) Following an accident or inherent condition where immediate
inspection is required to determine if an imminent danger to health
or safety exists.
G. Any person scheduling an inspection as provided in this section shall, at
the time of the application for inspection, pay to the Housing Officer an
§ 166-11 MANHEIM CODE § 166-11
1:130
§ 166-12. Duties of occupants of residential rental units.
Each occupant of a residential rental unit shall have the following duties:
inspection fee, if any, for use by the Borough, which shall be in
accordance with a fee schedule established by resolution or ordinance
of Borough Council from time to time. In addition, the inspection fee
for each inspection (or reinspection) shall be increased by an amount
as established by resolution or ordinance of Borough Council from time
to time, if the applicant changes a scheduled appointment with less
than two days' notice to the Housing Officer or fails to appear for a
previously scheduled inspection (or reinspection). In addition, a fee in
an amount established by resolution or ordinance of Borough Council
from time to time shall be charged to reschedule an appointment when
required as a result of applicant's failure to appear at a scheduled
appointment or if an applicant changes a scheduled appointment with
less than 10 days' notice to the Housing Officer.
A. Comply with all obligations of this article and all applicable codes and
Borough ordinances, as well as all applicable federal, state and local
laws and regulations.
B. Conduct himself or herself and require each other person, including but
not limited to each guest on the premises and within his or her
residential rental unit with his or her consent, to conduct himself or
herself in a manner that will not disturb the peaceful enjoyment of
adjacent or nearby dwellings by people occupying the same.
C. Not engage in, nor tolerate, nor permit any other person, including but
not limited to each guest on the premises and within his or her
residential rental unit with his or her consent, to cause damage to the
residential rental unit or engage in disruptive conduct, or other
violation of this article, any code, any Borough ordinance, or any
applicable federal, state and local law or regulation.
D. Use the trash and recyclable collection services provided by the owner.
E. Use the residential rental unit for no purpose other than as a residence.
F. Maintain the residential rental unit in a manner meeting all of the
requirements for occupants of structures set forth in the Property
Maintenance Code.
G. Allow the Housing Officer to inspect the residential rental unit in
accordance with this article at reasonable times.
H. Not allow any person other than those identified on the lease to reside
in the residential rental unit.
I. Not allow the residential rental unit to be occupied by more than one
family. For purposes of this subsection, a family shall be considered to
§ 166-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-12
1:131
§ 166-13. Disruptive conduct.
be a "family," as that term is defined in the Manheim Borough Zoning
Ordinance. (See § 220-12.C).
J. Not permit the possession of, serving to, or consumption of alcohol by
underage persons.
A. Police officers shall investigate alleged incidents of disruptive conduct.
The police officer conducting the investigation shall complete a
disruptive conduct report upon a finding that the reported incident
constitutes disruptive conduct. The information filed in the disruptive
conduct report shall include, if possible, the identity of the alleged
perpetrator(s) of the disruptive conduct and the factual basis for the
disruptive conduct described in the disruptive conduct report. A copy of
the disruptive conduct report shall be given or mailed to the occupant
and mailed to the owner and, if applicable, the manager within 10
working days of the occurrence of the alleged disruptive conduct.
B. The occupant or the owner and, if applicable, the manager shall have 10
days from the date of a disruptive conduct report to appeal the
disruptive conduct report. The appeal shall be made in writing and
submitted to the Housing Officer.
C. After three disruptive conduct incidents in any twelve-month period by
an occupant documented by disruptive conduct reports, the owner and,
if applicable, the manager shall have 10 days from the date of the third
disruptive conduct report to begin eviction proceedings against the
occupants. The owner and, if applicable, the manager shall submit a
copy of the document to the Housing Officer indicating that the eviction
process has begun. The owner and, if applicable, the manager shall
diligently and in good faith pursue such eviction proceedings, including
but not limited to appealing a Magisterial District Judge's denial of any
such eviction proceedings. Failure to timely and properly take such
action, as determined in the sole discretion of the Borough, shall result
in the immediate revocation of the rental occupancy permit by the
Borough. The residential rental unit involved shall not have its rental
occupancy permit reinstated until the reinstatement fee is paid and the
disruptive occupants have been evicted, the Magisterial District Judge
has ruled in the occupant's favor, the Magisterial District Judge has
ruled in the owner's favor but has not ordered the eviction of the
occupants, or the occupants have filed an appeal to a higher court or
declared bankruptcy, thereby preventing their eviction. The disruptive
occupants, upon eviction, shall not reoccupy any residential rental unit
on the same premises involved for a period of at least one year from the
date of eviction. This subsection is not intended to limit or inhibit the
owner's and, if applicable, the manager's right to initiate eviction
actions prior to the issuance of the third disruptive conduct report in a
twelve-month period.
§ 166-12 MANHEIM CODE § 166-13
1:132
§ 166-14. Enforcement; notice; appeal.
D. The disruptive conduct report shall count against all occupants of the
residential rental unit. More than one disruptive conduct report filed
against any occupant of a residential rental unit in any twenty-four-hour
period shall count as a single disruptive conduct report for the purpose
of this section. The Housing Officer shall maintain a list of names of all
occupants evicted as a result of this section. The names shall remain on
the list for a period of three years.
A. Whenever the Housing Officer believes, or has cause to believe, that
there is a violation of any provision(s) of this article or any rule(s),
regulation(s) or code(s), including but not limited to the Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code and the Property Maintenance Code, as
adopted by the Borough and related hereto, the Housing Officer shall
give notice of such violation to the owner of the residential rental unit
or the premises. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing and shall state the place and manner of the violation;
(2) State the nature or condition of the violation;
(3) State the determination of the Housing Officer in respect to the
violation;
(4) State the name of the person who the Housing Officer deems
responsible therefor, together with the name of the owner of the
residential rental unit or the premises involved;
(5) State the date of the notice and the number of days allowed for
compliance with said notice;
(6) Be served upon the owner of the residential rental unit or the
premises involved and all other persons, if any, named in such
notice pursuant to Subsection A(4) of this section, and any notice
served upon the owner and such other person or persons, if any,
personally or by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, postage prepaid, sent to the last known address of such
owner and such other person or persons, if any, and by posting the
same in a conspicuous place in or about the premises affected by
such notice, shall be deemed to have been properly served.
B. The notice may, in addition, contain any other pertinent data,
information and/or statements which the Housing Officer deems
appropriate.
C. Any person affected by a notice of decision, determination or order
issued by the Housing Officer or pursuant to this article may appeal
said decision, determination or order to Borough Council. Any such
appeal must be filed in writing with Borough Council, and a copy
delivered to the Housing Officer, within 10 days after receipt by the
appellant of such notice of decision, determination or order. At the time
§ 166-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-14
1:133
of the filing of such appeal, the appellant shall pay to the Borough
a deposit, the amount of which shall be established by resolution or
ordinance of Borough Council from time to time, to cover the costs
of such appeal. Borough Council shall hold a hearing on the appeal
within 45 days after the date the appeal is filed. Notice of the hearing
shall be given not less than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing
to the appellant, to the Housing Officer and to any other person who
may request such notice. At the hearing, Borough Council shall review
the decision, determination or order of the Housing Officer, or the rule
or regulation, which is the subject of the appeal, take such testimony,
hear such witnesses and, by a concurring vote of the majority of its
members, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the decision,
determination or order appealed from and shall make such order or
decision as, in Borough Council's opinion, should be made. Failure
to secure such concurring votes shall be deemed a confirmation of
the decision, determination or order of the Housing Officer. Within 20
days after said hearing, Borough Council shall advise the appellant, in
writing, of its order or decision, and a copy of such order or decision
shall be filed with the Borough Secretary and with the Housing Officer.
Any order or decision of Borough Council may be further appealed
to the Court of Common Pleas of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania by
the appellant within 20 days after receipt of the order or decision of
Borough Council, or as otherwise provided by law.
D. Whenever the Housing Officer determines that an emergency condition
exists which requires immediate action to protect public health and/or
safety, the Housing Officer may issue an order declaring the existence
of such emergency condition and requiring action to be taken to remedy
such emergency condition. Such emergency order shall be effective
immediately upon issuance. Any person to whom such order is directed
shall comply therewith immediately; provided, however, that such
person may file an appeal to Borough Council in accordance with the
provisions of this section, but such appeal shall not serve as a
supersedeas to the Housing Officer's emergency order.
E. Borough Council shall establish by resolution or ordinance from time to
time the amount of the deposit to be paid by any person filing an appeal
to Borough Council as provided in this section. Such deposit shall be
made to the Secretary of the Borough and shall be paid in full at the
same time as the appeal is filed. The deposit shall be used by the
Borough to pay all costs and expenses incurred by the Borough and
Borough Council pertaining to the appeal, which costs and expenses
shall include but not be limited to stenographic services, the fees of the
Borough Solicitor and all other professional and secretarial costs and
expenses. In the event such costs and expenses are less than the
amount of the deposit, any excess shall be returned to appellant.
F. Notwithstanding the requirements of Subsection A of this section, if the
Housing Officer determines or has reason to believe that a violation of
this article or any other Borough ordinance exists concerning the
§ 166-14 MANHEIM CODE § 166-14
1:134
§ 166-15. Violations and penalties.
health, safety, welfare or occupancy of the premises, the Housing
Officer may proceed, without giving the notice required by Subsection
A of this section, to cause a citation to be issued to the owner of the
residential rental unit which the Housing Officer determines or has
information to reasonably believe is in violation of the provisions of this
article, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this article, or any
other applicable Borough ordinance.
G. Any person aggrieved by a decision of a police officer or the Housing
Officer in regard to a disruptive conduct report or the revocation of a
rental occupancy permit may appeal to Borough Council in accordance
with the provisions of this section. Such appeal must be filed, in writing,
within 10 days from the date of the disruptive conduct report or notice
of revocation.
A. Violations. Any person who violates or fails to comply with, or permits
any other person to violate or fail to comply with, any provision of this
article, or any notice, rule or regulation made in connection with this
article, including but not limited to the following violations or failure to
comply, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties and
remedies set forth in Subsection B of this section:
(1) To lease, let or permit the occupancy of a residential rental unit
without obtaining a rental occupancy permit in accordance with
the provisions set forth in this article;
(2) To refuse to permit any inspection as required in accordance with
this article;
(3) To fail to perform the duties established by § 166-5 of this article if
such person is an owner or a manager of a residential rental unit;
(4) To fail to perform the duties established by § 166-12 of this article if
such person is an occupant of a residential rental unit; or
(5) To place false information on, or omit relevant information from, an
application for a rental occupancy permit.
B. Penalties and remedies.
(1) Any person who permits occupancy of a residential rental unit after
the rental occupancy permit has been revoked shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $500 per residential rental unit for each day
the violation exists. Each day the violation exists constitutes a
separate violation.
(2) Any person who fails to secure a rental occupancy permit shall be
sent a ten-day notice of violation, warning him, her or it of his, her
or its failure to secure a rental occupancy permit in accordance
with this article. If he, she or it does not comply at the end of such
§ 166-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-15
1:135
ten-day period, a fine of not less than $500 per residential rental
unit shall be imposed for each day the violation exists. Each day the
violation exists constitutes a separate violation.
(3) Any person who violates any other provision of this article shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for not
more than 30 days, or both. Each violation of this article shall
constitute a separate offense. Each day that such violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense.
(4) Any owner who fails to renew an expired rental occupancy permit
within 10 days after the expiration date of the rental occupancy
permit shall, in addition to the penalties provided in Subsection
B(1), (2) and (3) of this subsection, be subject to a penalty in the
amount of $10 for each day or part thereof during which the
expired rental occupancy permit is not renewed.
(5) In addition to prosecution of any person violating this article, the
Housing Officer or any duly authorized agent of the Borough may
take such civil and/or equitable remedies in any court of record of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania against any person or property,
real or personal, to effect the provisions of the article.
(6) The provisions of this section and the provisions of this article
governing revocation, suspension or nonrenewal of rental
occupancy permits shall be independent, nonmutually exclusive,
separate remedies, all of which shall be available to the Borough as
may be deemed appropriate. The remedies and procedures in this
article are not intended to supplant or replace to any degree the
remedies provided to the Borough in the Borough's Property
Maintenance Code, the Manheim Borough Zoning Ordinance, or
any other code or Borough ordinance, as amended from time to
time.
(7) The penalties imposed by this Subsection B shall be payable to the
Secretary of the Borough.
§ 166-15 MANHEIM CODE § 166-15
1:136
Chapter 169
SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 160.
§ 166-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-15
1:137

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 169-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Manheim Borough Pawn Shops and
Secondhand Shops Ordinance."
§ 169-2. Definitions.
The following terms are hereby defined for purposes of this chapter:
DEALERS IN SECONDHAND GOODS — Includes any person who otherwise
in the normal course of business purchases personal property not from
a retail or wholesale entity or auction for the purposes of reselling the
property.
PAWNBROKERS — Shall include any person who:
TARGET GOODS — Jewelry; cameras and photographic equipment; gold
coins or bars; silver bars; copper tubing; electronics equipment, such as
televisions or VCRs or radios or computers or computer equipment or
microwave ovens; antiques; currency collectibles, such as coins or stamps;
and any other item of value likely to be the subject of criminal activity such
as burglary or theft. Hereafter, the Manheim Borough Police Department
may update this definition by sending a list of categories of "target goods"
to pawnbrokers and dealers in secondhand goods identifying themselves as
such.
§ 169-3. Report required.
Engages in the business of lending money on the deposit or pledge
of personal property other than choses in action, securities or written
endeavors or indebtedness;
A.
Purchases personal property with an express or implied agreement or
understanding to sell it back at a subsequent time at a stipulated price;
or
B.
Lends money upon goods, wares or merchandise pledged, stored or
deposited as collateral security.
C.
A. At the time of any transaction in target goods, the pawnbroker or dealer
in secondhand goods shall make a record of the name and address and
the driver's license number or the social security number of the pawner
or seller of secondhand goods in the transaction. It will also be required
that items purchased from the pawner or seller must be photographed.
Such information shall be supplied to the Police Department as part of
the report required hereunder.
B. All pawnbrokers and dealers in secondhand goods shall make out and
deliver to the Chief of Police or his duly authorized representatives each
week a legible and accurate report of all target goods taken in pawn or
§ 169-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-3
1:139
§ 169-4. Minors.
No pawnbroker or dealer in secondhand goods shall purchase or take in
pawn any goods of any kind from any person under 18 years of age unless
such minor's parent or guardian is present, and the name of the parent or
guardian shall be reported along with the report of the transaction.
§ 169-5. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$500 nor more than $1,000 and, in default of payment thereof, shall be
imprisoned for not more than 90 days. Each day or portion thereof in which
a violation exists shall be considered a separate violation of this chapter.
Each section of this chapter which is violated shall be considered a separate
violation. Such fine shall be in addition to any other fine which may be
imposed under the provisions of any other ordinances of Manheim Borough,
Pennsylvania law, or federal law.
purchased during the preceding business week. Such report shall
contain the name or names of the pawners or sellers and accurate,
detailed description, together with serial numbers thereon, if any, of
all target goods taken in pawn or purchased, together with the amount
loaned on or paid for such target goods. Target goods, whether taken
in pawn or purchased shall not be sold, resold or otherwise disposed
of for a period of at least 15 days after pawn or purchase by such
pawnbrokers or dealers, but this requirement shall not apply to the
redemption of a lawfully pledged article by the pledger. Pawnbrokers
and dealers shall permit the Chief of Police or his duly authorized
representatives to inspect any target goods in their possession at any
time during regular business hours. Failure to timely submit such list
shall be a violation of this article.
§ 169-3 MANHEIM CODE § 169-5
1:140
ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 169-6. Confidentiality.
The information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be
confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection, and
shall be so kept in order that the contents thereof shall not be known
except to persons charged with the administration of this chapter and law
enforcement agencies conducting investigations.
§ 169-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-6
1:141
Chapter 172
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Authorities — See Ch. 8.
Construction codes — See Ch. 100.
Water — See Ch. 210.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 169-6 MANHEIM CODE § 169-6
1:142
ARTICLE I
Sanitary Sewer System Rules and Regulations
[Adopted by Ord. No. 9-26-1944 (Ch. 18, Part 3, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 172-1. Rules and regulations adopted.
The sanitary sewer system now constructed in the Borough or to be
constructed in the future shall be regulated and operated according to the
conditions hereof.
§ 172-2. Sewer connections required; cesspools, septic tanks,
privies and other receptacles to be abandoned.
A. In the drainage districts where sewers are laid, the use of cesspools,
septic tanks, wells, privy vaults or other receptacle for sewage purposes
shall cease and their use for the disposal of sewage shall be abandoned
within six months after a public sewer shall become accessible, and
connection shall be made to the sanitary sewer system of the Borough.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Council to cause a printed or written
notice of the completion of such sewer, together with a copy of this
article to be served on the owners of each property abutting on the
highway, road, street or walk along which such sewer has been laid,
such notice in each instance to state that it is the duty of such owners to
cause the building erected on their premises requiring sewage
drainage to be connected therewith at their own expense and subject to
the payment of the connection fee and the annual sewer rental for the
use of the same; and that, upon the failure of any such owner to comply
with the requirements of such notice and of this article, the Borough
Council will cause such connections to be made at the expense of the
owner, who shall thereupon also become subject to a penalty or fine as
hereinafter provided; and provided, further, that, after 45 days from the
date such notice shall have been given, no cesspool, septic tank, well,
privy vault or other receptacle for sewage purposes shall be pumped
out or repaired, and the use of any cesspool, septic tank, well, privy
vault or other receptacle for sewage purposes requiring pumping out or
repairs shall forthwith cease and their use for the disposal of sewage
shall forthwith be abandoned; and provided, further, if at any time the
Borough Council shall deem it necessary for the public health to require
that any building erected on premises abutting on, adjoining or
adjacent to any Borough sewer, wheresoever any such building may be
located on such premises, shall be connected with such sewer, the said
Borough Council shall cause to be served upon the owner or owners of
any such building a copy of this article and a printed or written notice
directing that the necessary connections be made to the Borough sewer
system within 45 days from the date of this service, such notice to be
similar in form to that hereinbefore referred to in this article.
B. If any owner or user shall, after notice as provided herein, refuse or
neglect to discontinue the use of cesspools, septic tanks, wells or privy
vaults or such other receptacles for sewage purposes, and shall refuse
§ 172-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-2
1:143
§ 172-3. Connection with cesspools and other receptacles
restricted; future construction limited.
No connection for cesspools, septic tanks, wells, privy vaults or any other
receptacles for sewage purposes, except specially designed sump pits or
sewage wells in buildings of lower elevation than the sewer outside, shall be
made with any sewer, and no cesspool, septic tank, well, privy vault or other
receptacle for sewage purposes, except as above noted, shall hereafter be
constructed in any part of the Borough where the sanitary sewer system is
accessible.
§ 172-4. Grease traps required; cleaning thereof.
All hotels, restaurants, boardinghouses or other public eating places shall
install adequate grease traps of type and size approved by the Borough
Superintendent of Sewers, or a proper authorized agent of the Borough, in
their system of plumbing or piping, and such grease traps shall be cleaned
at sufficiently frequent intervals to prevent grease from entering the sewer
system.
§ 172-5. House connections. [Amended 9-21-1955 by Ord. No. 287;
7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 524]
or neglect to cause a connection to be made to the sanitary sewer
system, the Borough Council shall cause its duly appointed employees
to enter upon the premises and shall cause said cesspool, septic tanks,
well, privy vault or other receptacle to be closed and a sewer
connection made to the sanitary sewer system at the owner's expense,
the costs to be collectible as hereinafter provided.
A. Applicant shall install, at the applicant's expense, the applicant's own
sewer running from the building to be served to the curbline or alley
line of the street or alley in which the Borough's sewer is laid, which
installation shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Borough,
and the size of which private sewer line shall be no less than six inches
in diameter, if constructed of terra cotta pipe, and no less than four
inches in diameter, if new construction of cast iron pipe or plastic pipe;
provided, however, that the existing construction of other dimensions
may be used if approved by the Borough authorities.
B. A separate house sewer shall be required for each individual building or
house, whether constructed as a detached unit or as one of a pair or
row, but a single house sewer will be permitted to serve an apartment
house or other permanently multiple-unit structure whose individual
apartments or units may not be subject to separate ownership.
C. When necessary or advisable to make any alteration or repair to any
lateral or house connection already in place, application shall be made
to the Borough Secretary in the same manner as for new connections,
and the sum as shall be from time to time set by resolution of Borough
Council shall be paid for the permit.
§ 172-2 MANHEIM CODE § 172-6
1:144
§ 172-6. Connection by Borough if property owner fails to do so.
In the event of failure to make approved connection to the sewer system
from any dwelling, commercial or industrial establishment, or other
building in which sanitary conveniences or facilities are provided after the
sewer becomes accessible and within the period prescribed in § 172-1 of
this article, and notice thereof has been given, the Borough Council shall
cause its duly appointed employees to enter upon the premises and cause
such connection to be made and at the owner's expense, the costs of same
to be collected as herein provided.
§ 172-7. Supervision over construction of laterals, house
connections and plumbing; disconnection of laterals carrying
prohibited material.
§ 172-8. Location of house connections. [Amended 9-21-1955 by
Ord. No. 28717]
All house connections to the sewer shall be made at the end of the lateral
at the curbline. "Y" branches or "T's" have been placed in the sewers as
constructed and will be placed in the sewers to be constructed, and laterals
have been extended to the curb at all improved properties where deemed
advisable or will be so placed, but in the event that laterals and connections
to the now-existing or future sewers are advisable or necessary at locations
other than at points where laterals have been placed, such laterals will
be constructed by the Borough upon written application to the Borough
Secretary, but only after the connection fee set forth in the Borough's
Schedule of Charges and Fees shall have been paid to the Borough Finance
Director.
A. The construction of lateral or house connections and of house plumbing
shall, at all times, be subject to supervision and inspection of the
Borough Superintendent of Sewers, or a proper authorized agent of the
Borough. The lateral or house connection shall not be covered until
permitted by the Borough Superintendent of Sewers, or a proper
authorized agent of the Borough, and all backfilling of trenches shall be
under his supervision and shall be thoroughly compacted by tamping in
six-inch layers, by thorough water jetting, or by other method approved
by the Borough Superintendent of Sewers, or a proper authorized agent
of the Borough.
B. The Borough Superintendent of Sewers, or a proper authorized agent of
the Borough, shall have the right to close up or disconnect from the
sewer system any lateral or house connection used for carrying
rainwater, surface water, groundwater or objectionable matter or
whenever any of the violations of this article are committed, and to
order or require such connection to be made and to carry such sewage
as is intended and indicated in this article.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 172-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-9
1:145
§ 172-9. Procedures in case of blocked laterals or house
connections.
If any lateral or house connection shall become clogged or obstructed,
the dam may be opened by employees of the Borough under the direction
of the Borough Superintendent of Sewers, or a proper authorized agent,
upon application of the owner to the Borough Secretary, which application
shall contain an agreement by the owner to reimburse the Borough for any
and all expenses incurred in the opening of such lateral branch or house
connection, providing that the clogging or obstruction thereof is found to
be due to any cause for which the Borough is not liable, but if otherwise,
the expense shall be paid by the Borough. The decision of the Borough
Superintendent of Sewers as to the liability for such clogging shall be final
and conclusive.
§ 172-10. Standards for house connections; inspection and
approval.
All house connections from buildings to the lateral sewer in the street
shall have permanently tight joints, suitable grade, depth, alignment and
protection, and be approved by the Borough Superintendent of Sewers, or a
proper authorized agent, to ensure satisfactory performance and to prevent
the admission of groundwater.
§ 172-11. Authority for Borough to do certain work and collect cost;
violations and penalties. [Amended 9-21-1955 by Ord. No. 287;
7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 524]
Should any person or persons refuse, neglect or fail to comply with any
of the terms, provisions and requirements of this article or with a notice
given in conformity with or pursuant to the provisions hereof, the Borough
Council is hereby empowered and directed to engage all labor and furnish
all materials necessary or required to comply with said notice, and the cost
and expenses thereof, together with 10% added thereto as a penalty and
including all delinquent sewer service charges and penalties as provided
in § 172-28 of this chapter, shall be certified to the Borough Solicitor, who
shall enter the same as a lien against the property in the Court of Common
Pleas of Lancaster County and shall proceed to collect same in like manner
as other municipal claims are by law collectible; or an action of assumpsit
may be brought to recover the same in the name of the Borough of Manheim
from the said owner or owners; or the same may be recovered by distress of
personal property on the premises; and in addition thereto, the said owner
or owners who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or who shall
violate any of the terms, requirements or conditions of this article or of any
notice as aforesaid shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 and cost of prosecution and, in default of payment thereof,
undergo a term of imprisonment for a period of not more than 30 days.
§ 172-9 MANHEIM CODE § 172-12
1:146
§ 172-12. Supervision over operation and maintenance of sewers
and treatment works.
The sewer system, sewage treatment works and sewage pumping stations
shall be operated and maintained under the direct supervision of the
Borough Superintendent of Sewers or a proper authorized agent, and such
operators or labor as may be required to operate and maintain the sewer
system, the sewage treatment works and the pumping stations shall be
engaged as directed by the Borough Council.
§ 172-13. Permit required before connection made.18
Connections to the Borough sewers may be made only after permit therefor
shall have been secured from the Borough Secretary and upon payment of
the connection fee set forth in the Borough's Schedule of Charges and Fees.
§ 172-14. Construction of laterals.
Upon issuance of a sewer permit to an owner, the Borough Council shall
cause the lateral connections to be constructed from the street sewer to the
curbline.
§ 172-15. Location of house sewer.
The location of the service "Y" or "T" or house lateral shall be secured
by the property owner from the Borough records before construction is
undertaken so that the house sewer may be properly located. If the existing
location of the service "Y" or "T" is not reasonably suitable, a connection
to the street sewer may be made only with the use of a cast iron saddle
securely cemented in place and on a concrete foundation and cradle. If a
cast iron saddle is required, the cost thereof shall be paid by the property
owner at the time of securing the sewer connection permit.
§ 172-16. Inspection and approval necessary before connection.
The house lateral sewer shall not be connected to the Borough sewer
system until after inspection by the Borough Superintendent of Sewers or
a proper authorized agent of the Borough, and the said sewer between the
curbline and the building shall not be covered or concealed in any way until
after inspection and written approval by the Borough Superintendent of
Sewers or a proper authorized agent of the Borough.
§ 172-17. Specifications for house laterals. [Amended 7-14-1992 by
Ord. No. 524]
All house laterals from the main sewers to a point five feet beyond the
outside wall of a building shall be either six-inch inside diameter first-class
terra cotta pipe or four-inch inside diameter cast iron pipe or plastic pipe,
no less than four inches in diameter, if new construction. From a point five
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 172-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-17
1:147
feet beyond the building wall and the building wall, the pipe size may be
reduced to four-inch inside diameter cast iron soil pipe laid with lead joints;
provided, however, that existing construction of other dimensions may be
used if approved by Borough authorities.
§ 172-18. Pipe specifications. [Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 524]
§ 172-19. Grading and backfilling.
A. Terra cotta pipe shall have joints either of hot-poured bituminous
material or die-cast asphaltic sewer joint.
B. Cast iron soil pipe shall have joints of tightly caulked twisted hemp or
oakum on which shall be poured a one-and-one-half-inch layer of soft
lead and tightly caulked.
C. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe and fittings. Polyvinyl chloride
(PVC) sewer pipe and fittings are acceptable for use as sewer laterals.
Copies of Borough specifications are available at the Manheim Borough
office.
D. When bituminous joints are used, the bituminous material shall be
heated to a temperature as recommended by the manufacturer and
poured according to specifications and instructions of the manufacturer
to ensure the best work. Twisted hemp or oakum shall first be caulked
into the joint, leaving 1 1/2 inches on the pipe for the compound to run
into the joint. An asbestos runner shall be used. During cold weather, in
a wet trench, or when directed by the Borough Superintendent of
Sewers, the bell and spigot of the two pipes to be joined shall be heated
or dried with a plumber's blow torch before the joint is poured.
E. When die-cast asphaltic sewer joints are used, the following
requirements shall be met: Steel discs shall be furnished with their two
sections machined to a precisely tapered fit. In making the joints, the
pipe shall be placed upright, the spigot resting on the female section of
the die, with the male section of the die placed on the bell of the pipe.
The spaces between the die sections and the pipe shall be poured with a
hot asphaltic sewer joint compound. Before the pipe is lowered into the
trench, the collars shall be painted with a solvent which will soften and
make the surface of the joints gummy. The pipe shall be aligned for line
and grade and shoved completely home. The joint shall become one
integral part, completely filling the annular joint space.
F. After the sewer pipes have been joined with either a die-cast joint or a
hot-poured bituminous joint, a 1:1 cement mortar collar neatly beveled
off with a trowel to an angle of 45° shall be constructed on the outside
of the bituminous joints. No backfilling shall be done over the cement
collar until the cement mortar has sufficiently hardened.
A. Before any pipe is laid, the trench shall be evenly graded, the minimum
grade being one-fourth-inch fall per running foot. In extreme cases a
§ 172-17 MANHEIM CODE § 172-19
1:148
§ 172-20. Laying of pipe in wet places.
When pipe is laid in wet places, either cast iron soil pipe with lead joints or
terra cotta pipe with a concrete bed and jackets shall be used. The concrete
bed and jacket shall extend below the bell of the pipe at least three inches,
shall have a horizontal bearing extending longitudinally along the pipe at
least three inches on each side of the bell of the pipe, and shall be at
least three inches thick over the top or on the side of any part of the pipe.
Concrete shall be made of one part cement, two parts sand and three parts
stone or gravel having a maximum size of one inch.
§ 172-21. Laying of pipe in rock excavation.
When pipe is laid in rock excavation, the trench shall be excavated three
inches deeper than the outside bell of the pipe, and this space under the
pipe and up to the midsection of the pipe shall be filled with well-compacted
concrete of 1:3:5 mix.
§ 172-22. Requirement for cleanout.
When the length of a house connection is in excess of 100 feet, a cleanout
shall be installed adjacent to the connection with the building.
§ 172-23. Certain wastewater not to enter sewer system.
No roof water, stormwater, surface water or water from subsurface
groundwater drainage pipes shall be permitted to enter the sewer system.
§ 172-24. Penalty for violation of rules and regulations.
Any person, firm or corporation offending against any of these rules and
regulations shall be liable to a fine as provided in § 172-11 of this article.
grade of one-eighth-inch fall per running foot will be permitted. All pipe
must have the barrel resting on the ground and the space for the ball
at each joint shall be excavated to provide sufficient space for making
the joints. After the pipe is laid and the joints made, it shall remain
uncovered a sufficient period of time for the joints to set and to allow
for the necessary inspection by the Borough.
B. Backfilling shall be done with loose earth and carefully tamped about
and over the pipe in six-inch layers for a depth of two feet above the
pipe. Coarser materials may then be used for backfill and the trench
brought to its original condition.
§ 172-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-24
1:149

ARTICLE II
Sewer Connections
[Adopted by Ord. No. 12-18-1945 (Ch. 18, Part 2, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 172-25. Sewer connections required.
All owners of improved property in the Borough of Manheim are hereby
required to connect their premises with the sanitary sewer system
constructed by the Borough of Manheim Authority and leased by it to the
Borough at such time or times and in such manner as now is or in the future
may be provided by ordinance.
§ 172-26. Duties of property owner before making connections with
sewer. [Amended 9-21-1955 by Ord. No. 288; 7-14-1992 by Ord. No.
524]
Before making such connection to said sanitary sewer system, the owner or
owners of the premises to be served shall:
§ 172-27. Separate connections required; private sewers.
Every building must have its own entrance or connection to the main
sewer in the street or alley in which said sewer is laid, except that an
industrial establishment having two or more buildings may construct its
own trunk sewer to serve said buildings by connecting each building thereto
separately and connecting its trunk to the main sewer, providing that such
private sewer system has been inspected and approved by the Borough
and that a plan thereof suitable for permanent record has been furnished
the Borough. All private sewers shall be maintained and repaired at the
expense of the owner of the premises served thereby; subject, however, to
the direction, inspection and approval of the Borough.
A. Make written application to the Borough Secretary therefor, agreeing
to pay all lawful charges for sewage service to said premises so long as
the applicant remains the owner thereof and thereafter until said
applicant shall give written notice to the Borough of a change of
ownership and the name and address of the new owner.
B. Install at the applicant's expense the applicant's own sewer running
from the building to be served to the curbline or alley line of the street
or alley in which the Borough's sewer is laid, which installation shall be
subject to inspection and approval by the Borough and the size of which
private sewer line shall be no less than six inches in diameter, if
constructed of terra cotta pipe, and no less than four inches in diameter,
if new construction of cast iron pipe or plastic pipe; provided, however,
that the existing construction of other dimensions may be used if
approved by the Borough authorities.
C. Obtain a connection permit and pay the connection fee therefor in
accordance with the rates herein specified.
§ 172-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-28
1:151
§ 172-28. Penalty added to delinquent sewer rental charges.
[Amended 5-31-1961 by Ord. No. 333]
Every customer who shall not pay in full any sewer bill within 30 days after
the date of the bill shall be subject to a penalty of 5% of the amount of such
bill. In case any sewer bill shall not be paid within 60 days from the date
of the bill, it shall be the duty of the Borough Superintendent of Sewers
or other authorized agent of the Borough to give to the customer who
shall have been billed for such sewage service 10 days' notice in writing
of the fact that such sewer bill has become delinquent and that at the end
of such period of 10 days all water service to the premises upon which
such bill is delinquent shall be shut off and discontinued and shall not be
restored until said account shall have been paid in full together with a
reasonable charge for the shutting off and restoring of said water service.
At the end of such period of 10 days, it shall be the duty of the Borough
Superintendent of Sewers or other authorized agent of the Borough to shut
off the water service to such premises, such service not to be resumed until
such delinquent account and service charge shall have been paid in full.
§ 172-29. Use of moneys collected from sewer charges.
The funds received by the Borough from the collection of charges
authorized herein shall be used for the purpose of defraying the expense
of the Borough in the operation, maintenance, repair, alteration, inspection
and depreciation of the sewage system and sewage treatment works, as well
as other payments specified to be made by the Borough under the terms
of the Borough of Manheim Authority agreement dated as of September 1,
1944, in accordance with the provisions of the Act of 1935, P.L. 1286, as
amended,19 and the Act of May 2, 1945, No. 164. 20
§ 172-30. Sewer rental a lien against property.
The annual rental or charge imposed under this article shall be a lien
against the property served, and the lien thereof shall be preserved by
the Borough against the property served by filing in the office of the
Prothonotary, all as now is or may in the future be provided by law.
19.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 2231.
20.Editor's Note: Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, repealed by Act 22 of 2001 (June 19,
2001, P.L. 287, No. 22); see now the Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et
seq.
§ 172-28 MANHEIM CODE § 172-30
1:152
ARTICLE III
Rates and Charges
[Adopted 5-6-1968 by Ord. No. 391 (Ch. 18, Part 4, of the 1992
Code)]
§ 172-31. Connection charge.
§ 172-32. Sewer rent. [Amended 5-29-1991 by Ord. No. 519]
A. Where there are no house connections already made to the curbline
from the sewer there is hereby imposed on the property owner the
following charges for such connections from the line of the sewer to the
inside of the curbline or proposed curbline:
4-inch or 5-inch connection $100
6-inch connection $150
8-inch connection $200
B. Such charge shall be paid to the Borough Manager at the time
application is made for the connection to the sewer system.
A. Beginning effective July 1, 1991, the sewer rent for collection and
treatment of all sewage discharged into the sewer system by all
dwellings, business buildings, institutions, commercial and industrial
establishments and public users receiving water from the Manheim
Water Plant shall be a quarterly charge based on the water
consumption for the prior three-month period and shall be computed in
accordance with the following rate schedule:
Quarterly Sewer Rent
0 to 8,000 gallons $60 minimum
All usage in excess of 8,000
gallons per quarter
$7.50 per 1,000 gallons
B. In the case of a combination of two or more dwelling units, households,
flats, apartments or two or more families using separate cooking and
bathroom facilities in one dwelling having the use of the sewer system
through one sewer lateral, each and every such occupied dwelling unit,
household, flat, apartment or such family shall be charged the
foregoing minimum quarterly sewer rents or charges the same as if
each such unit or family had a direct and separate connection to the
sewer system. Sewer rents or charges in excess of such minimum shall
be determined by dividing the total water consumed, as shown by the
meter readings, by the number of occupied units or families using such
single sewer connection and applying the above rate schedule to the
quantity so determined.
C. In cases where a combination of one or more dwelling units,
households, flats, apartments with stores, shops, offices or business or
§ 172-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-32
1:153
industrial units have the use of the sewer system through one sewer
lateral, each and every occupied dwelling unit, household, flat,
apartment, store, shop, office or business or industrial unit shall be
charged the foregoing minimum sewer rents or charges the same as
if each such unit had a direct and separate connection to the sewer
system. Sewer rents or charges in excess of such minimum shall be
determined by dividing the total water consumed, as shown by the
meter readings, by the number of occupied units.
D. In cases where dwellings using the sewer system have sources of water
supply other than or in combination with water supplied by the
Manheim Water Department, all or a part of which is discharged into
the sewerage system, the person discharging said waste may install and
maintain at his expense water meters of a type approved by the
Borough Council for the purpose of determining the proper volume of
flow, or a flat charge of $55 will be made for each separate dwelling
unit, household, flat, apartment or family.
E. In the event that any sewer user discharging water into the sewer
system produces evidence satisfactory to the Borough Council that
more than 10% of the total annual volume of water used for the purpose
does not reach the sewage works, then the determination of the total
water consumption to be used in determining the waste discharged into
the said sewer may be agreed upon between the Borough and the
person or by metering by methods satisfactory to Borough Council.
§ 172-32 MANHEIM CODE § 172-32
1:154
ARTICLE IV
Sewer Use Regulations
[Adopted 9-12-1989 by Ord. No. 507 (Ch. 18, Part 1, of the 1992
Code)]
§ 172-33. General provisions.
A. Purpose and policy. This article sets forth uniform requirements for
direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and
treatment system for the Borough of Manheim, to effect compliance
with applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act
of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403).
B. Objectives. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge, or otherwise be
incompatible with the system.
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will be inadequately treated and thus
pass through the system inadequately treated into receiving waters
or the atmosphere.
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system.
(4) To provide for equitable distribution of the cost for the
implementation of the Authority's Municipal Industrial
Pretreatment Program.
C. Regulations. This article provides for the regulation of direct and
indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the
issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through
enforcement of general requirements for the other users; authorizes
monitoring and enforcement activities; requires user reporting;
assumes that existing customer's capacity will not be preempted; and
provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs
resulting from the program established herein.
D. Application. This article shall apply to the Borough of Manheim and to
persons outside the Borough who are users or significant users of the
Borough Authority's POTW. Except as otherwise provided herein, the
Borough shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
article.
E. Special agreements; arrangements. Nothing contained in this article
shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the Borough and significant users within or out of the
Borough, whereby a waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the Borough by special agreement, in writing, executed
§ 172-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-33
1:155
§ 172-34. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms
and phrases as used in this article shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Director in an NPDES state with an
approved state pretreatment program, or the Administrator of the EPA in an
NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF SIGNIFICANT USER — An
authorized representative of a significant user may be:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure, five days at 20° C., expressed in terms of weight and
concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)].
BOROUGH — The Borough of Manheim, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH AUTHORITY — The Manheim Borough Authority, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of
a user to the POTW.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or pretreatment standards.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use, such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added
is heat.
prior to such acceptance, containing safeguards, limitations and
conditions acceptable to the Borough. No such special agreement or
arrangement, however, shall waive or abrogate any national categorical
pretreatment standard.
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the
significant user is a corporation.
A.
A general partner or proprietor if the significant user is a partnership
or proprietorship, respectively.
B.
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above, or
any governmental entity within the Borough, if such representative is
responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the
indirect discharge originates.
C.
§ 172-33 MANHEIM CODE § 172-34
1:156
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The "approval authority," as defined hereinabove,
or the Superintendent if the Borough has an approved pretreatment
program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11.
COUNCIL — The Council of Manheim Borough.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EDU — Equivalent domestic unit, with the following wastewater
characteristics:
Flow 250 gpd
Ammonia–Nitrogen 25 mg/l as N
BOD 250 mg/l
Phosphate 10 mg/l as P
Suspended solids 250 mg/l
TKN 40 mg/l as N
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also
be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized
official of said agency.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime
basis, with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks, such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank
trucks.
INDIRECT EXPOSURE — The discharge or the introduction of pollutants
into the POTW, including holding tank waste discharged into the system as
outlined in 40 CFR 403.3(g) and Sections 307(b), (c), and (d) of the Act.
INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial source of indirect discharge.
INTERFERENCE — The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment
processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement
of the Borough Authority's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention
of sewage sludge use, sludge processes, or disposal by the POTW in
accordance with Section 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any criteria,
guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal
Act (SWDA),21 the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or
more stringent state criteria, including those contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of the SWDA applicable to
the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant
21.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 172-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-34
1:157
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in 40 CFR Parts 401 to 471, in
accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), which
applies to a specific industry.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OR NPDES
PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the authority
of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5.
NEW SOURCE — Any source: 1) the construction of which is carried out
at a site at which no other source is located; or 2) the construction totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge
of pollutants at an existing source; or 3) the production or wastewatergenerating
processes of the constructed facility are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site, and in any event,
the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed
regulations prescribing a Section 307(c) (33 U.S.C. § 1317) Categorical
Pretreatment Standard which will be applicable to such sources, if such
standard is thereafter promulgated within on 120 days of proposal in the
Federal Register. Where the standard is promulgated later than 120 days
after proposal, a "new source" means any source, the construction of which
is commenced after the date of promulgation of the standard.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge
or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, any other legal entity or any of their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine. The singular shall
include the plural where indicated by the context.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into
water.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature
§ 172-34 MANHEIM CODE § 172-34
1:158
of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or
alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes
or process changes, or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR
403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment other than a National Pretreatment
Standard imposed on a significant user.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment works as
defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned in
this instance by the Borough Authority. This definition includes any sewers
that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include
pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing
treatment. For the purposes of this article, "POTW" shall also include any
sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the
Borough who are, by contract or agreement with the Borough Authority,
users of the Borough Authority's POTW.
SHALL/MAY — "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT USER — Any nonresidential user of the Borough's
wastewater disposal system who:
SIGNIFICANT USER PERMIT — A permit as set forth in § 172-49D of this
article.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget (1972).
STATE — Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
Has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average workday;
or
A.
Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow in the Borough Authority's
wastewater collection and treatment system; or
B.
Has in his wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of
the Act or Pennsylvania statutes and rules; or
C.
Is found by the Borough Authority, Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (PA DEP) or the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or
in combination with other contributing significant users, on the
wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's
effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system.
D.
§ 172-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-34
1:159
SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated by the Borough of Manheim
who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his
duly authorized representative, deputy or agent.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is
removable by laboratory filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the EPA under the
provision of the Clean Water Act Section 307(a) or other acts.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the POTW.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater
that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed
into or permitted to enter the POTW.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulation of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion
thereof.
§ 172-35. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
Abbreviation Meaning
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
l Liter
mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System
O&M Operations and Maintenance
POTW Publicly Owned Treatment Works
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et
seq.
U.S.C. United States Code
§ 172-34 MANHEIM CODE § 172-35
1:160
Abbreviation Meaning
TKN Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen
TSS Total suspended solids
§ 172-36. Regulations.
A. General. No user or significant user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which
will interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These
general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW, whether or not
the user is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or
any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or
requirements. A user or significant user may not contribute the
following substances to any POTW:
(1) Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with
other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any
other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time
shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the
point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be
more than 5%, nor any single reading over 10% of the lower
explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but
are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene,
xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, hydrides, sulfides, and any other
substance determined by the Borough Authority, the state, or the
EPA to be a fire hazard or a hazard to the system.
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to, grease,
garbage with particles greater than 1 1/2 inch in any dimension,
animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides, spent
lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass
clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood,
plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, glass grinding, or
polishing wastes.
(3) Grease, oil or sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent and/or Borough, they are necessary
for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease
in such amounts as to cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or
other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment
facilities, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients, except such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of
a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent and the
Borough and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible
§ 172-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-36
1:161
for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper
removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured
material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of
disposal which are subject to review by the Superintendent and the
Borough. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not
performed by owner's (owners') personnel must be performed by
currently licensed waste disposal firms.
(4) Any wastewater having a pH less than five, unless the POTW is
specifically designed to accommodate such wastewater, or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the
POTW.
(5) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure, to
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, to constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, to create a toxic effect in the
receiving waters or the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth
in a Categorical Pretreatment Standard. A toxic pollutant shall
include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to
Section 307(a) of the Act.
(6) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry
into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
(7) Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other
product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the
POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or
disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under
Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations
affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control
Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method
being used.
(8) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES
permit or the receiving water its water quality standards.
(9) Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(10) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but
in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into
§ 172-36 MANHEIM CODE § 172-36
1:162
§ 172-37. Use of publicly owned treatment facilities.
the POTW which exceeds 40° C. (104° F.) unless the POTW
treatment plant is designed to accommodate such temperature.
(11) Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD,
COD, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which cause interference to the POTW. In no case shall a sludge
load have a flow rate or contain concentration or qualities of
pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes
more than five times the average twenty-four-hour concentration,
quantities or flow during normal operation.
(12) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by
the Superintendent in compliance with applicable state and federal
regulations.
(13) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance.
(14) Stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or
cooling water.
B. Borough determination of interference to POTW. When the Borough
determines that a user or significant user is contributing to the POTW
any of the above-enumerated substances in such amounts as to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, the Borough shall advise the
user of the impact of such contribution on the POTW and develop
effluent limitations for such user to correct the interference with the
POTW.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the Borough of Manheim or in any area under the jurisdiction of
said Borough any human or animal excrement, garbage or
objectionable waste.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
Borough or under the jurisdiction of the Borough any wastewater,
except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this article.
C. The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, business, industry or other purposes, situated
within the Borough and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in
which there is now located or may in the future be located publicly
owned treatment works of the Borough, is hereby required at the
owner's (owners') expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and
to connect such facilities directly with the publicly owned treatment
works in accordance with the provisions of this article within 90 days
§ 172-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-37
1:163
§ 172-38. Building sewers and connections.
after date of official notice to do so, provided that said publicly owned
treatment works is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.
A. No unauthorized persons shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb the POTW or any appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written user permit from the
Superintendent and/or the Borough as set forth in § 172-49B of this
article.
B. There shall be two classes of user permits: for residential and
commercial service and for service to establishments producing
significant waste. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the Borough. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
Superintendent and/or the Borough Authority. A permit and inspection
fee for a residential or commercial user permit and for a significant
waste user permit shall be paid to the Borough at the time the
application is filed. All user permit applications shall be reviewed and
approved in writing by the Borough prior to permit issuance. Permit
and inspection fees for user permits shall be in such amounts as may be
established from time to time by the Borough.
C. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation, connection and
maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The
owner(s) shall indemnify the Borough from any loss or damage that
may, directly or indirectly, be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.
D. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building.
E. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to
meet all requirements of this article.
F. The size, slope, alignment, materials or construction of a building sewer
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, joint
testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements
of the Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable ordinances of
the Borough. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification
thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall
apply.
G. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the POTW, wastewater
§ 172-37 MANHEIM CODE § 172-38
1:164
§ 172-39. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
Upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard
under Section 307 of the Clean Water Act for a particular industrial
subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations
imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall control,
and neither the Borough nor the Borough Authority shall be responsible
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
H. No person shall make connection of sump pumps, roof downspouts,
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to the POTW unless such connection is
approved in writing by the Superintendent for purposes of disposal of
polluted surface drainage.
I. The connection of the building sewer into the POTW shall conform to
the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or other
applicable rules and regulations set forth in appropriate specifications
of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such
connections shall be made gas-tight and watertight, and verified by
proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the Superintendent before installation.
J. The applicant for the user permit shall notify the Superintendent when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the POTW.
The connection to the POTW and testing shall be made under the
supervision of the Superintendent or his representative.
K. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Borough.
L. No excavation, construction or connection work shall be commenced
within a Borough Authority right-of-way until the owner, his agents and/
or independent contractor shall have first filed a bond in double the
amount of the cost of the work to be performed, as determined by the
Borough and Borough Authority, agreeing to indemnify and save
harmless the Borough Authority against any and all loss, damages,
costs and expenses which the Borough Authority may thereafter suffer,
incur, be put to or pay by reason of the failure to complete properly any
of the aforesaid excavation, construction or connection work. The term
"owner," as used herein, shall be deemed to include the owner or
owners in fee simple, lessees of the premises, occupiers of the
premises, and all other parties having a beneficial use or interest in the
premises and occupying the same with the consent and permission of
the owner of the fee title.
§ 172-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-39
1:165
to notify all affected users or significant users of the applicable reporting
requirements under 40 CFR 402.12. Each significant user shall be
responsible to notify the Borough Authority of changes to his status under
the federal, state or local regulations.
§ 172-40. Modification of Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards.
Where the Borough Authority's wastewater treatment system achieves
consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards,
the Borough Authority may apply to the approval authority for modifications
of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. "Consistent
removal" shall mean the reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration
of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less
toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system in
95% of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set
forth in Section 403.7(c)(2) of Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations,
Part 403, "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources
of Pollution," promulgated pursuant to the Act. If the requirements
contained in 40 CFR Part 403, § 403.7 are fulfilled, and prior approval from
the approval authority is obtained, the Borough may then modify pollutant
discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards.
§ 172-41. Specific pollutant limitations.
A. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of:
Parameter
Maximum Concentration from
Industrial Connections to
POTW
(mg/l)
Antimony 5.0
Arsenic 0.1
Barium 4.0
Boron 1.0
Cadmium 0.05
Chromium (hexavalent) 0.1
Chromium (total) 2.0
Copper 1.0
Cyanide 0.2
Iron 5.0
Lead 0.1
Manganese 1.0
Mercury 0.01
§ 172-39 MANHEIM CODE § 172-41
1:166
§ 172-42. State requirements.
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this article.
§ 172-43. Borough's right of revision.
The Borough reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent
limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal
system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in
§ 172-33A of this article.
§ 172-44. Excessive discharge.
No significant user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any
way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained
in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards or with any other
pollutant-specific limitation developed by the Borough, state or federal
agencies.
Parameter
Maximum Concentration from
Industrial Connections to
POTW
(mg/l)
Nickel 1.0
Phenol 0.5
Selenium 0.04
Silver 0.1
Tin 3.0
Vanadium 3.0
Zinc 4.0
Total toxic organics 1.0
Any single toxic organic 0.5
B. All wastewater entering the Borough's collection system shall be
pretreated to normal domestic levels unless otherwise stated in writing
by the Borough by way of the significant user permit. These levels shall
be:
BOD 250 mg/l
Suspended solids 250 mg/l
Ammonia nitrogen 25 mg/l as N
TKN 25 mg/l as N
§ 172-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-45
1:167
§ 172-45. Accidental discharge.
Each significant user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities
to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided
and maintained at the significant user's own cost and expense. Detailed
plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection
shall be submitted to the Borough for review and shall be approved by the
Borough before construction of the facility. All existing significant users
shall complete such a plan prior to being issued a permit. No significant
user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of
this article shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until
his accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the Borough.
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not
relieve the significant user from the responsibility to modify his facility,
as necessary, to meet the requirements of this article. In the case of an
accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the significant user to
immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification
shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume,
and corrective actions.
§ 172-46. Written report.
Within five days following an accidental discharge, the significant user shall
submit to the Borough a detailed written report describing the cause of
the discharge and the measures to be taken to mitigate any expense, loss,
damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage
to the POTW or aquatic life or any other damage to person or property.
Such report shall not relieve the user or significant user of any fines, civil
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other
applicable law.
§ 172-47. Notice to employees.
A notice shall be permanently posted on the significant user's bulletin board
or other prominent place, advising employees who to call in the event of a
dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may
cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedures.
§ 172-48. Fees.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of
costs from significant users of the Borough Authority's wastewater
disposal system for the implementation of the program established
herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the
Borough's Schedule of Charges and Fees.
B. Charges and fees.
(1) The Borough may adopt charges and fees which may include:
§ 172-45 MANHEIM CODE § 172-48
1:168
§ 172-49. Administration.
(a) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating
the Borough's pretreatment program;
(b) Fees for monitoring, inspections, and surveillance procedures;
(c) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
(d) Fees for permit applications;
(e) Fees for filing appeals;
(f) Fees for consistent removal by the Borough of pollutants
otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards; and
(g) Other fees the Borough may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
(2) These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and
are separate from all other fees chargeable by the Borough.
A. Wastewater dischargers. In the absence of a permit from the Borough,
it shall be unlawful to discharge to the publicly owned treatment works
any wastewater except as authorized in writing by the Borough in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. User permit.22
(1) All users proposing to connect to and contribute to the POTW shall
obtain a user permit before connecting to or contributing to the
POTW.
(2) There shall be two classes of user permits:
(a) For residential and commercial service; and
(b) For service to establishments producing significant wastes. In
either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the Borough. The permit application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
Superintendent and/or the Borough. A permit and inspection
fee for a residential or commercial user permit and for a
significant user permit shall be paid to the Borough at the time
the application is filed. All user permit applications shall be
reviewed and approved in writing by the Borough prior to
permit issuance. Permit and inspection fees for user permits
shall be in such amounts as may be established from time to
time by the Borough Council.
22.Editor's Note: User permit and significant user permit applications are available upon
request at the Manheim Municipal Building.
§ 172-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-49
1:169
(3) The Borough may:
(a) Impose conditions in any user permit for compliance with
monitoring and reporting requirements and compliance with
pollutant limitations, which conditions are deemed necessary
by the Borough to ensure continued compliance with
pretreatment standards and requirements.
(b) Modify existing permits to respond to changes in industrial
discharges, to alleviate problems at the POTW treatment plant,
to meet standard quality water standards, or to incorporate
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and
requirements.
(c) Prohibit the transfer of user permits when an industry is
acquired by a new owner.
(d) Revoke user permits in response to violations of permit
conditions.
(4) The Borough shall require a user of sewer services to provide
information needed to determine compliance with this article or
other applicable local, state, or federal laws, rules or regulations.
These requirements may include:
(a) Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume records over a
specified time period.
(b) Information on raw materials, processes, and products
affecting wastewater volume and quality.
(c) Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent
or other materials important to sewer use control.
(d) A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer
facility locations and all proposed sewer connections to these
facilities.
(e) Details of systems to prevent and control stormwater from
entering municipal sewers.
(f) Payment of all costs incurred for the information described in
this section shall be paid by the user of the sewer services in
addition to other charges and sewer rentals.
(5) All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastewaters to which reference is made in this article
shall be determined in accordance with procedures established by
the Administrator pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act, and
contained in 40 CFR Part 136, and amendments thereto, or with
any other test procedures approved by the Administrator. Sampling
shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by
the Administrator.
§ 172-49 MANHEIM CODE § 172-49
1:170
(6) The user shall be responsible for submitting all applicable county,
regional, state or federal permits or planning documents required
for approval of sewer connection.
C. Significant users.
(1) Permit.
(a) All significant users proposing to connect to or contribute to
the POTW shall obtain a significant user permit before
connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing
significant users connected to or contributing to the POTW
shall apply for a significant user permit within 30 days after the
effective date of this article.
(b) Whenever a user becomes subject to a new National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, but has not previously
submitted an application for a significant user permit as
required by Subsection B(2), the user shall apply for a
significant user permit within 180 days after the promulgation
of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
D. Permit application.23
(1) A user or significant user required to obtain a significant user
permit shall complete and file with the Borough an application in
the form prescribed by the Borough, accompanied by the required
fee. In support of the application, the significant user shall submit,
in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following
information:
(a) Name, address and location of the facility (if it is different from
the address).
(b) SIC number, according to the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget 1972, as
amended.
(c) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not
limited to those mentioned in § 172-36 of this article, shall be
determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.12(1); sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with procedures established by the
EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act, and contained in 40
CFR Part 136, as amended.
(d) Time and duration of contribution.
(e) Average daily and three-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variation, if any.
23.Editor's Note: User permit and significant user permit applications are available upon
request at the Manheim Municipal Building.
§ 172-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-49
1:171
(f) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and
appurtenances by the size, location and elevation.
(g) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be
discharged.
(h) The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by any Borough, state or federal
pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or
not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis, and if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required for the significant user to meet applicable
pretreatment standards.
(i) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to
meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by
which the significant user will provide such additional
pretreatment. The completion data in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to
this schedule:
[1] The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment facilities required for the
significant user to meet the applicable pretreatment
standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing
permit for major components, commencing construction,
completing construction, etc.).
[2] No increment referred to in § 172-49D(1)(i)[1] above shall
exceed nine months.
[3] No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule
and the final date for compliance, the significant user shall
submit a progress report to the Superintendent, including,
as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress to be met on such date, and if not,
the date on which it expects to comply with this increment
of progress; the reason for delay; and the steps being
taken by the significant user to return the construction to
the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine
months elapse between such progress reports to the
Superintendent.
(j) Each product produced, by type, amount, process or processes,
and rate of production.
§ 172-49 MANHEIM CODE § 172-49
1:172
(k) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
(l) Number and type of employees, the hours of plant operation,
and proposed or actual hours of pretreatment system
operation.
(m) Any other information as may be deemed by the Borough to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application.
(2) The Borough will evaluate the data furnished by the significant
user and may require additional information. After evaluation and
acceptance of the data furnished, the Borough may issue a
significant user permit subject to terms and conditions provided
herein.
E. Permit modifications. Upon the promulgation of a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, the significant user permit of significant users
subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with
such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard.
F. Permit conditions.
(1) Significant user permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions
of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges,
and fees established by the Borough. The permit may contain the
following:
(a) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer.
(b) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents
and characteristics.
(c) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
(d) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities.
(e) Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule.
(f) Compliance schedules.
(g) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports (see § 172-50, Pretreatment).
(h) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records
relating to wastewater discharge for a minimum of three years,
and in the case of litigation, for a minimum of three years from
the termination or settlement of said litigation.
§ 172-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-49
1:173
(i) Requirements for notification of the Borough of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial
change in the volume or character of the wastewater
constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment
system.
(j) Requirements for notification of sludge discharges in
accordance with § 172-52.24
(k) Other conditions as deemed necessary by the Borough to
ensure compliance with this article.
(2) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge for a minimum of three years, and in the
case of litigation, a minimum of three years from the termination or
settlement of said litigation.
G. Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not
to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a
year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The significant user
shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the
expiration of his significant user's existing permit. The terms and
conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the Borough
during the term of the permit, as limitations or requirements as
identified in § 172-36 are modified or other just cause exists. The
significant user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit
at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or
new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule
for compliance.
H. Permit transfer. Significant user permits are issued to a specific
significant user for a specific operation. A significant user permit shall
not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new significant
user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the
written approval of the Borough. Any succeeding owner shall also
comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit.
I. Reporting requirements in permits.
(1) Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards, or in the case
of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW, any significant user subject to
pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
Borough a report indicating the nature and concentration of all
pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are
limited by pretreatment standards or requirements. The report
shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, what
additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 172-49 MANHEIM CODE § 172-49
1:174
significant user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an
authorized representative of the significant user and certified by a
qualified professional engineer registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(2) Periodic compliance reports.
(a) Any significant user subject to a pretreatment standard after
the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or in the
case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge to
the POTW, shall submit to the Superintendent during the
months of June and December, unless required more frequently
in the pretreatment standards or by the Superintendent, a
report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in
the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards.
In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flow
which, during the reporting period, exceeded the average daily
flow allowed in the permit. At the discretion of the
Superintendent and in consideration of such factors as local
high or low flow rates, holiday, budget cycles, etc., the
Superintendent may agree to alter the months during which
the above reports are to be submitted.
(b) The Borough may impose mass limitations on significant users
which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements, or in other cases where the
imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases,
the report required by § 172-49I(2)(a) above shall indicate the
mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the
effluent of the significant user. These reports shall contain the
results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the
flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass
where requested by the Borough, of pollutants contained
therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment
standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be as prescribed
in the applicable pretreatment standard or by the Borough. All
analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by 40 CFR Part 136, and amendments thereto, or
with any other test procedures approved by the EPA. Sampling
shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
approved by the EPA.
J. Monitoring facilities. The Borough Authority shall inspect the facilities
of any industrial user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is
being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or
occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall
allow the Borough Authority or its representative(s) ready access
during all working hours to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, records examination, including the copying
thereof, or in the performance of any of his duties. The Borough
§ 172-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-49
1:175
§ 172-50. Pretreatment.
§ 172-51. Confidential information.
Authority and the EPA shall have the right to set up on the industrial
user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling,
inspection, compliance monitoring, and/or metering operations. Where
an industrial user has security measures in force which would require
proper identification and clearance before entry into his premises, the
industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with his security
guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel
from the Borough Authority and the EPA will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing their specific
responsibilities.
A. Users and significant users shall provide necessary wastewater
treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve
compliance with all Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards within
the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment
regulations. Any equipment or facilities required to pretreat
wastewater to a level acceptable to the Borough shall be provided,
operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing
the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted
to the Borough for review and shall be acceptable to the Borough
before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and
operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
effluent acceptable to the Borough under the provisions of this article.
Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported to and be accepted by the Borough prior to
the user's or significant user's initiation of the changes.
B. Annually, the Borough shall publish in a newspaper of general
circulation a list of the users and significant users who failed to comply
with any pretreatment requirements or standards at least once during
the previous 12 months. The notification shall also summarize any
enforcement actions taken by the Borough against the users and
significant users during the same 12 months. Reference: 40 CFR
403.8(f)(2)(VII).
C. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be
made available to officials of the Borough, the EPA or the approval
authority upon request.
A. Information and data on a user or significant user obtained from
reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring
programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public or other
governmental agency without restriction unless the user or significant
user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the Borough and/or Borough Authority that the release of such
§ 172-49 MANHEIM CODE § 172-51
1:176
§ 172-52. Enforcement.
information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user or
significant user.
B. When requested by the person furnishing the report, the portions of the
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
related to this article, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit, state disposal permit, and/or the pretreatment
programs. Any such portions of a report shall be also available for use
by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential
information.
A. Notification of violation. Whenever the Borough finds that any user or
significant user has violated or is violating this article, his user permit
or significant user permit, or any prohibition, limitation or
requirements contained herein, the Borough may serve upon such
person a written notice, stating the nature of the violation. Within 30
days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction
thereof shall be submitted to the Borough by the user or significant
user.
B. Harmful contributions.
(1) The Borough may suspend a user permit or a significant user
permit whenever such suspension is necessary in the opinion of the
Borough in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment
to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes
interference to the POTW, or causes the Borough to violate any
condition of its NPDES permit.
(2) Any person notified of a suspension of his permit shall immediately
stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure of the
person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Borough shall take steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any
individuals. The Borough shall reinstate the permit upon proof of
the elimination of the noncomplying discharge by the user or
significant user, payment of any damages, fines, penalties or costs
associated with the discharge, and the submission of a detailed
written statement describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence.
§ 172-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-52
1:177
C. Revocation of permit. Any user or significant user is subject to
revocation of a permit granted hereunder for violation of applicable
state and federal regulations or by reason of the commission of any of
the following acts:
(1) Failure to report factually on discharge wastewater constituents
and characteristics.
(2) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
constituents and characteristics.
(3) Refusal to permit reasonable access to the premises for inspection
and monitoring.
(4) Violation of the conditions of the permit.
D. Appeal. A user, upon receipt of notification of suspension or revocation
of a user permit or significant user permit, may appeal the decision in
writing to the Council of Manheim Borough with a statement of reasons
therefor within 10 days of the notice. Such an appeal shall not act as
supersedeas.
E. Notice of hearing. Thereafter, upon notice in writing given to the permit
holder or any agent or officer thereof at least five days prior to the time
fixed therefor, Council shall convene and conduct a hearing on the
propriety or lack thereof of the notice of suspension or revocation. The
cost of the stenographic transcript of such a proceeding shall be borne
by the appellant, who shall pay a filing fee of $300 to cover the cost
thereof.
F. Method of decision. The findings and determinations of the Council
shall be in writing and shall be mailed to the owner or to his duly
authorized representative within 48 hours of the hearing, with a
certified copy thereof to be filed with the Borough Manager who
originally served the notice of suspension or revocation. The
determination shall be binding both upon the Borough Manager and all
parties in interest.
G. Action following appeal decision. If the decision of the Council sustains
the notice of suspension or revocation of permit, the user shall be given
10 days' notice of the new date of suspension or revocation by the
Borough Manager.
H. Legal action. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes, or
other wastes into the Borough Authority's wastewater disposal system
contrary to the provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment
requirements, or any order of the Borough and/or the Borough
Authority or violates any other provision of this article, the Borough
Authority and/or the Borough Attorney(s) may commence an action for
appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 172-52 MANHEIM CODE § 172-53
1:178
§ 172-53. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No.
524]
A. Prosecution and fines. Any user or significant user alleged to have
violated an order of the Borough or to have failed to comply with any
provision of this article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits
issued hereunder shall be prosecuted before a Magisterial District
Judge and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each offense and, upon default of
said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue to occur shall be
deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
B. Civil remedies. In addition to prosecution as set forth in Subsection A
hereof, the Borough may recover civil penalties of $1,000 per day per
violation, damages, costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and
costs of court reporters' transcripts, as well as other expenses of
litigation made necessary as the result of violations of this article or the
orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, to be
recovered in an action at law instituted by the Council against the user
or significant user alleged to have been responsible therefor.
C. Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false
statements, representations or certification in any application, record,
report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained
pursuant to this article or wastewater contribution permit, or who
falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device or method required under this article, shall be subject to
prosecution or other legal action as provided herein or as otherwise
may be provided by law.
§ 172-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-53
1:179
Chapter 176
SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS
§ 176-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Sex Offender
Residency Restriction Ordinance."
§ 176-2. Intent and purpose.
The Pennsylvania State Legislature adopted certain requirements for the
registration of adult sexual offenders, commonly known as Megan's Law
II, as set forth at 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 9791 et seq. Megan's Law II requires
that persons convicted of various offenses and persons adjudicated sexually
violent predators must register with the Pennsylvania State Police for
periods not less than 10 years, which registration procedure is set forth
in the statute. In its legislative findings, Megan's Law II recognizes that
these sexually violent predators pose a high risk of engaging in further
offenses, even after being released from incarceration or commitment, and
that protection of the public from this type of offender is a paramount
governmental interest. Borough Council wants to help insure the safety
of its citizens most susceptible to becoming crime victims by creating
residency requirements for certain types of criminal offenders. Borough
Council believes that it is in the best interest of the Borough, its residents
and the general public to adopt regulations regarding convicted sexual
offenders to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, including
Borough residents and especially minors.
§ 176-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHILD-CARE FACILITY — A licensed day-care center, child-care facility or
any other child-care service facility exempt from licensing pursuant to the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A building and its related facilities used for
educational, social, cultural or recreational activities, which is operated by
a not-for-profit entity.
PUBLIC PARK OR RECREATIONAL FACILITY — Any land, tract of land, or
facility used for passive or active recreation, including, but not limited to,
any playground, park, skate park, athletic field, swimming pool, and any
other facility owned or operated by the Borough or any other governmental
agency or not-for-profit organization, including Lancaster County or the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
RESIDENCE — A location where an individual resides or is domiciled or
intends to be domiciled for 30 consecutive days or more during a calendar
year.
§ 172-53 MANHEIM CODE § 176-3
1:180
SCHOOL — Any educational building or facility, whether public or private,
that provides educational services, including secondary schools, trade or
professional institutions or institutions of higher education.
SEX OFFENDER — Any individual required to register under 42 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 9795.1(a), (b)(l) or (2).
§ 176-4. Sex offender residency restrictions established.
§ 176-5. Exceptions to residency restrictions.
This chapter shall not apply to any person or sex offender who has:
§ 176-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
before a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to a term of imprisonment
of not more than 90 days and shall be fined not more than $1,000 for each
violation, plus the cost of prosecution and reasonable attorneys' fees.
§ 176-7. Publication.
The Borough Manager shall prepare and place at the Borough Zoning Office
a map of the Borough of Manheim depicting the areas where sex offenders
are restricted from residing pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
Chapter 184
SOLID WASTE
A. It shall be unlawful for any sex offender or other person who has been
convicted of a violation which requires registration in another
jurisdiction to reside, lodge, abide or live within 500 feet of any school,
child-care facility, community center, public park, recreational facility
or library in the Borough.
B. For the purpose of determining this minimum distance separation, the
requirements shall be measured by following a straight line from the
outer property line of the residence of the sex offender to the nearest
outer property line of a school, child-care facility, community center,
public park, recreational facility or library.
A. Established a residence at a location that may be in violation of § 205-4
above prior to the date of adoption of this chapter;
B. Established a residence not in violation of § 205-4 above but which
becomes in violation of § 205-4 because a school, child-care facility,
community center, park, recreational facility or library is established
subsequent to the establishment of the sex offender's residence; or
C. Established a residence that is in violation of § 205-4 above prior to any
obligation of the sex offender to register under Megan's Law II.
§ 176-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-7
1:181

ARTICLE I
Collection and Disposal
§ 184-1. Definitions.
Any term, if not defined in this article, shall have the meaning as from
time to time set forth in the Lancaster County Solid Waste Management
Authority (LCSWMA) Rules and Regulations. In addition, as used in this
article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ACT 97 — The Solid Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380,
No. 97, as now or hereafter amended.25
ACT 101 — The municipal waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act, Act of July 28,1988, P.L. 528, No. 101, as now or hereafter amended.26
ALUMINUM — All food and beverage cans made of the light-in-weight,
ductile and malleable metallic substance or element commonly known as
"aluminum." This description excludes aluminum foil, trays, plates and
miscellaneous aluminum products.
BATTERY BAGS — Bags which LCSWMA makes available to generators of
municipal waste and which shall be used as disposal containers for batteries
which are generated in households.
COMMENCEMENT DATE — October 1, 1991, the date upon which the
Borough's mandatory recycling program and the contract collection
services began.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored by public or private
agencies or individuals, including, but not limited to, fairs, bazaars, socials,
picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more individuals
per day.
CONTRACT — The agreement between the Borough of Manheim and a
licensed hauler under which collection services are to be provided to units
of occupancy for contract waste and for recyclable materials other than
leaves.
CONTRACT WASTE — Those portions of regulated municipal waste which
are to be collected and disposed of under the contract. Contract waste
consists exclusively of refuse and oversized refuse items.
CONTRACTOR — The person providing municipal contract waste and
designated recyclable materials collection services under the municipal
contract.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Unbleached, unwaxed kraft paper that is
formed into layers with a fluted medium and manufactured into shipping
boxes and related products.
25.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
26.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 184-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-1
1:183
CURBSIDE — The correct location for the placement of refuse containers
and recycling containers for the purpose of collection by the contractor,
which shall be:
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those source-separated
recyclable materials designated in § 184-11 of this article.
EXISTING CONTRACT — Any contract for the storage, collection,
transportation, processing or disposal of regulated municipal waste or
recyclable materials generated or located within the Borough, which:
EXTRA REFUSE CONTAINERS — Refuse containers which are in excess of
the three-refuse-containers-per-collection-site limit.
EXTRA SERVICE TAG — A label which must be affixed to tires, white goods,
oversized refuse items, yard waste and extra refuse containers in order for
such items to be collected by the contractor.
FACILITY — Any specific site designated by LCSWMA (or approved by
LCSWMA) as the specific place or site to which solid waste or sourceseparated
recyclable materials, or any portion of solid waste or sourceseparated
recyclable materials, must or may be delivered; or in the absence
of a specific site being designated by LCSWMA, any approved site for
the delivery of any category of solid waste or source-separated recyclable
materials.
GENERATOR — A person who produces or creates any solid waste.
HAZARDOUS WASTE —
A. Adjacent to the residential unit; and
No more than five feet from the public street used by collection
vehicles.
B.
A. Was legally entered into prior to the effective date of this article; and
B. When entered into was legally enforceable.
Garbage, refuse, sludge from an industrial or other wastewater
treatment plant, sludge from a water supply treatment plant or air
pollution control facility and other discarded material, including solid,
liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from
municipal, commercial, industrial, institutional, mining or agricultural
operations, and from community activities, or a combination of these
factors, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics may:
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or
morbidity in either an individual or the total population; or
(1)
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of or otherwise managed.
(2)
A.
§ 184-1 MANHEIM CODE § 184-1
1:184
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — A portion of municipal waste that
would be considered hazardous under Act 97 but for the fact that it is
produced in quantities smaller than those regulated as hazardous waste
under Act 97 and is generated by persons not otherwise covered as
hazardous waste generators by Act 97. Household hazardous waste
includes the following materials and other materials of a similar nature:
LCSWMA — Lancaster County Solid Waste Management Authority, a
municipal authority organized and existing under the Municipal Authorities
Act of 1945, as amended.27
LCSWMA FACILITY — Any facility owned or operated by or on behalf of
LCSWMA.
The term does not include coal refuse as defined in the Coal Refuse
Disposal Control Act (52 U.S.C.A. §§ 30.51-30.62), treatment sludges
from coal mine drainage treatment plants, disposal of which is being
carried on under and in compliance with a valid permit issued under
the Clean Streams Law (35 P.S. §§ 691.1691.1001), solid or dissolved
material in domestic sewage, solid dissolved materials in irrigation
return flows, industrial discharges which are point sources subject to
permits under Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
(33 U.S.C.A. § 1342), or source, special nuclear, or by-product material
as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C.A. §§ 2011-2394).
B.
A. Antifreeze;
B. Batteries;
C. Chlorinated hydrocarbons;
D. Fluorescent light bulbs and other mercury-containing devices;
E. Gasoline and kerosene;
F. Grease and rust solvents;
G. Oven, toilet and drain cleaners;
H. Paints, rust preventatives, stains and wood preservatives;
Pesticides, fungicides, herbicides, insecticides, rodenticides, roach and
ant killers;
I.
J. Photographic and pool chemicals;
K. Thinners, solvents and furniture strippers;
L. Transmission and brake fluids;
M. Used oil or other hydrocarbon based lubricants; and
N. Wood, metal, rug and upholstery cleaners and polishes.
27.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 184-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-1
1:185
LICENSED HAULER — A person who is in possession of all pertinent
permits and licenses which may be required by the Borough and LCSWMA
for the collection, transportation, storage or disposal of solid waste or
recyclable materials.
MANIFEST — A form supplied by LCSWMA to be completed and signed
by each Person who collects or transports solid waste or source-separated
recyclable materials and which specifies, inter alia, the source, type,
quantity and delivery point for the solid waste or source-separated
recyclable materials, the applicable license number and other pertinent
information.
MULTIOCCUPANCY PROPERTY — A property with five or more units of
occupancy.
MUNICIPAL CONTRACT — The agreement between the Borough and a
permitted collector under which collection services are to be provided for
municipal contract waste and for designated recyclable materials.
MUNICIPAL CONTRACT WASTE — Those portions of Regulated municipal
waste which are to be collected and disposed of under the municipal
contract. Municipal contract waste consists exclusively of refuse and
oversized refuse items.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Manheim.
MUNICIPALITY'S POLICIES AND PROCEDURES — The rules and
regulations adopted and revised from time to time by the Borough which
govern and pertain to the Borough's recycling program and the collection,
storage or transportation of regulated municipal waste within the Borough.
NONPROCESSABLE WASTE — Nonprocessable waste is a portion of
municipal waste consisting of materials which cannot be handled by
LCSWMA's normal processing or disposal methods. Nonprocessable waste
includes items greater than six feet in any dimension, such as mattresses,
large furniture and recreational vehicles. Nonprocessable waste (oversized)
may consist of large auto parts, machines, and any other items deemed
appropriate by LCSWMA.
NONRESIDENTIAL UNITS — All commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments, all community activities and all farms, excluding residential
units.
OPEN BURNING — A fire, the air contaminants from which are emitted
directly into the outdoor atmosphere and not directed thereto through a
flue.
OVERSIZED REFUSE ITEMS — Refuse which will not fit into refuse
containers but which is not bulky waste, including small furniture, carpet,
and the like, but excluding tires and white goods.
PERMITTED COLLECTOR — A person who is in possession of all pertinent
permits and licenses which may be required by the municipality and
LCSWMA, for the collection, storage or disposal of solid waste or recyclable
materials.
§ 184-1 MANHEIM CODE § 184-1
1:186
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
governmental entity or agency or any other legal entity whatsoever which
is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PLASTICS — Recyclable plastics consist of containers with a neck, which
are primarily #1 PETE (such as soda and water bottles) and #2 HDPE (such
as milk, spring water, and detergent bottles).
PROPERTY — An individually deeded parcel with its own tax parcel ID
number.
PUTRESCIBLE WASTE — A portion of municipal waste consisting of organic
waste materials which due to biological decomposition are, or have a
tendency to be, rotten, foul, or odorous, including dead animals and spoiled
foods, but not including sludge.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Any material which would be regulated
municipal waste but for source separation and which will be processed into
raw materials or products which are beneficially reused.
RECYCLING — The separation, collection, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, yard waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed of or processed as waste; or the mechanized
separation and treatment of solid waste and creation and recovery of
reusable materials or energy.
RECYCLING CONTAINER — For residential units, the term "recycling
container" shall refer to a container purchased from the Borough or a
container substantially consistent with and similar to such container. For
multioccupancy units and nonresidential units, the term "recycling
container" shall refer to a receptacle which is constructed of plastic, metal
or fiberglass and has handles of adequate strength for lifting.
REFUSE — All regulated municipal waste, except the following categories
of solid waste:
A. Construction/demolition waste.
B. Bulky waste.
C. Putrescible waste.
D. Uncompactible waste.
E. Special handling waste.
F. Household hazardous waste.
G. Source-separated recyclable materials.
H. Unacceptable waste.
I. Oversized refuse items.
§ 184-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-1
1:187
REFUSE CONTAINER —
REGULATED MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any solid waste generated or collected
within the Borough which is garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities,
and any sludge which is not residual or hazardous waste from a municipal,
commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater
treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term does not include
designated recyclable materials or unacceptable waste.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Any single-family detached or, semidetached
dwelling, townhouse dwelling or a dwelling unit within a multiple-family
dwelling.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material or
other Waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations and
any sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility or air pollution control
facility, provided that it is not hazardous. The term does not include coal
refuse as defined in the Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act28 or treatment
sludges from coal mine drainage treatment plants, disposal of which is
being carried on under and in compliance with a valid permit issued under
the Clean Streams Law.29
SCAVENGING — The uncontrolled or unauthorized removal of recyclable
materials from the curbside.
SINGLE STREAM — A system where certain recyclable materials
acceptable at a LCSWMA Facility, consisting of corrugated cardboard,
plastic bottles and jugs with a neck, metal food and beverage cans, and
glass bottles and jars, as determined by LCSWMA's rules and regulations,
are collected and processed together.
A receptacle which is constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass, having
handles of adequate strength for lifting and having a tight-fitting lid
capable of preventing entrance into the container by vectors; or
A.
A polyethylene bag which:
(1) Is specifically designed for storage and collection;
Is protected against animal damage and overloading so as to
prevent littering or attraction of insects or rodents; and
(2)
Has a holding strength capable of withstanding normal stresses
until it is collected. With respect to residential units, the weight of
a refuse container and is contents shall not exceed 30 pounds nor
shall its capacity exceed 32 gallons.
(3)
B.
28.Editor's Note: 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq.
29.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 184-1 MANHEIM CODE § 184-1
1:188
SOLID WASTE OR WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to
municipal, residual, or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid
or contained gaseous materials.
SOURCE-SEPARATE or SOURCE SEPARATION — The process of separating
or the separation of recyclable materials from other solid waste at the
location where generated for the purpose of recycling.
STEEL AND BIMETALLIC CANS — The ferrous metal food or beverage
containers commonly known as "tin cans."
TIRES — Any pneumatic rubber automobile, truck, or farm implement tire.
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE — The following types of solid waste are
unacceptable waste unless approved by LCSWMA on a case-by-case basis:
WHITE GOODS — A portion of regulated municipal waste consisting of
large appliances, including the following: clothes washers, clothes dryers,
dishwashers, freezers, refrigerators, stoves, ovens, hot water heaters, air
conditioners, dehumidifiers, furnaces and electrical heaters.
YARD WASTE — All garden residues, glass clippings, shrubbery and tree
prunings less than 1/4 inch in diameter, and similar material.
§ 184-2. Mandatory recycling.
All persons and occupiers of units of occupancy within the Borough shall
source-separate designated recyclable materials.
§ 184-3. Collection, transportation and disposal.
Each person who owns or occupies a unit of occupancy, multioccupancy
unit or nonresidential unit within the Borough shall ensure that regulated
municipal waste and designated recyclable materials generated at such
residential unit, multioccupancy unit or nonresidential unit are:
A. Chemotherapeutic waste;
Drums, barrels, buckets and paint cans unless lids have been removed
and interiors are cleaned and free of any residue;
B.
C. Explosives and ordinance materials;
Gas cylinders, unless empty and delivered separate from other solid
waste;
D.
E. Hazardous waste;
F. Infectious/pathological waste; and
G. Radioactive materials.
A. Source-separated; and
§ 184-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-3
1:189
§ 184-4. Residential, nonresidential, and multioccupancy
properties.
B. Collected, transported and disposed of in accordance with this article,
the Borough's policies and procedures, and the LCSWMA rules and
regulations.
A. For properties with four or less residential units of occupancy and no
nonresidential units of occupancy. Such properties will receive services
under the Borough's municipal contract for municipal contract waste
collection and disposal. Each person who owns or occupies a unit of
occupancy shall prepare designated recyclable materials and contract
waste for collection in accordance with the Borough's policies and
procedures. With respect to regulated municipal waste which is not
contract waste, persons who own or occupy such units of occupancy
may elect to provide proper collection and transportation by either:
themselves transporting such materials to a facility; or utilizing a
licensed hauler to collect and transport such materials to a facility.
B. For properties with at least one nonresidential unit of occupancy, but
that do not have more than four total units of occupancy (residential or
nonresidential). Such properties will receive services under the
Borough's municipal contract for municipal contract waste collection
and disposal unless the owner of such property requests, in writing,
approval to opt out of these services under the municipal contract,
provided that all units of occupancy on said property shall be included
in the request. Requests shall be made prior to October 1 of each year.
Request shall include documentation from the permitted collector
contracted by the person requesting such approval that the permitted
collector has been contracted by the person responsible for such
property.
(1) For such properties which have been approved to not be part of the
municipal contract. Each person who owns or occupies such a
property shall provide proper collection and disposal for regulated
municipal waste and designated recyclable materials by utilizing a
permitted collector to collect and deliver such materials to a
facility, and shall provide documentation from the selected
permitted collector that the permitted collector has been
contracted by the person responsible for such property. This
documentation shall be submitted annually or at such time that a
change in permitted collector occurs. Additionally, each such
person shall provide recycling containers at easily accessible
locations for source separation of designated recyclable materials;
provide written instructions to all persons occupying each unit of
occupancy to ensure that all designated recyclable materials are
source separated, and; provide collection and delivery of source
separated designated recyclable materials at a frequency of at least
once per week. Frequencies of once per every two weeks may be
approved by the Borough Manager if sufficient documentation is
§ 184-3 MANHEIM CODE § 184-4
1:190
§ 184-5. Designated recycling materials.
provided to demonstrate that such frequency will not create a
nuisance, and such approval may be revoked at any time should
conditions warrant.
(2) For such properties which will be a part of the municipal contract:
Collection services for contract waste and for designated
recyclable materials shall be provided to the units of occupancy by
the contractor. Each person who owns or occupies a unit of
occupancy shall prepare designated recyclable materials and
contract waste for collection in accordance with the Borough's
policies and procedures. With respect to regulated municipal waste
which is not contract waste, persons who own or occupy units of
occupancy may elect to provide proper collection and
transportation by either themselves transporting such materials to
a facility; or utilizing a licensed hauler to collect and transport such
materials to a facility.
C. For properties defined herein as multioccupancy properties: Such
properties will not receive services under the Borough's municipal
contract for municipal contract waste collection and disposal. Each
person who owns or occupies such a property shall provide proper
collection and disposal for regulated municipal waste and designated
recyclable materials by utilizing a permitted collector to collect and
deliver such materials to a facility, and shall provide documentation
from the selected permitted collector that the permitted collector has
been contracted by the person responsible for such property. This
documentation shall be submitted annually or at such time that a
change in permitted collector occurs. Additionally, each such person
shall provide recycling containers at easily accessible locations for
source separation of designated recyclable materials; provide written
instructions to all persons occupying each unit of occupancy to ensure
that all designated recyclable materials are source separated, and;
provide collection and delivery of source separated designated
recyclable materials at a frequency of at least once per week.
Frequencies of once per every two weeks may be approved by the
Borough Manager if sufficient documentation is provided to
demonstrate that such frequency will not create a nuisance, and such
approval may be revoked at any time should conditions warrant.
A. Each person who owns or occupies a residential unit shall source
separate corrugated cardboard, plastic bottles and jugs with a neck,
metal food and beverage cans, and glass bottles and jars for the
purpose of single stream recycling. Yard waste, tires, and white goods
must also be source separated for recycling and require separate
collection and an additional service tag per the Borough's adopted fee
schedule. Materials defined as recyclable materials are designated
from time to time, per LCSWMA's rules and regulations.
§ 184-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-5
1:191
§ 184-6. Approved haulers.
B. Each person who owns or occupies a multioccupancy property shall
source separate corrugated cardboard, plastic Bottles and jugs with a
neck, metal food and beverage cans, and glass bottles and jugs for the
purpose of single stream recycling. Yard waste, tires, and white goods
must also be source separated for recycling and require separate
collection and an additional service tag per the Borough's adopted fee
schedule. Materials defined as recyclable materials are designated
from time to time, per LCSWMA's rules and regulations.
C. Each person who owns or occupies a nonresidential unit shall source
separate corrugated cardboard, plastic bottles and jugs with a Neck,
metal food and beverage cans, and glass bottles and jars for the
purpose of single stream recycling. Yard waste, tires, and white goods
must also be source separated for recycling and may require separate
collection and/or an additional service tag per the Borough's adopted
fee schedule. Materials defined as recyclable materials are designated
from time to time, per LCSWMA's rules and regulations.
A. With respect to municipal contract waste and designated recyclable
materials, no person other than the contractor shall collect, transport,
store, process or dispose of such contract waste. With respect to
regulated municipal waste other than municipal contract waste which
is generated at residential units of occupancy and regulated municipal
waste or designated recyclable materials other than leaves, which are
generated at multioccupancy properties or nonresidential units, no
person other than a licensed hauler shall collect, transport, store,
process or dispose of such waste. Each permitted collector that collects
or transports Regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable
materials generated in any unit of occupancy shall complete monthly
LCSWMA Manifests reporting the amount of regulated municipal waste
and designated recyclable material collected in the Borough.
B. No person who generates, owns or possesses designated recyclable
materials or regulated municipal waste shall, by contract for collection
services or otherwise, cause, permit or assist in the collection,
transportation, storage, processing or disposal of such Waste by any
person other than the contractor, with respect to municipal contract
waste or designated recyclable materials including leaves generated at
units of occupancy; and a permitted collector, with respect at regulated
municipal waste other than municipal contract waste generated at
residential units of occupancy and regulated municipal waste or
designated recyclable materials other than leaves generated at
multioccupancy properties or at nonresidential units.
C. No permitted collector who collects, transports or disposes of
designated recyclable materials or regulated municipal waste shall, by
municipal contract for such services or otherwise, cause, permit or
assist in the storage, collection, transportation, processing or disposal
of designated recyclable materials in a manner which treats such
§ 184-5 MANHEIM CODE § 184-6
1:192
§ 184-7. Illegal dumping and open burning.
§ 184-8. Charges for service fees.
Fees for services provided by the Borough shall be charged to the owners
of all units of occupancy, as defined in this article, which will receive
municipal contract services based on the provisions of § 184-3 and based
on fees established from time to time by a resolution adopted by the
Borough Council and published as part of the Borough's Schedule of Fees.
The Borough's policies and procedures may provide for the amount of
annual fees, dates fees are due, interest and penalties for late payments
and provisions for municipal liens and attorney's fees for unpaid collection
service fees. If any service charge levied and assessed pursuant to this
article shall not be paid when due, a penalty of up to 18% of the amount of
the service charge due and unpaid shall be added thereto and collected. The
penalty stated herein may be changed from time to time by a resolution of
Borough Council and published as part of the Borough's Borough Schedule
of Fees.
materials as regulated municipal waste or which is otherwise
inconsistent with source reparation or recycling. Any delivery of
designated recyclable materials to the LCSWMA facility in accordance
with the LCSWMA rules and regulations shall be deemed to satisfy the
requirements of this § 184-6C.
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 184-6A and B above, any person
who occupies a unit of occupancy may transport to a facility the
regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable materials which
were generated at such person's residence.
E. All regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable materials
generated or collected in the Borough shall be transported directly to a
facility in accordance with the LCSWMA rules and regulations and
without any intervening transfer, unloading, processing, sorting,
salvaging, scavenging or reuse of any portion of any load of such
regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable materials from
the time of its collection until the time of its delivery to the facility.
F. Each permitted collector shall collect and deliver, separately to a
LCSWMA facility battery drop-off location, all battery bags placed at
curbside by residential units.
A. No person shall store, process or dispose of any regulated municipal
waste or designated recyclable materials except at a facility.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, yard waste may be composted in
accordance with the Borough's guidelines on the property on which
such waste was generated.
B. No person shall process or dispose of any regulated municipal waste or
designated recyclable materials, including yard waste and leaves,
through open burning.
§ 184-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-9
1:193
§ 184-9. Scavenging.
From the time of placement for collection of any designated recyclable
materials, all such designated recyclable materials shall be the property of
the generator or permitted collector who has contracted to provide on-site
collection, as provided in the municipal contract. It shall be a violation of
this article for any person, other than such permitted collector, to collect
or pickup, or cause to be collected or picked up, any such designated
recyclable materials.
§ 184-10. Existing contracts.
§ 184-11. Authorization.
The Borough shall have the power to issue the Borough's policies and
procedures governing all matters set forth in this article and any other
related matters be necessary or convenient by the Borough. The Borough's
policies and procedures shall be effective when issued in writing and signed
by the Manager of the Borough. The Borough shall have the power to
establish record and reporting requirements, and standards and procedures
for the issuance, administration and revocation of licenses, as deemed
necessary, including without limitation application procedures and
standards and conditions for licenses, the fixing of a monetary bond, with
or without surety, to secure the compliance by any permitted collector with
any such requirements, standards or procedures, and any other matters
A. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair the obligations of
any existing contract.
B. No renewal or modification of any existing contract and no new
contract for the storage, collection, transportation, processing or
disposal of regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable
materials shall be entered into after the effective date of this article
unless such renewal or modification or new contract shall conform to
the requirements of this article and the Borough's policies and
procedures.
C. No contract which is entered into, renewed, extended, modified or
assigned after the effective date of this § 184-10 shall provide for
collection services to be performed after the commencement date for
contract waste or designated recyclable materials generated at
residential units. This provision shall not apply to the contract between
the Borough and the contractor. With respect to any contract which
violates this § 184-10C, such contract shall be deemed void, and the
hauler that is a party to such contract:
(1) Shall reimburse to the applicable residential units any funds which
have been paid for such on-site collection services; and
(2) Shall not collect or attempt to collect any funds from such on-site
collection services.
§ 184-9 MANHEIM CODE § 184-11
1:194
deemed necessary or convenient by the Borough. In the event of suspension
or revocation of any license which is issued by the Borough or LCSWMA,
the person whose collection permit is suspended or revoked shall refund to
each customer any prepaid fees.
§ 184-12. Unlawful activity.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or cause or permit or assist in
the violation of any provision of this article or any provision of the Borough's
policies and procedures. All unlawful conduct shall also constitute a public
nuisance.
§ 184-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article or any provision of the
Borough's policies and procedures shall, upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding, be sentenced for each violation to pay a fine of
not more than $1,000 court costs and, in default of the payment of such
fine, costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings to the extent allowed by law for the punishment
of a summary offense. Each violation of any provision of this article or of any
provision of the Borough's policies and procedures and each day that such
a violation shall exist shall constitute a separate violation and offense.
§ 184-14. Persons liable.
For purposes of the obligations established by this article or the Borough's
policies and procedures, and for purposes of any fine, penalty, imprisonment
or other sanction, the terms "person," "residential unit," "multioccupancy
property" and "nonresidential unit" shall:
§ 184-15. Injunctive relief.
In addition to any other remedy provided in this article, the Borough may
institute proceedings to restrain any violation of, or to require compliance
with, this article and/or the Borough's policies and procedures.
A. Include officers and directors of any corporation or other legal entity
having officers and directors; and
B. Refer to and impose joint and several liability upon both:
(1) The persons residing in or occupying any such residential
multioccupancy or nonresidential units; and
(2) The owner, landlord, condominium owners' association and/or
agent of an owner, landlord or condominium owners' association of
such premises.
§ 184-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-16
1:195
§ 184-16. Concurrent remedies.
The penalties and remedies set forth in this article are in addition to, not in
lieu of, any fines, penalties or remedies provided in the Borough's policies
and procedures. The existence or exercise of any remedy shall not prevent
the Borough from exercising any other remedy provided under this article,
the Borough's policies and procedures, or available at law or equity.
§ 184-16 MANHEIM CODE § 184-16
1:196
Chapter 187
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 124.
Sewers — See Ch. 172.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 184-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-16
1:197

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 187-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Manheim Borough Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
§ 187-2. Statement of findings.
The Manheim Borough Council finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities; contributes to erosion and sedimentation; overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers; greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater;
undermines floodplain management and flood-reduction efforts in
upstream and downstream communities; reduces groundwater
recharge; and threatens public health and safety.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare,
and the protection of the people of the Borough and all the people of the
commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
E. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater issues.
F. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
(MS4) can contribute to pollution of waters of this commonwealth.
G. Inadequate maintenance of stormwater best management practices
(BMPs) causes loss of water quality, flooding, and other problems.
H. A program of reasonable regulation of connections and discharges to
municipal stormwater management facilities will be beneficial.
§ 187-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-3
1:199
§ 187-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
Manheim Borough by minimizing the damages described in § 187-2 of this
chapter through provisions designed to:
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations in Chapter 93, to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore the
existing and designated uses of the waters of this commonwealth.
B. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems at
their source by regulating activities that cause these problems.
C. Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems.
D. Maintain recharge of groundwater to prevent degradation of surface
water and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water
resources.
E. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in the
Borough and the commonwealth.
F. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
G. Provide proper operations and maintenance of all temporary and
permanent stormwater management facilities and best management
practices (BMPs) that are constructed and implemented.
H. Ensure consistency and compliance with the recommendations for
quantity and quality controls that are found in "Blueprints: An
Integrated Water Resources Plan for Lancaster County," including the
"Countywide Act 167 Plan" dated April 2013, revised August 16.
I. Prevent scour, aggradation, degradation, and erosion of stream banks
and stream beds.
J. Provide procedures, performance standards, and design criteria for
stormwater planning and management.
K. Implement an "illegal discharge detection and elimination program"
within MS4 permitted urbanized areas to address nonstormwater
discharges into Manheim Borough separate storm sewer system.
L. Promote stormwater runoff prevention through the use of nonstructural
best management practices (BMPs).
M. Provide a regulatory environment that supports the proportion, density,
and intensity of development called for in the Comprehensive Plan;
allows for creative methods of improving water quality and managing
stormwater runoff; and promotes a regional approach to water resource
management.
N. Help preserve and protect exceptional natural resources and conserve
and restore natural resource systems.
§ 187-3 MANHEIM CODE § 187-3
1:200
§ 187-4. Statutory authority.
The Manheim Borough Council, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Storm Water
Management Act, Act No. 167 of October 4, 1978, (P.L. 864) (Act 167),
Section 680.1 et seq., as amended;30 the Pennsylvania Borough Code, Act
of February 1, 1966, P.L. (1965) 1656, No. 581, as reenacted and amended
by the Act of May 17, 2012 (P.L. 262, No. 43), as amended; and the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, Act No. 166 of October 4, 1978
(P.L. 851);31 and 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq., the Pennsylvania Clean Streams
Law, hereby enacts and ordains this chapter as the Manheim Borough
Stormwater Management Ordinance.
§ 187-5. Applicability.
With the exception of activities exempted under § 187-19, the provisions,
regulations, limitations, and restrictions of this chapter shall apply to
regulated activities as defined in this chapter, including:
O. Promote stormwater management practices that emphasize infiltration,
evaporation, and transpiration.
P. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
A. Installation and proper operation and maintenance of stormwater
management facilities and appurtenances thereto.
B. All activities that may contribute nonstormwater discharges to the
Borough's regulated small MS4.
C. Discharges from regulated earth disturbance activities.
D. The following additional activities are defined as "regulated activities"
and shall be regulated by this chapter:
(1) All subdivisions or land developments.
(2) Major or minor land disturbances.
(3) Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces (driveways,
parking lots, etc.).
(4) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(5) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
(6) Installation or modification of stormwater management facilities,
BMPs, or appurtenances thereto.
(7) Any other activities where the Borough determines that said
activities may affect any existing watercourse's stormwater
management facilities or stormwater drainage patterns.
30.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
31.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 187-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-6
1:201
§ 187-6. General requirements.
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter, the final approval of
subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of any zoning
permit, authorizing earth disturbance or additional impervious area, or the
commencement of any land disturbance activity may not proceed until the
property owner or developer or his/her agent has received written approval
of a stormwater management site plan from the Borough or its designee and
has received approval from the Lancaster County Conservation District of a
written erosion and sediment pollution control plan as specified in Chapter
102 (where applicable).
§ 187-7. Repeals and continuation of prior regulations.
§ 187-8. Severability.
Should any section, provision or part thereof of this chapter be declared
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 187-9. Compatibility with other requirements and greater
restrictions.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
A. Except as otherwise required by law, this chapter is intended as a
continuation of, and not a repeal of, existing regulations governing the
subject matter. To the extent that this chapter restates regulations
contained in ordinances previously enacted by the Council, this chapter
shall be considered a restatement and not a repeal of such regulations.
It is the specific intent of the Council that all provisions of this chapter
shall be considered in full force and effect as of the date such
regulations were initially enacted. All ordinances or parts of ordinances
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed. It
is expressly provided that the provisions of this chapter shall not affect
any act done, contract executed or liability incurred prior to its effective
date, or affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to
enforce any rights, rule, regulation or ordinance, or part thereof, or to
punish any violation which occurred under any prior stormwater
regulation or ordinance. In the event any violation has occurred under
any prior stormwater regulation or ordinance of the Borough,
prosecution may be initiated against the alleged offender pursuant to
the provisions of said prior stormwater regulation or ordinance, and the
provisions and penalties provided in said prior stormwater regulation
or ordinance shall remain effective as to said violation.
B. Any stormwater management site plan pending at the time of the
effective date of this chapter shall be allowed to proceed with revisions,
finalization and implementation in accordance with any ordinance in
effect prior hereto.
§ 187-6 MANHEIM CODE § 187-9
1:202
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. To the
extent that this chapter imposes more-rigorous or -stringent requirements
for stormwater management, the specific requirements contained in this
chapter shall be followed.
§ 187-10. Municipal liability.
Except as specifically provided by the Pennsylvania Storm Water
Management Act, Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, No. 167, as amended,
32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., the making of any administrative decision by the
Borough or any of its officials or employees shall not constitute a
representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the Borough of the
practicability or safety of any proposed structure or use with respect to
damage from erosion, sedimentation, stormwater runoff, flood, or any other
matter and shall create no liability upon or give rise to any cause of
action against the Borough and its officials and employees. The Borough, by
enacting and amending this chapter, does not waive or limit any immunity
granted to the Borough and its officials and employees by the Governmental
Immunity Act, 42 Pa. C.S.A. § 8541 et seq., and does not assume any
liabilities or obligations.
§ 187-11. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful.
No action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the Borough
purporting to validate such a violation.
§ 187-12. Duty of persons engaged in the development of land.
Notwithstanding any provision(s) of this chapter, including exemptions, any
landowner or any person engaged in the alteration or development of land
which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such
measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety,
or other property. Such measures also shall include actions as are required
to manage the rate, volume, direction, and quality of resulting stormwater
runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property,
and water quality.
§ 187-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-12
1:203

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 187-13. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 187-14. Definitions.
Specific terms or words used herein, unless otherwise expressly stated,
shall have the following meanings:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of man's activity and the natural processes at a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural processes alone.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include those of feminine gender
and vice versa.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any other
similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended,"
"designed," "maintained," or "arranged to be used or occupied."
F. The time within which any act required by this chapter is to be
performed shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last day. However, if the last day is a Saturday or Sunday or a
holiday declared by the United States Congress or the Pennsylvania
General Assembly, it shall also be excluded. The word "day" shall mean
a calendar day, unless otherwise indicated.
G. Any words not defined in this chapter or in Section 107 of the MPC shall
be construed as defined in standard dictionary usage.
H. References to officially adopted regulations, standards, or publications
of the DEP or other governmental agencies shall include the regulation,
publication, or standard in effect on the date when an SWM site plan is
first filed. It is the intent of the Borough Council in enacting this
chapter to incorporate such changes to statutes, regulations, and
publications to the extent authorized by 1 Pa. C.S.A. § 1937.
§ 187-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-14
1:205
ACCESS EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing entry for the purpose of inspecting, maintaining and repairing
SWM facilities.
ACT 167 PLAN — A plan prepared under the authority of Pennsylvania's
Storm Water Management Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, No. 167, as
amended 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., and as may be amended in the future.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — The work of producing crops and raising
livestock, including tillage, plowing, disking, harrowing, pasturing and
installation of conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or
impervious areas is not considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; the
changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; any land disturbance.
ANIMAL HEAVY-USE AREAS — A barnyard, feedlot, loading area, exercise
lot, or other similar area on an agricultural operation where, due to the
concentration of animals, it is not possible to establish and maintain
vegetative cover of a density capable of minimizing accelerated erosion
and sedimentation by usual planting methods. The term does not include
entrances, pathways and walkways between areas where animals are
housed or kept in concentration.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application for
approval to engage in any regulated activities as defined in § 187-5 of this
chapter.
BMP MANUAL — The Pennsylvania Storm Water Best Management
Practices Manual, as published by the Department of Environmental
Protection (PADEP), December 2006, or most-recent version thereof.
BMPs (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: "nonstructural" or "structural." "Nonstructural" BMPs are
measures referred to as operational and/or behavior-related practices that
attempt to minimize stormwater runoff generation resulting from an
alteration of the land surface or the contact of pollutants with stormwater
runoff, whereas "structural" BMPs are measures that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
"Structural" BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale wet ponds and constructed wetlands, to smallscale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips,
low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. "Structural" stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
§ 187-14 MANHEIM CODE § 187-14
1:206
BUILDING — Any enclosed or open structure, other than a boundary wall
or fence, occupying more than four square feet of area and/or having a roof
supported by columns, piers, or walls.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Manheim, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Manheim Borough Council.
CARBONATE GEOLOGY — Limestone or dolomite bedrock. Carbonate
geology is often associated with karst topography.
CHAPTER 102 — Chapter 102 of the regulations of PADEP, 25 Pa. Code
§ 102.1 et seq. (Erosion and Sediment Control).
CHAPTER 105 — Chapter 105 of the regulations of PADEP, 25 Pa. Code
§ 105.1 et seq. (Dam Safety and Waterway Management).
CHAPTER 106 — Chapter 106 of the regulations of PADEP, 25 Pa. Code
§ 106.1 et seq. (Floodplain Management).
CISTERN — A reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Lancaster County Conservation District
or any agency successor thereto.
CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan written by a National Resources
Conservation Service (or any agency successor thereto) certified planner
that identifies conservation practices and includes site-specific BMPs for
agricultural plowing or tilling activities and animal heavy-use areas.
CONVEYANCE — The ability of a pipe, culvert, swale or similar facility to
carry the peak flow from the design storm.
CULVERT — A structure with appurtenant works which carries a stream
under or through an embankment or fill.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill, or structure for highway, railroad,
or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or
semifluid. The dam falls under the requirements of Chapter 105, Dam Safety
and Waterway Management, if any of the following is true:
DEP also PA DEP or PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection or any agency successor to the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNEE — The agent of the Manheim Borough Council involved with the
administration, review, or enforcement of any provisions of this chapter.
A. The contributory drainage area exceeds 100 acres.
The greatest depth of water measured by upstream toe of the dam at
maximum storage elevation exceeds 15 feet.
B.
The impounding capacity at maximum storage elevation exceeds 50
acre-feet.
C.
§ 187-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-14
1:207
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event, measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of this commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, or other
entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes
any regulated activity of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific area of land for which a regulated
activity is proposed, planned, conducted, or maintained.
DISAPPEARING STREAM — A stream in an area underlain by limestone or
dolomite which flows underground for a portion of its length.
DISCONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DIA) — An impervious or
impermeable surface that is disconnected from any stormwater drainage or
conveyance system and is redirected or directed to a pervious area, which
allows for infiltration, filtration, and increased time of concentration.
DISTURBED AREA — A land area where an earth disturbance activity is
occurring or has occurred.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management, drainage, or
conveyance purposes.
E&S — Erosion and sediment.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing
and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; land development;
agricultural plowing or tilling; operation of animal heavy-use areas; timber
harvesting activities; road maintenance activities; oil and gas activities;
well drilling; mineral extraction; building construction; and the moving,
depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA — Slopes greater than 15%
shallow bedrock (located within six feet of ground surface), wetlands,
natural heritage areas and other areas designated as conservation or
preservation areas in Greenscapes, the Green Infrastructure Element of the
County Comprehensive Plan, where encroachment by land development or
land disturbance results in degradation of the natural resource.
EPHEMERAL STREAM — A transient stream, one that flows for a relatively
short time.
EROSION — The movement of soil particles by the action of water, wind,
ice, or other natural forces.
§ 187-14 MANHEIM CODE § 187-14
1:208
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan which
is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior to the
proposed regulated activity. If the initial condition of the site is not forested
or undeveloped land, the land use shall be considered as "meadow" unless
the natural land cover is documented to generate lower curve numbers or
Rational "C" coefficients, such as forested lands.
FACILITY DEPTH — For above-ground detention/retention/BMP facilities,
the facility depth is defined to be the depth between the bottom invert of
the lowest orifice and the invert of the spillway. If there is no spillway, the
top of the berm shall be used. For basins with no orifices or outlet structure,
the bottom elevation of the basin shall be used.
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency or any agency
successor thereto.
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers,
and other waters of this commonwealth.
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from
any natural source or delineated by applicable Department of Housing
and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration, Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps as being a special flood hazard area; also, the area of
inundation which functions as a storage or holding area for floodwater to
a width required to contain a base flood of which there is a one-percent
chance of occurring in any given year. The floodplain contains both the
floodway and the flood fringe.
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT ACT — Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 851, No.
166, as amended 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq., and as may be amended in the
future.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies
have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year frequency floodway, it
is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from
the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forest land. These include timber
inventory; preparation of forest management plans; silvicultural treatment;
cutting budgets; logging road design and construction; timber harvesting;
site preparation; and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the one-hundred-year design
elevation of the water surface at the emergency spillway, in a condition that
§ 187-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-14
1:209
assumes the primary outlet(s) are blocked, and the top of a dam, levee, tank,
basin, berm, or diversion ridge.
FREQUENCY — The probability or chance that a given storm event/flood
will be equaled or exceeded in a given year.
GRADE — A slope, usually of a road, channel, or natural ground, specified
in percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad
and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to conduct
surface water from cropland.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — The classification of soils according to
their runoff-producing characteristics by NRCS. Soils are classified into four
HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is
obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The NRCS defines the four
groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their
group classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be
identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local NRCS
offices or Conservation District offices. Soils become less pervious as the
HSG varies from A to D.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of water
into the ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas) shall include, but are not
limited to, roofs, additional indoor living spaces, patios, garages, storage
sheds and similar structures, and any new streets and sidewalks. Any
surface area proposed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be
assumed to be impervious, unless designed and maintained as an infiltration
BMP. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas are not counted as
impervious areas if they do not prevent infiltration.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the ground (e.g. French drains, seepage pits, infiltration trenches, rain
gardens, etc.).
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain; a structure at the diversion
end of a conduit; the upstream end of any structure through which water
may flow.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by features
including, but not limited to, surface depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/
uneven bedrock surface, underground drainage, and caves. Karst is formed
on carbonate rocks, such as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A.
§ 187-14 MANHEIM CODE § 187-14
1:210
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving grading, tilling, digging, or
filling of ground or stripping of vegetation or any other activity that causes
an alteration to the condition of the land; the erection of a dwelling or other
structure; or the modification, removal, filling, or alteration of an existing
stormwater management facility or drainage easement. Land disturbance
activities shall be classified as follows:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or
other features.
(2)
B. A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503 (1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.32
C.
Major land disturbance activity:
Any use requiring the submission of a subdivision or land
development plan, as herein defined;
(1)
Any land disturbance not defined as a minor land disturbance
activity or deemed to qualify as a minor land disturbance activity
by the Borough;
(2)
Any use involving the diversion or piping of any natural or manmade
watercourse or existing drainage pattern;
(3)
Any use involving the installation of ground cover, grading, filing,
excavation, or disturbance of woodland in excess of one acre,
except for the use of land for agricultural plowing and tilling and
the science of forestry when operated in accordance with approved
conservation and erosion control practices.
(4)
A.
Minor land disturbance activity:
The use of land on an existing lot of record, including subdivided
lots or land developments approved under a major land disturbance
activity, provided that:
(a) The use is not within a floodplain area;
No diversion or piping of any natural or man-made
watercourse or existing drainage pattern is involved;
(b)
(1)
B.
32.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503.
§ 187-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-14
1:211
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LIMITING ZONE — A rock formation, other stratum, or soil condition
which is so slowly permeable that it effectively limits downward passage
of effluent. Seasonal high-water tables, whether perched or regional, also
constitute a limiting zone.
LINEAMENT — A fracture on the order of tens of kilometers long, usually
extending to the basement below sedimentary rock.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for calculation
of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per
second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of
flow, and slope. "Open channels" may include closed conduits so long as the
flow is not under pressure.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP) — Applies when the applicant
demonstrates to the Borough's satisfaction that the performance standard
is not achievable. The applicant shall take into account the best available
technology, cost effectiveness, geographic features, and other competing
interests, such as protection of human safety and welfare, protection of
endangered and threatened resources, and preservation of historic
properties, in making the assertion that the performance standard cannot
be met and that a different means of control is appropriate.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (MPC) — The Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 1, 1967, P.L. 805, No. 247, as
reenacted and amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., and as may be amended in
the future.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains),
which is all of the following:
The use creates impervious areas of more than 1,000 square
feet and less than 5,000 square feet or involves the removal
of ground cover, grading, filling, or excavation of an area less
than 5,000 square feet, either of which shall be measured on a
cumulative basis from July 29, 2014;
(c)
The use does not require the submission of a subdivision or
land development plan, as herein defined.
(d)
Any use of the land which, in the opinion of the Borough,
represents minimal ground disturbance or impact to the
environment.
(2)
Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, district,
association or other public body (created under state law) having
A.
§ 187-14 MANHEIM CODE § 187-14
1:212
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — All separate
storm sewers that are defined as "large" or "medium" or "small" municipal
separate storm sewer systems pursuant to 40 CFR 122.26(b)(18), or
designated as regulated under 40 CFR 122.26(a)(1)(v).
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) —
The federal government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean
Water Act, which is delegated to the PADEP in Pennsylvania.
NATURAL DRAINAGEWAY — An existing channel for water runoff that was
formed by natural forces.
NATURAL GROUND COVER — Ground cover which mimics the infiltration
characteristics of the predominant hydrologic soil group found at the site.
NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION SERVICE (NRCS) — Previously
the Soil Conservation Service (SCS), or any agency successor to the NRCS.
NOAA ATLAS 14 — The Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States,
Atlas 14, Volume 2, United States Department of Commerce, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland
(2004). NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at Internet address:
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
OPEN CHANNEL — A stormwater management element in which
stormwater flows with an open surface. Open channels include, but shall
not be limited to, natural and man-made drainageways, swales, streams,
ditches, canals, and pipes flowing partly full.
OUTFALL —
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater or
artificial drain.
PARENT TRACT — All contiguous land held in single and separate
ownership, regardless of whether: such land is divided into one or more
lots, parcels, purparts, or tracts; such land was acquired by the landowner
at different times or by different deeds, devise, partition, or otherwise; or
such land is bisected by public or private streets or rights-of-way, which was
jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater or
other wastes;
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Not a combined sewer; and
Not part of a publicly owned treatment works, as defined at 40 CFR
122.2.
D.
A. A point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain;
"Point source," as described in 40 CFR 122.2, at the point where the
municipal separate storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of
this commonwealth.
B.
§ 187-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-14
1:213
held by the landowner or his predecessor in title on the effective date of this
chapter. "Single and separate ownership" is the ownership of property by
any person, partnership, or corporation, in which ownership is separate and
distinct from that of any adjoining property.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PennDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, or any agency
successor thereto.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any material/surface that allows water to pass through
at a rate equal to or greater than natural ground cover.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLAN — The stormwater management and erosion and sediment pollution
control plans and narratives.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Manheim
Borough, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Water that comes in contact with any raw
material, product, by-product, or waste during any production or industrial
process.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the Borough are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PERSON — Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work
required by this chapter.
RATE CONTROL — SWM controls used to manage the peak flows for the
purposes of channel protection and flood mitigation.
RATIONAL FORMULA (RATIONAL METHOD) — A rainfall-runoff relation
used to estimate peak flow.
RECORD PLAN — Where a regulated activity constitutes a subdivision or
land development, the final subdivision or land development plan which
contains the information the ordinance requires; where a regulated activity
does not constitute a subdivision or land development, a stormwater
management site plan containing all required information and prepared in
a form acceptable to the office of the Recorder of Deeds for recording.
REGIONAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan to manage
stormwater runoff from an area larger than a single development site. A
regional stormwater management plan could include two adjacent parcels,
an entire watershed, or some defined area in between. Regional stormwater
management plans can be prepared for new development or as a retrofit to
manage runoff from already developed areas.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
§ 187-14 MANHEIM CODE § 187-14
1:214
that may affect stormwater runoff and that are specified in § 187-5 of this
chapter.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of predevelopment peak rate of runoff
from a site or subwatershed area to which the post-development peak rate
of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RELEASE RATE MAP — A graphical representation of the release rates for
a specific area.
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment in which stormwater is stored and
not released during the storm event. Stored water may be released from the
basin at some time after the end of the storm.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff that
is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the
twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to recur on the
average once every 25 years, or, stated in another way, the probability of a
twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent
chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A vegetated area bordering perennial and
intermittent streams and wetlands that serves as a protective filter to help
protect streams and wetlands from the impacts of adjacent land uses.
RIPARIAN FOREST BUFFER — A type of riparian buffer that consists of
permanent vegetation that is predominantly native trees, shrubs and forbs
along a watercourse that is maintained in a natural state or sustainably
managed to protect and enhance water quality, stabilize stream channels
and banks, and separate land use activities from surface waters.
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used
to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a
product of erosion.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, or retention or detention basin located
and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material transported
by water.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge, or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth occurring
from the failure to design, construct, implement or maintain control
§ 187-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-14
1:215
measures and control facilities in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
clean, loose stone or similar coarse material into which surface water is
directed for infiltration into the ground.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff which flows over the ground surface as a thin, even
layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SOIL CONSERVATION SERVICE (SCS) — Now known as the National
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS).
SOIL-COVER-COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the SCS (now NRCS) that is based on relating soil type and
land use/cover to a runoff parameter called "curve number (CN)."
SOIL HORIZON — A layer of soil or soil material approximately parallel
to the land surface and differing from adjacent genetically related layers
in physical, chemical, and biological properties or characteristics such as
color, structure, texture, consistency, kinds and number of organisms
present, degree of acidity or alkalinity, etc.
SPILLWAY — A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin which
is used to pass peak discharge greater than the maximum design storm
controlled by the pond.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law and the Clean Water Act.
STORAGE — A volume above or below ground that is available to hold
stormwater.
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure based
on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the
change in storage), with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and
depth.
STORM EVENT — A storm of a specific duration, intensity, and frequency.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm "event"
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See "return
period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that conveys
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT ACT — Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864,
No. 167, as amended 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., and as may be amended in the
future.
§ 187-14 MANHEIM CODE § 187-14
1:216
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SWM
BMP) — See "BMPs."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management
facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins,
open channels, road gutters, swales, storm sewers, pipes, BMPs, and
infiltration structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN
(O&M PLAN) — A plan, including a narrative, to ensure proper functioning
of the SWM facilities in accordance with Article VI of this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT — A permit issued by Manheim
Borough after the stormwater management site plan is unconditionally
approved.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The "Countywide Act 167 Plan"
for Lancaster County for managing stormwater runoff adopted by Lancaster
County as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, 32 P.S., P.L. 864, (Act 167)
as amended, and known as the "Storm Water Management Act."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the
developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the particular site of interest according to this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBWATERSHED AREA — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for
which stormwater management criteria have been established in the
stormwater management plan.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
SWM — Stormwater management.
SWM SITE PLAN — A stormwater management site plan.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time for surface runoff to travel
from the hydraulically most-distant point of the watershed to a point of
interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland
flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
USDA — The United States Department of Agriculture or any agency
successor thereto.
§ 187-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-14
1:217
WATERCOURSE — A stream of water, river, brook, creek, or a channel or
ditch for water, whether natural or man-made, having a defined bed and
banks, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a watercourse.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water,
wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance
of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas. The term includes, but is not limited
to, wetland areas listed in the State Water Plan, the United States Forest
Service Wetlands Inventory of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Coastal Zone
Management Plan and a wetland area designated by a river basin
commission. This definition is used by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (USEPA) and the United States Army Corps of Engineers
(USACOE).
§ 187-14 MANHEIM CODE § 187-14
1:218
ARTICLE III
Plan Processing Procedures
§ 187-15. General requirements.
§ 187-16. Compliance with Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Hearing
Board decisions.
Whenever the Zoning Ordinance33 provides that the use proposed by the
applicant for a subdivision or land development approval shall constitute
a use by special exception or conditional use, or when a variance from
the terms of the Zoning Ordinance is required to develop in accordance
with the plan, the applicant shall obtain such special exception, variance,
or conditional use approval from the Borough Zoning Hearing Board or
Borough Council, as applicable, prior to the submission of the plan. The plan
shall be designed and developed in accordance with any conditions which
have been imposed upon the grant of such special exception, variance, or
conditional use by the Borough Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council,
as applicable.
§ 187-17. Application and processing requirements.
All applications shall follow these application and processing requirements.
A. This article sets forth the application requirements for obtaining
approval of a stormwater management site plan. The form of the plans
referred to in this article and information required to be forwarded with
such plans shall be as specified in Article IV.
B. Manheim Borough shall not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient
in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion and in
accordance with this article, when an SWM site plan is found to be
deficient, Manheim Borough may either disapprove the submission and
require a resubmission or, in the case of minor deficiencies, Manheim
Borough may accept submission of revisions.
A. Formal application/submission deadlines. All applications for approval
of a stormwater management site plan shall be made by the developer
filing an application form, to be supplied by the Borough, together with
the appropriate plans. The plan shall include studies, reports,
supporting data (including all plans, reports, and correspondence with
the Lancaster County Conservation District), and the required filing
fee. Applications may be filed with the Borough on any business day;
however, the Borough Planning Commission or Borough Council will
review a plan at a particular meeting only if the plan was filed at least
15 business days prior to that meeting.
B. Application requirements. All plan applications shall include the
following:
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 187-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-17
1:219
(1) Two copies of the plan(s). All plans shall be either black-on-white or
blue-on-white paper prints and prepared in conformance with the
provisions of Article IV of this chapter.
(2) Two copies of all reports, notifications, and certifications which are
not provided on the plan.
(3) Two copies of the application form as provided by the Borough.
(4) Filing and review escrow fees in the amounts as specified on the fee
schedule adopted by resolution of the Borough Council and
available at the Borough Office.
(5) Two copies of all reports required by Article IV.
(6) Plans which require access to a highway under the jurisdiction of
the PennDOT shall include two copies of the plans prepared to
support the application for a highway occupancy permit.
(7) The applicant shall provide the Borough with five copies of the
most-current plan at least five business days before the plan is
scheduled to be reviewed by the Planning Commission or the
Borough Council.
(8) Applicants are encouraged to schedule a preapplication meeting to
review the overall stormwater management concept with the
Borough staff/Engineer. The preapplication meeting is not
mandatory and shall not constitute formal filing of a plan with the
Borough.
C. Distribution. The applicant shall submit one copy of the above-required
information to the Borough and one copy to the Borough Engineer for
their respective reviews. The developer is responsible for submitting
plans to any other agencies, such as the Lancaster County Conservation
District, PennDOT, DEP, etc., when permits from these agencies are
required.
D. Initial application. The Borough staff shall have seven business days
from the date of submission of an application to check the plans and
documents to determine if on their face they are in proper form and
contain all information required by this chapter. If defective, the
application shall be returned to the applicant with a statement
explaining the reason(s) of rejection, within 12 business days following
the date of submission by the applicant; otherwise, it shall be deemed
accepted for filing as of the date of submission. Acceptance for filing
shall not, however, constitute a waiver of any deficiencies or
irregularities. Under this section, the applicant may appeal a decision
by the Borough staff to the Borough Council.
E. Amendments or corrections to an application. The Borough staff shall
have seven business days from the date of submission of an amended or
corrected application or plan to determine whether such amended or
§ 187-17 MANHEIM CODE § 187-17
1:220
corrected application results in a substantial amendment to the plan or
if the application or plan filed is/was/has changed so as to be considered
a new plan. If the Borough staff determines that the amended or
corrected application constitutes a substantial amendment, the
applicant shall be informed of the determination within 12 business
days from the date of the submission of the amended or corrected
application, and the Borough staff shall further inform the applicant
that the Borough shall consider the ninety-day review procedure to
have been restarted as of the date of the filing of the substantial
amendment. If the Borough staff determines that the amended or
corrected application constitutes a new plan, he shall so inform the
applicant and shall inform the applicant that a new application and
new fees are required. Under this section, the applicant may appeal a
decision by the Borough staff to the Borough Council.
F. Plan review process.
(1) All complete applications for approval of a plan shall be acted upon
by the Borough Council, which shall render its decision and
communicate it to the applicant not later than 90 days following the
date the completed application is filed.
(2) The decision of the Borough Council shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the developer personally or mailed to him at his
last known address not later than 15 days following the decision.
(3) When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite
the provisions of the ordinance(s) relied upon.
(4) Failure of the Borough Council to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
required herein shall be a disapproval of the application in terms as
presented, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time or change in prescribed manner of presentation
or communication of the decision; in which case, failure to meet the
extended time or change in manner of presentation or
communication shall have like effect.
(5) Approval of a stormwater management site plan by the Borough
shall be obtained by the applicant/developer prior to the issuance
of a zoning permit by the Borough. No regulated activity may begin
until proof of recording of the required ownership and maintenance
program is presented and a zoning permit is obtained by the
applicant in accordance with the Borough Zoning Ordinance, as
amended.
G. Procedure for modifications of the provisions of this chapter to be
applied to the submitted plan.
§ 187-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-17
1:221
(1) Application requirements. A request for a modification may be
submitted to the Borough at any time. All requests shall be in
writing and accompanied by a plan prepared to the minimum
standards of a minor land disturbance plan (see § 187-20). The
written request shall identify:
(a) The specific section of this chapter which is requested to be
modified.
(b) The provisions proposed as an alternate to the requirements.
The alternate provisions must be equal to or better than the
requirements of, and consistent with the intents of, this
chapter and shall not be contrary to the general public
interest.
(c) Justification for the modification. The request shall state in full
the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on
which the request is based.
(2) Borough action.
(a) A modification request that is submitted as part of an
application for a stormwater management site plan shall be
processed along with that application of which it is a part. The
plan processing procedures outlined in this section shall apply.
(b) If a modification request is not submitted with an application
for subdivision, land development, lot add-on, or improvement
construction plan, then the processing procedures outlined in
this section shall apply.
(c) The Borough may determine that a modification constitutes a
substantial modification as specified in § 187-17E of this
chapter, whereupon the application may be deemed to be a
new plan.
H. A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the Borough's concerns, to the Borough in accordance with
this article. The applicable review fee must accompany a resubmission
of a disapproved SWM site plan.
I. All stormwater management permits or approvals shall expire 12
months from the date of issuance unless an extension of time is
approved. An extension of an unexpired stormwater management
permit or approval shall be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
following the submission of a written request if, in the opinion of the
Code Enforcement Officer, the subject property or affected surrounding
area has not been altered in a manner which requires alteration to the
stormwater management site plan.
§ 187-17 MANHEIM CODE § 187-17
1:222
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management Site Plan Requirements
§ 187-18. Applicability.
To determine what stormwater management site plan requirements to
follow, an applicant should first review the exemption criteria in § 187-19.
If the applicant's proposal does not satisfy the criteria as described, then
the applicant should consult the definitions of "minor and major land
disturbance activity" in § 187-14 of this chapter to determine in which
category the applicant's proposal falls. With the determination made, the
applicant can follow the appropriate stormwater management site plan
requirements of this article for his/her/its proposal.
§ 187-19. Exemptions.
Any regulated activity that meets one of the following exemption criteria
(Subsection A through E below) is exempt from the provisions of this
chapter. These criteria shall apply to the total development even if
development is to take place in phases. The date of the adoption of this
chapter shall be the starting point from which to consider tracts as "parent
tracts" in which respective impervious area computations shall be
cumulatively considered. Exemption shall not relieve the applicant from
implementing such measures as are necessary to protect health, safety, and
property.
A. Regulated activities that create additional impervious areas less than or
equal to 1,000 square feet are exempt from the requirements of this
chapter, except as provided for in Subsection F, provided that the
activities meet the following criteria below [Subsection A(2)(a) through
(f)]. This exemption will be applied on a cumulative basis for the subject
property.
(1) Any applicant desiring exemption from design, plan submission,
and plan processing requirements shall complete an application for
exemption in the form set forth and available at the Borough Office
and pay any applicable filing fee.
(2) The applicant for exemption shall provide the Borough with all
information necessary for the Borough to determine that:
(a) There shall be no disturbance of land within floodplains,
wetlands, environmentally sensitive areas, riparian forest
buffers, or slopes greater than 15%.
(b) No impervious surface coverage shall be installed and no earth
disturbance activity shall be conducted within any existing
drainage or stormwater easement created by or shown on any
recorded plan.
(c) The applicant shall minimize soil disturbance, take steps to
minimize erosion and sedimentation during construction
§ 187-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-19
1:223
activity, and promptly reclaim all disturbed areas with topsoil
and vegetation.
(d) The applicant shall take steps that runoff be directed to
pervious areas on the subject property. No runoff shall be
directed onto an abutting street or neighboring property.
(e) The proposed impervious surface shall not adversely impact
any existing known problem areas or downstream property
owners or the quality of runoff entering any storm sewer.
(f) The proposed impervious surface shall not create accelerated
erosion and sedimentation.
(3) If the proposed activity does not meet all of the criteria set forth in
Subsection A(2) above, the applicant shall follow the minor land
disturbance processing procedure in § 187-20 or the major land
disturbance processing procedure in § 187-21.
(4) No applicant and no activity is exempt from complying with any
state or federal requirements applicable if the subject property is
located in a high-quality (HQ) or exceptional-value (EV) watershed.
(5) No applicant and no activity shall violate or cause to be violated:
the Federal Clean Water Act or any regulation issued thereunder,
an NPDES permit, any recorded stormwater management or
operations and maintenance agreement, or any requirement
applicable to a municipal separate storm sewer system.
B. Activities on lands which have a prior approved stormwater
management plan, which was approved prior to the adoption of this
chapter and which, in the opinion of the Borough following consultation
with the Borough Engineer, adequately manages stormwater resulting
from the proposed activities, are exempt from the requirements of this
chapter that may conflict with the requirements of the stormwater
management ordinance in effect at the time of the approval of the prior
approved stormwater management plan.
C. Use of land for gardening and landscaping of property, when performed
as an accessory use of the property, is exempt from the requirements of
this chapter.
D. Except as provided for in Subsection F, agricultural activity, when
operated in accordance with a conservation plan or an erosion and
sedimentation pollution control plan found to be adequate by the
Lancaster County Conservation District and performed according to the
requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, is exempt from the
provisions of this chapter. Agricultural activities such as growing crops,
rotating crops, tilling of soil and grazing animals and other such
activities are specifically exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
§ 187-19 MANHEIM CODE § 187-19
1:224
§ 187-20. Minor land disturbance.
§ 187-21. Major land disturbance.
The SWM site plan shall consist of all applicable calculations, maps and
plans, including simultaneous copies of all plans, reports, and
correspondence with the Lancaster County Conservation District. A note
on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and E&S pollution
control plan by title and date. The cover sheet of the computations and E&S
pollution control plan shall refer to the associated maps by title and date.
All SWM site plan materials shall be submitted to the Borough in a format
that is clear, concise, legible, neat and well organized.
E. Except as provided for in Subsection F, forest management and timber
operations which are following the Department of Environmental
Protection's management practices contained in its publication "Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Guidelines for Forestry" and are
operating under an erosion and sedimentation pollution control plan
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102 are
specifically exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
F. The Borough may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the Borough believes may pose a
threat to public health, safety, property, or the environment.
A. The minor land disturbance plan shall include a general plan of the lot
configuration, existing and proposed building locations, location, and
square footage of proposed impervious area or land disturbance,
grading, stormwater management facilities, and erosion and
sedimentation control facilities.
B. The plan need not demonstrate literal compliance with all the
provisions of this chapter, other than Appendix E,34 however the plan
shall demonstrate that the proposed activity will comply with the intent
of this chapter as provided for in § 187-3.
C. The minor land disturbance plan shall provide for volume control, but
shall not be required to provide for rate control. Additional guidance is
provided in Appendix E, including formulas and construction notes to
be followed in design and construction of volume control features.
D. The Borough staff may require additional information, or invoke any
section of this chapter as deemed necessary to adequately demonstrate
compliance with the intent of this chapter. These requirements may be
appealed to the Borough Council.
E. Appendix D shall be completed and signed by the applicant.35
34.Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
35.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 187-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-21
1:225
A. Drafting standards. All stormwater management site plans shall be
prepared in accordance with the following drafting standards:
(1) The plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a horizontal scale of
10 feet, 20 feet, 30 feet, 40 feet, or 50 feet to the inch.
(2) All profiles of stormwater management facilities, streets, sanitary
sewer facilities, and water supply facilities shall be drawn at a
horizontal scale of one inch equals 50 feet and at a vertical scale of
one inch equals 10 feet or one inch equals five feet.
(3) A North arrow, graphic scale and written scale shall be provided.
(4) Dimensions shall be in feet and decimals; bearings shall be in
degrees, minutes and seconds. Lot line descriptions shall read in a
clockwise direction.
(5) The survey shall not have an error of closure greater than one foot
in 10,000 feet.
(6) The sheet size shall be no smaller than 18 by 22 inches and no
larger than 24 by 36 inches. If the plan is prepared in two or more
sections, a key map showing the location of the sections shall be
placed on each sheet. If more than one sheet is necessary, each
sheet shall be the same size and numbered to show the relationship
to the total number of sheets in the plan (e.g., Sheet 1 of 5).
B. Project location and identification. The following location and
identification shall be included on all SWM site plans:
(1) The proposed project name or identifying title.
(2) The name of the Borough or municipalities in which the project is
located, including the location of any municipal boundaries if
located within 200 feet of the subject tract.
(3) The name and address of the owner of the tract (or his authorized
agent), the developer/subdivider, and the firm that prepared the
plans.
(4) The file or project number assigned by the firm that prepared the
plan, the plan date, and the date(s) of all plan revisions.
(5) The entire existing tract boundary with bearing and distances. (If it
is the intention of the landowner to retain a single lot with a lot
area in excess of 10 acres, the boundary of that lot may be
identified as a deed-plotting and may be drawn at any legible scale;
if the retained lot has a lot area of 10 or less acres, it must be
described to the accuracy of the requirements of this chapter.) In
the case of lot add-on plans, and revised final plans, the boundary
of the receiving tract shall also be identified as a deed-plotting and
may be drawn at any legible scale.
§ 187-21 MANHEIM CODE § 187-21
1:226
(6) The total acreage of the entire existing tract.
(7) The location of existing lot line markers along the perimeter of the
entire existing tract.
(8) The zoning district, lot size, and/or density requirements of the
Borough Zoning Ordinance.
(9) A statement on the plan indicating the granting of a prior zoning
amendment, special exception or variance, if applicable, along with
any prior modifications granted by the Board to sections of this
chapter.
(10) The names of all adjacent landowners, both adjoining and across
existing rights-of-way, along with the plan book record numbers of
all previously recorded plans for adjacent properties.
(11) A location map, drawn to scale, relating the subdivision or land
development to at least two intersections of street center lines,
including the approximate distance to the intersection of center
lines of the nearest improved street intersection.
(12) Source of title, deed, book, page, plan book (if applicable), and Tax
Map, block, and parcel number.
(13) A note indicating existing and proposed land use(s).
C. Existing features. The following features shall be shown on all SWM site
plans and shall be shown on a separate sheet titled "Existing Features."
No proposed features shall be included on this sheet.
(1) Existing contours shall be shown at the following minimum vertical
intervals:
Average Natural Slope Required Contour Interval
0% to 3% 1-foot contour interval
4% to 20% 2-foot contour interval
21% and greater 5-foot contour interval
(a) Contour intervals may be adjusted based upon horizontal scale
with concurrence of the Borough Engineer.
(b) Contours shall be accompanied by the location of the
benchmark and a notation indicating the datum used. The
datum used by an Authority shall be used in all plans indicating
connection to an Authority's public sewer system or public
water system.
(c) Contours plotted by interpolation of Lancaster County GIS
mapping will only be accepted when there is no new
construction or earth disturbance proposed by the plan.
§ 187-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-21
1:227
(d) Contours plotted by interpolation of the United States Geodetic
Survey 7.5-foot mapping will not be accepted.
(2) The following items when located upon or within 200 feet of the
tract:
(a) The location and name of existing rights-of-way and cartways
for private or public streets, alleys and driveways.
(b) The location and size of the following features and any related
right-of-way: sanitary sewer mains, water supply mains, fire
hydrants, buildings, and stormwater collection, conveyance,
and management facilities.
(c) The location and size of existing on-lot sewage systems and
wells.
(d) The location of existing rights-of-way and easements for
electric, gas and oil transmission lines, and railroads.
(e) Significant environmental or topographic features, such as
floodplains, wetlands, quarry sites, solid waste disposal areas,
historic structures, cemetery or burial sites, archaeological
sites, highly erosive soils, or wooded areas.
(f) The soil names and boundaries.
(3) The following items when located within the subject tract:
(a) The size, capacity and condition of the existing stormwater
management system and any other facility that may be used to
convey storm flows.
(b) The location and size of existing on-lot sewage systems and
wells.
(c) The location and use of existing buildings and other man-made
features.
(d) Significant environmental or topographic features as identified
in the Manheim Borough Comprehensive Plan, including, but
not limited to:
[1] Prime agricultural soils;
[2] Underlying geology, with any hazardous geology noted;
[3] Floodplains;
[4] Quarry sites;
[5] Solid waste disposal areas;
[6] Historic structures;
§ 187-21 MANHEIM CODE § 187-21
1:228
[7] Cemetery or burial sites;
[8] Archaeological sites;
[9] Highly erosive soils;
[10]Wooded areas;
[11] Natural habitat; and
[12] PNDI sites.
(e) The location of wetlands and supporting data.
D. Proposed features and plan information. The following proposed
features and plan information shall be shown on all stormwater
management site plans and shall be shown on a separate sheet entitled
"Proposed Features." The proposed features and plan information shall
be overlaid upon a copy of the existing features plan. The existing
features shall be "screened" or "shaded" on the proposed features plan.
(1) Block and lot numbers in consecutive order (e.g., Block A, Lots 1
through 10; Block B, Lots 11 through 22).
(2) The location and configuration of proposed buildings, parking
compounds, streets including cartway and right-of-way widths,
alleys, driveways, common open space, recreational areas, and all
other significant planned facilities.
(3) Total number of lots, units of occupancy, density, and proposed land
use. If a multiple land use is proposed, the location of each land use
shall be indicated.
(4) Easements and rights-of-way, including:
(a) A minimum twenty-foot-wide access easement around all SWM
facilities that would provide ingress from and egress to a
public right-of-way. Easements shall be provided to allow for
the collection and discharge of water, the inspection,
maintenance, repair and reconstruction of the drainage
facilities, and the passage of machinery for work.
(b) Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for
all existing and proposed physical SWM facilities, such as
ponds and infiltration structures, as necessary to implement
the operation and maintenance (O&M) plan. All such
agreements shall be duly recorded in the office of the Recorder
of Deeds and shall constitute a binding permanent covenant
upon the property, superior to all liens of record and not
subordinate to any easement or restriction that would interfere
with its provisions and the implementation thereof.
(5) Building setback line and building envelope.
§ 187-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-21
1:229
(6) Identification of buildings to be demolished and all other features
to be removed.
(7) Typical street cross section for each proposed public or private
street and typical cross section for any existing street which will be
improved as part of the application. Each cross section shall
include the entire right-of-way width.
(8) Stormwater management data and plans designed in accordance
with this chapter. This information may be provided on a sheet with
other data or on separate sheets and need not necessarily be
recorded with the final plan. In the case of any dispute in the
methodology used in the design of any stormwater management
site plan and/or in the presentation of such information, the
Borough Council shall make the final determination on the design
criteria, methodology, and form of presentation. The following
information shall be included:
(a) All calculations, assumptions, criteria, and references used in
the design of the stormwater management facilities, the
establishment of existing facilities capacities, and the pre- and
post-development discharges.
(b) All plans and profiles of the proposed stormwater management
facilities, including the horizontal and vertical location, size,
and type of material.
(c) For all basins, a plotting or tabulation of the storage volumes
and discharge curves with corresponding water surface
elevations, inflow hydrographs, and outflow hydrographs.
(d) The guidelines for lot grading within the subdivisions. This
information shall identify the direction of stormwater runoff
flow within each lot and the areas where stormwater runoff
flows will be concentrated. This information shall be shown by
flow arrows or topographical data.
(9) A table indicating the existing zoning district, total tract area,
required lot size, required setbacks, required maximum and/or
minimum development density, maximum building height,
maximum lot coverage, and number of lots in the proposed
subdivision along with the proposals for each of these parameters.
(10) A statement identifying the number of square feet of impervious
coverage for which stormwater management facilities have been
designed for each lot.
(11) A statement on the plan indicating the granting of a zoning
amendment, special exception or variance, if applicable, along with
modifications granted by the Borough Council to sections of this
chapter.
§ 187-21 MANHEIM CODE § 187-21
1:230
(12) Where the proposed regulated activity is located partially or wholly
within an area prone to frequent flooding (either by impoundment
or conveyance), as indicated by the Flood Boundary and Floodway
Map, profiles, and supporting data, soil type or local historical
record, the developer shall supply the location and elevation of all
proposed roads, fills, utilities, buildings, stormwater management,
and erosion control facilities.
(13) Location of all percolation test holes, deep probe holes and
proposed well locations.
(14) Easements for the on-lot sewage replacement locations.
(15) The location of all trees and/or woodlands on the site and location
of trees and/or woodlands to be removed and trees and/or
woodlands to remain.
(16) The layout of lots, with approximate dimensions and gross and net
acreage.
(17) A detailed grading plan. The grading plan shall include finished
grades and ground-floor elevations. This information may be
provided on separate sheets and is not subject to recording with
the final plans.
(18) The location and dimensions of all E&S control facilities.
(19) Identification of any lands to be dedicated or reserved for public,
semipublic, or community use.
(20) In the case of a plan which requires access to a highway under the
jurisdiction of the Department of Transportation, the inclusion of
the following plan note:
"A highway occupancy permit is required pursuant to Section 420
of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the
'State Highway Law,' before access to a state highway is permitted.
Access to the state highway shall be as authorized by a highway
occupancy permit, and the Borough Council's approval of this plan
in no way implies that such a permit can be acquired."
(21) A complete landscape plan showing the location, size, and type of
all plant material required by provisions of this chapter or any
other applicable Borough regulations, including, but not limited to,
all vegetated stormwater BMPs. The landscape plan should be
provided on separate sheets and must include the signature and
seal of the registered landscape architect responsible for
preparation of the plan. Native or naturalized/noninvasive
vegetation suitable to the soil and hydrologic conditions of the
development site shall be used unless otherwise specified in the
BMP Manual. The limit of existing, native vegetation to remain
§ 187-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-21
1:231
shall be delineated on the plan along with proposed construction
protection measures.
(22) A detailed schedule of inspections during construction, generally
outlined as follows, which is tailored for the site under
consideration:
(a) The Borough shall inspect all phases of the installation of any
temporary or permanent SWM facilities during construction.
The developer shall pay the cost of any such inspection. The
developer shall provide at least 24 hours' notice prior to the
start of construction of any improvements that are subject to
inspection. All inspections of completed items shall be
requested, in writing, at least 48 hours in advance of the
inspection time and date.
(b) It is generally required that the following phases of site
construction have mandatory inspection. This general list of
phases may be amended by mutual agreement of the Borough
and developer when the site requires special construction
procedures. The inspection schedule must be shown on the
approved stormwater management site plan.
(c) General site construction.
[1] Upon completion of preliminary site preparation, including
stripping of vegetation, stockpiling of topsoil, and
construction of temporary erosion and sedimentation
control devices.
[2] Upon completion of rough grading but prior to placing
topsoil, permanent drainage, or other site development
improvements and ground covers.
[3] During the construction of permanent stormwater
management and BMP facilities.
[4] Upon the final completion of permanent stormwater
management and BMP facilities, including the
establishment of ground covers and plantings.
[5] After review of the as-built drawings, required by § 187-38,
but prior to final release of the financial guarantee for
completion of final grading, vegetative controls required
by the BMP standards, or other site restoration work.
(d) In addition to the above-outlined observations, additional
observations will be made at the request of the developer for
reduction of financial securities. Random observations should
be made at the frequency desired by the Borough. At the time
of any of the above-listed observations, all ongoing
construction (i.e., storm drainage, sanitary sewer, water,
§ 187-21 MANHEIM CODE § 187-21
1:232
§ 187-22. General requirements.
The following general standards shall be applied to all regulated activities
to promote flow attenuation, erosion and sediment control, and flood
control, unless the otherwise regulated activity is specifically exempted in
§ 187-19 or falls under the definition of "minor land disturbance" and is
regulated by the provisions of § 187-20:
erosion control, etc.) should also be checked for compliance
with the approved plans and the findings reported. Since the
above inspections are mandatory, it is recommended that
requests for reduction of financial guarantee be submitted to
coincide with the above inspections.
(23) A note indicating that as-built plans will be provided for all
stormwater management facilities prior to occupancy, or the
release of financial security.
A. The SWM site plan shall include a note on the plan informing the owner
that the Borough shall have the right of entry for the purposes of
inspecting all stormwater conveyance, treatment, or storage facilities.
B. All landowners of land included in the SWM site plan who will be
directly impacted by the applicant's proposed runoff or earth
disturbance shall be required to execute all applications and final
documents.
C. All SWM site plans shall be prepared by a qualified person.
D. SWM site plans shall be prepared in a form that meets the requirements
for recording in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Lancaster County.
E. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and
sedimentation pollution control BMPs shall be designed, implemented,
operated, and maintained during the regulated earth disturbance
activities (e.g., during construction) to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the Storm
Water Management Act.
F. Impervious areas:
(1) The measurement of impervious area shall apply to the total
proposed development even if development is to take place in
stages or phases.
(2) For development taking place in stages or phases, the entire
development plan must be used in determining conformance with
this chapter.
(3) Any areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be
assumed to be impervious.
§ 187-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-22
1:233
(4) Existing impervious areas that are not being altered by the
proposed regulated activity shall not be subject to the volume
controls in § 187-30 and the peak rate controls of § 187-25V.
G. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
notification of the adjacent property owner(s) by the developer,
including the establishment of an easement. Such stormwater flows
shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
H. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property.
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes,
existing native vegetation, and woodlands.
(b) Create, maintain, or extend riparian buffers and protect
existing forested buffers.
(c) Provide trees and woodlands adjacent to impervious areas
whenever feasible.
(d) Minimize the creation of impervious surfaces and the
degradation of waters of the commonwealth and promote
groundwater recharge.
(e) Protect natural systems and processes (drainageways,
vegetation, soils, and sensitive areas) and maintain, as much as
possible, the natural hydrologic regime.
(f) Incorporate natural site elements (wetlands, stream corridors,
mature forests) as design elements.
(g) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(h) Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction.
(i) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of the commonwealth.
(j) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas wherever possible and decentralize and manage
stormwater at its source.
(3) To the maximum extent practicable, the techniques for low-impact
development (LID) practices described in the BMP Manual shall be
incorporated. The proposed LID practices shall be noted on the
SWM site plan.
I. The design of all stormwater management facilities over karst shall
include an evaluation of measures to minimize adverse effects.
§ 187-22 MANHEIM CODE § 187-22
1:234
§ 187-23. Notifications.
J. Infiltration BMPs, to the extent practicable, shall be spread out, made
as shallow as practicable when located above grade, and located to
maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while still meeting
the other requirements of this chapter.
K. Normally dry, open-top storage facilities shall completely drain the
volume control storage over a period of time not less than 24 hours and
not more than 72 hours from the end of the design storm. However, any
infiltration at such facilities is exempt from the minimum twenty-fourhour
standard, i.e., may infiltrate in a shorter period of time, provided
that none of this water will be discharged into waters of this
commonwealth.
L. Normally dry, open-top storage facilities shall completely drain the rate
control storage over a period of time less than or equal to 24 hours from
the peak one-hundred-year water surface design elevation.
M. The design storm volumes and precipitation intensities to be used in the
analysis of peak rates of discharge shall be as required in § 187-27D.
N. The applicant shall refer to the BMP Manual for various BMPs and their
design standards.
O. For any activities that are regulated under Chapter 105 or Chapter 106,
or require any other permit under applicable state or federal
regulations, the permit(s) shall be part of the SWM site plan and must
be obtained prior to final plan approval.
A. Notice from the Lancaster County Conservation District of the approval
of the erosion and sedimentation pollution control plan.
B. A note shall be placed on the plan indicating any area that is not to be
offered for dedication, if applicable.
C. Written notice from the Borough that all proposed improvements have
been designed to the standards of the Borough and that financial
guarantee and a completed improvement guarantee agreement in a
form suitable to the Borough Council has been received.
D. Such written notices of approval as may be required by this chapter,
including, but not limited to, stormwater runoff to adjacent properties.
E. Notification from the appropriate state and federal agencies that
permits have been issued, or are not required, for any proposed
activities within streams, wetlands, or any other state or federally
regulated body of water. These permits include, but are not limited to,
floodplain encroachment permits, dam safety permits, earth
disturbance permits, stream encroachment permits, and general
permits.
F. Public utility lines.
§ 187-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-23
1:235
§ 187-24. Certificates.
(1) Where the tract described in the application includes any public
utility, electric transmission line, gas pipeline, or petroleum
product transmission line located within the tract, the applicant
shall notify, in writing, the owner or lessee of the right-of-way of his
intentions.
(2) A note stating any conditions regarding the use of the land,
minimum building setback, or right-of-way lines shall be included
on the plan.
(3) This requirement may also be satisfied by submitting a copy of the
recorded agreement.
G. Natural resource easement.
(1) Where the land included in the subject application has an
agricultural, woodland or other natural resource easement located
within the tract, the application shall be accompanied by a letter
from the party holding the easement stating any conditions on the
use of the land.
(2) This requirement may also be satisfied by submitting a copy of the
recorded easement.
A. Certificate for approval by the Borough's authorized staff
representative. See form of certificate in Appendix E.36
B. Certificate for approval by the Borough Engineer.
C. A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater BMPs are fixtures that cannot be altered or removed
without prior approval by the Borough.
D. A statement referencing the operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement and stating that the O&M agreement is part of the SWM site
plan.
E. The following signature block for the qualified professional preparing
the SWM site plan:
"I, __________, hereby certify that the stormwater management plan
meets all design standards and criteria of the Borough Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
36.Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 187-23 MANHEIM CODE § 187-24
1:236
ARTICLE V
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 187-25. General requirements.
All stormwater management, collection, conveyance, erosion control, and
floodplain considerations shall be accomplished in accordance with the
following provisions:
A. Prior to the final approval of any subdivision or land development plan,
or the commencement of any regulated activity within the jurisdiction
of this chapter, the developer shall submit a stormwater management
site plan to the Borough for approval.
(1) When plan applications, whether preliminary or final, are
submitted in sections, a generalized stormwater management site
plan for the entire project site shall be submitted in addition to the
detailed stormwater management site plan for the proposed
section. This generalized plan shall demonstrate how the
stormwater of the proposed section will relate to the entire
development. The amount and velocity at the discharge point of the
section shall be included in the data submitted. If temporary
facilities are required for construction of a section, such facilities
shall be included in the submitted plans.
(2) The type, location and extent of all erosion and sedimentation
control measures shall be shown on an erosion and sedimentation
pollution control plan that conforms to the requirements of the Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and the Design Standards
of § 187-26 of this chapter.
(3) An ownership and maintenance program shall be submitted, in
recordable form acceptable to the Borough, that clearly sets forth
the ownership and maintenance responsibility of all temporary and
permanent stormwater management facilities and erosion and
sedimentation control facilities, including:
(a) Description of temporary and permanent maintenance
requirements;
(b) Identification of a responsible individual, corporation,
association, or other entity for ownership and maintenance of
both temporary and permanent stormwater management and
erosion and sedimentation control facilities;
(c) Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for
all existing and proposed physical SWM facilities and BMPs,
such as ponds and infiltration structures, as necessary to
implement the operation and maintenance (O&M) plan. All
such agreements shall be duly recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds and shall constitute a binding permanent
§ 187-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-25
1:237
covenant upon the property, superior to all liens of record
and not subordinate to any easement or restriction that would
interfere with its provisions and the implementation thereof.
(d) The intent of these regulations is to provide private ownership
and maintenance of stormwater management and erosion and
sedimentation control facilities. Where the Borough Council
accepts dedication of stormwater management facilities, the
Borough Council may require the developer to establish, at the
time of dedication, a maintenance fund, in an amount
determined by the Borough, adequate for the perpetual care of
such facilities.
(4) A written report shall be submitted that includes the following
information:
(a) Stormwater runoff calculations for both predevelopment and
post-development conditions.
(b) An erosion and sedimentation pollution control plan narrative
that conforms to the requirements of the Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Manual of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and provides a
description of all erosion and sedimentation control measures,
temporary as well as permanent, including the staging of
earthmoving activities, sufficient in detail to clearly indicate
their function.
(c) A general description of the development site, including a
description of existing natural and hydrologic features and any
environmentally sensitive areas.
(d) A general description of the overall SWM concept for the
project, including a description of permanent SWM techniques,
nonstructural BMPs to be employed and construction
specifications of the materials to be used for structural SWM
facilities.
(e) For all proposed detention basins and retention basins, except
temporary sedimentation basins, the documentation shall
include a plotting or tabulations of storage volumes with
corresponding water surface elevations and the outflow rates
for those water surfaces.
(f) For all proposed detention basins and retention basins, except
temporary sediment basins, documentation shall set forth the
design hydrograph, the shortcut routing method or a method of
equal caliber acceptable to the Borough Engineer, utilized to
determine the function of the basin.
B. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
§ 187-25 MANHEIM CODE § 187-25
1:238
stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent with this
chapter.
C. The existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto
adjacent property shall not be relocated and shall be subject to any
applicable discharge criteria specified in this chapter.
D. Where a development site is traversed by watercourses other than
permanent streams, a drainage easement shall be provided conforming
substantially to the line of such watercourses. The terms of the
easement shall prohibit excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and
any alterations that may affect adversely the flow of stormwater within
any portion of the easement. Also, maintenance of vegetation within the
easement shall be required.
E. The PADEP Chapter 105 Rules and Regulations apply to the
construction, modification, operation, or maintenance of both existing
and proposed water obstructions and encroachments throughout the
watershed, including work in wetlands. Inquiries on permit
requirements or other concerns shall be addressed to DEP's regional
office.
F. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the development site cannot adequately provide for
drainage, open channels may be constructed conforming substantially
to the line and grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural
drainageways shall be subject to approval by DEP through the joint
permit application process, or, where deemed appropriate by DEP,
through the general permit process.
G. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the applicant must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding, or other harm will result from the
concentrated discharge. The applicant must provide an executed
easement for newly concentrated flow across adjacent properties.
H. Any stormwater management facilities or any facilities that constitute
water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges, outfalls, or stream
enclosures, etc.) that are regulated by this chapter, that will be located
in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth (including wetlands),
shall be subject to approval by DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 105 through the joint permit application process, or, where
deemed appropriate by DEP, the general permit process. When there is
a question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility of
the applicant or his agent to show that the land in question cannot be
classified as wetlands; otherwise, approval to work in the area must be
obtained from DEP.
I. Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under DEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
§ 187-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-25
1:239
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105
concerning dam safety which may be required to pass storms larger
than the one-hundred-year event.
J. When stormwater management facilities are proposed within 1,000 feet
of a downstream Borough, the stormwater analysis shall be submitted
to the downstream Borough's Engineer for review and comment.
K. Roof drains shall not be connected to sanitary or storm sewers. When it
is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers,
then the Borough shall permit it on a case-by-case basis.
L. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
will be located on or discharged onto state highway rights-of-way shall
be subject to approval by PennDOT.
M. Stormwater management facilities located within or affecting the
floodplain of any watercourse shall comply with the requirements of the
floodplain regulations provided in the Zoning Ordinance or any future
ordinances regulating construction or development within areas of the
Borough subject to flooding.
N. The minimum floor elevations for all structures that would be affected
by a basin, other temporary impoundments, or open conveyance
systems where ponding may occur shall be two feet above the onehundred-
year water surface. If basement or underground facilities are
proposed, detailed calculations addressing the effects of the
stormwater ponding on the structure and waterproofing and/or
floodproofing design information shall be provided for review and
approval.
O. Stormwater BMPs shall be encouraged. They shall be located,
designed, and constructed in accordance with the latest technical
guidance published by PADEP, provided they are accompanied by
detailed engineering plans and performance capabilities and
supporting site-specific soils, geology, runoff and groundwater and
infiltration rate data to verify proposed designs. Additional guidance
from other sources may be accepted at the discretion of the Borough
Engineer (a preapplication meeting is suggested).
P. All existing and natural watercourses, channels, drainage systems, and
areas of surface water concentration shall be maintained in their
existing condition unless an alteration is approved by the appropriate
regulatory agency.
Q. No outlet structure from a stormwater management facility shall
discharge directly onto a Borough or state roadway.
R. Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from regulated activities
shall be selected based on suitability of soils and site conditions and
shall be constructed on soils that have the following characteristics:
§ 187-25 MANHEIM CODE § 187-25
1:240
(1) A minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the facility
and the limiting zone, unless it is demonstrated to the satisfaction
of the Borough that the selected BMP has design criteria which
allow for a smaller separation.
(2) A stabilized infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional
stormwater load and drain completely as determined by field tests
conducted by the applicant's professional designer. The stabilized
infiltration rate is to be determined in the same location and within
the same soil horizon as the bottom of the infiltration facility. The
stabilized infiltration rate is to be determined as specified in the
BMP Manual.
S. Stormwater discharge points onto an adjacent property shall comply
with the following:
(1) Stormwater runoff from a project site shall flow directly into a
natural watercourse or into an existing storm sewer system. If
neither of these is available, the applicant shall obtain an easement
from the downstream landowner(s) to allow the site's runoff
discharge to reach a natural watercourse or an existing storm
sewer system through the easement. If an easement is obtained,
post-developed flow characteristics must be similar to or better
than the runoff characteristics (spread, velocity, and peak rate) of
the predeveloped flows. The easement from the downstream
property owner(s) shall be to allow for a piped storm sewer system,
an overland flow system, or a combination of the two. The
downstream system design shall conform to the design
requirements of this chapter.
(2) When the applicant provides verification that the downstream
landowner(s) refuses to grant an easement at reasonable terms in
the sole opinion of the Borough, the site shall be designed such that
the discharge from the applicant's site shall be in a nonerosive,
sheet flow condition. For all design year storms, including the onehundred-
year storm, runoff from the applicant's site shall flow onto
the adjacent property in a manner similar to the runoff
characteristics (spread, velocity, and peak rate) of the
predeveloped flow. The use of level spreaders is prohibited.
(3) Stormwater runoff shall not be transferred from one watershed to
another unless the watersheds are subwatersheds of a common
watershed which join together within the perimeter of the property,
or both of the following apply:
(a) The effect of the transfer does not alter the peak discharge (in
conformance with the requirements of the Act 167 plan) onto
adjacent lands; and
(b) Drainage easements from the affected landowners are
provided.
§ 187-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-25
1:241
T. Unless an alternate design is submitted to the Borough for review, and
said design is prepared by a licensed (in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania) geologist or geotechnical engineer:
(1) No stormwater facilities shall be placed in, over or within a
distance that will impact the following features:
(a) Sinkholes.
(b) Closed depressions.
(c) Lineaments in carbonate areas.
(d) Fracture traces.
(e) Caverns.
(f) Intermittent streams.
(g) Ephemeral streams.
(h) Bedrock pinnacles (surface or subsurface).
(2) The minimum isolation distance from stormwater management
facilities to the listed geologic features shall be as follows:
(a) One hundred feet from the rim of sinkholes or closed
depressions;
(b) One hundred feet from disappearing streams;
(c) Fifty feet from lineaments or fracture traces;
(d) Twenty-five feet from surface or identified subsurface
pinnacles.
(3) Stormwater runoff from any regulated activity shall not be
discharged into sinkholes.
(4) It shall be the developer's responsibility to verify if the
development is underlain by carbonate geology. The following note
shall be attached to all stormwater management site plans and
signed and sealed by the developer's qualified professional:
"I, __________, certify that the proposed detention basin is/is not
(circle one) underlain by carbonate geology."
(5) Whenever a stormwater facility will be located in an area underlain
by carbonate geology, a geological evaluation of the proposed
location by a registered professional geologist shall be conducted
to determine susceptibility to sinkhole formation. The evaluation
may include the use of impermeable liners to reduce or eliminate
the separation distances listed in § 187-25T(2).
§ 187-25 MANHEIM CODE § 187-25
1:242
U. All stormwater runoff flowing over the project site shall be considered
in the design of the stormwater management facilities.
V. The calculated peak rates of runoff for stormwater originating on the
project site must meet one the following conditions, for all watersheds
flowing from the project site:
(1) Match predevelopment hydrograph. Developers and/or landowners
are encouraged to provide infiltration facilities or utilize other
techniques which will allow the post-development one-hundredyear
hydrograph to match the predevelopment one-hundred-year
hydrograph, along all parts of the hydrograph, for the development
site. To match the predevelopment hydrograph, the postdevelopment
peak rate must be less than or equal to the
predevelopment peak rate, and the post-development runoff
volume must be less than or equal to the predevelopment volume
for the same storm event. A shift in hydrograph peak time of up to
five minutes and a rate variation of up to 5% at a given time may be
allowable to account for the timing effect of BMPs used to manage
the peak rate and runoff volume. This option is most feasible for
small subdivisions in areas of noncarbonate geology. Incorporating
the volume control requirements as given in § 187-30 can be used
as part of this option.
(2) Where the predevelopment hydrograph cannot be matched, one of
the following shall apply:
(a) For areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act
167 plan, the post-development peak discharge rates for the
two-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year storm
events (a twenty-four-hour SCS type storm or an IDF Curve
Rational Method storm) will follow the applicable approved
release rate maps.
(b) For areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved
Act 167 plan, post-development runoff from any regulated
activity shall not exceed the peak rates of runoff prior to
development for all design storms (two-, ten-, twenty-five-,
fifty-, and one-hundred-year storm events) except where the
post-development hydrograph does not exceed the
predevelopment hydrograph at all points in time for all design
storms.
(3) Infiltration. Developers and/or landowners are encouraged to
provide infiltration facilities or utilize other techniques which will
allow the post-development hydrograph to match the
predevelopment hydrograph, along all parts of the hydrograph for
the site. This option is most feasible for small subdivisions in areas
of noncarbonate geology.
(4) Developers have the option to propose a regional stormwater
management plan or participate in a regional stormwater
§ 187-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-25
1:243
§ 187-26. Design standards - erosion and sediment control.
management plan developed by others. A regional stormwater
management plan may include off-site volume and rate control, as
appropriate and supported by a detailed design approved by the
Borough. A regional stormwater management plan must meet all of
the volume and rate control standards required by this chapter for
the area defined by the regional stormwater management plan, but
not necessarily for each individual development site. Appropriate
agreements must be established to ensure the requirements of
this chapter and the requirements of the regional stormwater
management plan are met.
W. Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase to
maintain maximum infiltration capacity. Staging of earthmoving
activities and selection of construction equipment should consider this
protection.
X. Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff from
disturbed areas until the entire contributory drainage area to the
infiltration BMP has achieved final stabilization.
A. The applicant shall meet requirements as contained in 25 Pa. Code,
Chapters 92 and 102, as required and applicable as follows:
(1) The implementation and maintenance of erosion and sediment
control BMPs.
(2) Development of written plans.
(3) Submission of plans for approval.
(4) Obtaining erosion and sediment control and NPDES permits.
(5) Maintaining plans and permits on site.
B. Evidence of any necessary plan or permit approval for earth
disturbance activities from PADEP or the LCCD must be provided to the
Borough.
C. The Borough shall receive simultaneous copies of plans, reports,
applications, and other documents submitted to the LCCD for review.
D. A copy of the notice of termination for NPDES permits shall be provided
to the Borough once accepted by the LCCD.
E. A copy of the approved erosion and sediment control plan and any other
permit, as required by PADEP or the LCCD, shall be available at the
project site at all times if required under Chapter 102.
§ 187-25 MANHEIM CODE § 187-26
1:244
§ 187-27. Methods of calculation of runoff.
Methods shall be selected by the qualified person based on the individual
limitations and suitability of each method for a particular site. The methods
of computation used to determine peak discharge and runoff shall be:
F. Approval of an erosion and sedimentation control plan by the Borough
shall not be construed as an indication that the plan complies with the
standards of any agency of the commonwealth.
G. Construction of temporary roadways (e.g., for utility construction,
timber harvesting, etc.) shall comply with all applicable standards for
erosion and sedimentation control and stream crossing regulations
under 25 Pa. Code, Chapters 102 and 105.
H. The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the
LCCD for approval and shall address the following, as applicable:
(1) Design of the roadway system, including haul roads, skid roads,
landing areas, trails, and storage and staging areas.
(2) Runoff control structures (e.g., diversions, culverts, detention
ponds, etc.).
(3) Stream crossings for both perennial and intermittent streams.
(4) Access to public roadways, including design of rock construction
entrance for mud and debris control.
(5) A remediation plan for restoring the disturbed area through
regrading, topsoil placement, reseeding, and other stabilization
techniques, as required.
I. In accordance with Chapter 102, temporary facilities shall be included
in the submitted plans for a phased section where the following
conditions are met:
(1) A regulated activity constitutes a subdivision or land development.
(2) The final plan applications are submitted in sections.
(3) Temporary facilities are required for construction of a section.
A. The Soil-Cover-Complex Method (as set forth in the latest edition of
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55, as
published by NRCS, formerly SCS) may be used for all detention
facilities with a drainage area greater than or equal to 60 acres. This
method is recommended for design of stormwater management
facilities and where stormwater runoff volume must be taken into
consideration.
B. The Rational Method may be used for drainage areas up to 60 acres.
Extreme caution should be used by the qualified person if the
watershed has more than one main drainage channel, if the watershed
§ 187-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-27
1:245
is divided so that hydrologic properties are significantly different in
one watershed versus the other, if the time of concentration exceeds
60 minutes, or if stormwater runoff volume is an important factor. The
combination of Rational Method hydrographs based on timing shall be
prohibited.
C. The Rational Method shall be used for all:
(1) Collection facilities.
(2) Conveyance facilities.
D. If the NRCS/SCS Method (also known as the "Soil-Cover-Complex
Method") is used, the design storm volumes to be used in the analysis of
peak rates of discharge shall be obtained from the Precipitation-
Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0,
United States Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland.
NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/
pfds/orb/pa pfds.html.
(1) Provide the rainfall used for the two-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and
one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm events. Rainfall values
vary throughout the county depending on location.
(2) Provide the location (longitude and latitude) or a description of the
location for which the rainfall applies.
(3) If rainfalls from more than one location are used, provide the
methodology by which the design rainfall was calculated.
E. If the SCS Method is used, Antecedent Moisture Condition 1 is to be
used in areas of carbonate geology, and Antecedent Moisture Condition
2 is to be used in all other areas. A Type II distribution shall be used in
all areas.
F. If the Rational Method is used, the NOAA Atlas 14 data (see Subsection
D above) shall be used to determine the rainfall intensity in inches per
hour based on the information for the five- through sixty-minute
duration storm events.
G. Hydrographs may be obtained from NRCS methods such as TR-55,
TR-20, or from use of the "modified" or "unit hydrograph" rational
methods. If "modified" or "unit hydrograph" rational methods are used,
the ascending leg of the hydrograph shall have a time of three times the
time of concentration (3xTc), and the descending leg shall have a time
of seven times the time of concentration (7xTc) to approximate an
NRCS/SCS Type 2 hydrograph.
H. Runoff Coefficients "C" and Curve Numbers "CN" shall be based on the
charts contained in the Appendix.37
§ 187-27 MANHEIM CODE § 187-27
1:246
I. Times of concentration shall be based on the following design
parameters:
(1) Sheet flow: The maximum length for each reach of sheet or
overland flow before shallow concentrated or open channel flow
develops is 150 feet. Flow lengths greater than 100 feet shall be
justified based on the actual conditions at each development site.
Sheet flow may be determined using the nomograph in Appendix
C-4 or Manning's kinematic solution shown in the Sheet Flow
section of Worksheet No. 1 in Appendix C-5.38
(2) Shallow concentrated flow: Travel time for shallow concentrated
flow shall be determined using Appendix C-6 from TR-55, Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds.39
(3) Open channel flows: At points where sheet and shallow
concentrated flows concentrate in field depressions, swales,
gutters, curbs, or pipe collection systems, the travel times and
downstream end of the development site between these design
points shall be based upon Manning's Equation and/or acceptable
engineering design standards as determined by the Borough
Engineer.
J. For the purpose of calculating predevelopment peak discharges, all
runoff coefficients, both on-site and off-site, shall be based on actual
land use assuming summer or good land conditions. Post-development
runoff coefficients for off-site discharges used to design conveyance
facilities shall be based on actual land use assuming winter or poor land
conditions.
K. Design of on-site conveyance systems calculations may use the Rational
Method of Q=CIA where Q is the peak discharge of the watershed in
cubic feet per second, C is the coefficient of runoff, I is the intensity of
rainfall in inches per hour, and A is the area of the watershed in acres;
or any other method approved by the Borough.
L. Runoff calculations shall include a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
indicating volume and velocities of flow and the grades, sizes, and
capacities of water-carrying structures, sediment basins, and retention
and detention structures and sufficient design information to construct
such facilities. Runoff calculations shall also indicate both
predevelopment and post-development rates for peak discharge of
stormwater runoff from the project site.
M. Runoff calculations will also be made to ensure that the runoff from the
upstream watershed area can be accommodated by the pipes, drainage
easements, watercourses, etc., on the site.
37.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
38.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
39.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 187-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-27
1:247
§ 187-28. Design standards - water-carrying facilities.
N. Peak rate control is not required for off-site runoff. Off-site runoff may
be bypassed around the site, provided all other discharge requirements
are met. If off-site runoff is routed through rate control facilities, runoff
coefficients for off-site discharges used to design those rate control
facilities shall be based on actual land use assuming winter or poor land
conditions.
A. All storm sewer pipes, grass waterways, open channels, swales, and
other water-carrying facilities that service drainage areas within the
site shall be designed to convey the twenty-five-year storm event
unless, in the opinion of the Borough or Borough Engineer, the
character of development and potential for damage warrant design for
the fifty- or one-hundred-year storm.
B. Stormwater management facilities that convey off-site water through
the site shall be designed to convey the fifty-year storm event.
C. All developments shall include provisions that allow for the overland
conveyance and flow of the post-developed one-hundred-year storm
event without damage to public or private property.
D. Conveyance facilities shall comply with the design criteria in the
following table:
Conveyance Facility Design Criteria
Location
Within
Public
Street
Ridght-of-
Way
Outside Public Street
Right-Of-Way
Loading All
Vehicular
Loading
Nonvehicular
Loading
(1) Pipe design
(a) Material SLHDPE,
RCP
PVC, SLHDPE,
RCP
PVC, SLHDPE,
RCP
(b) Slope
(minimum)
0.5% 0.5% 0.5%
(c) Cover 1 foot to
stone
subgrade
1 foot to stone
subgrade
1 foot to
surface
(d) Diameter
(minimum)
15 inches 15 inches 8 inches
(e) Street crossing
angle
75° to 90° N/A N/A
§ 187-27 MANHEIM CODE § 187-28
1:248
Conveyance Facility Design Criteria
Location
Within
Public
Street
Ridght-of-
Way
Outside Public Street
Right-Of-Way
Loading All
Vehicular
Loading
Nonvehicular
Loading
(f) Access/
maintenance
port frequency
(maximum)
400 feet 400 feet 600 feet
(2) Inlet design
(a) Material Concrete Concrete N/A
(b) Grate
depression
0 inches 0 inches 0-inch
minimum
(3) Manhole design
(a) Material Concrete Concrete Concrete
(4) Swale design
(a) Freeboard
(minimum)
6 inches N/A 6 inches
(b) Velocity
(maximum)
Stability
check
N/A Stability check
(c) Slope
(minimum)
1% N/A 1%
(d) Side slopes
(residential
area)
4:1 max N/A 4:1 max
(e) Side slopes
(nonresidential
area)
4:1 max N/A 3:1 max
(f) Bottom width to
flow depth ratio
12:1 N/A 12:1
(5) Outlet design
(a) End treatment Headwall/
endwall
N/A Headwall/
endwall or
flared end
section
(b) Energy
dissipater
Required N/A Required
§ 187-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-28
1:249
E. All storm sewer pipes, culverts, manholes, inlets, endwalls, and end
sections shall be constructed in accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Form 408, as amended by Manheim
Borough.
F. Storm sewer pipes, culverts, manholes, inlets, endwalls, and end
sections proposed for dedication or located along streets shall conform
to the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation,
Bureau of Design, Standards for Roadway Construction, Publication No.
72, in effect and as amended by Manheim Borough at the time the
design is submitted.
G. The roughness coefficient (Manning "n" values) used for conveyance
pipe capacity calculations shall be determined in accordance with
PennDOT Publication 584, PennDOT Drainage Manual, or per the
manufacturer's specifications.
H. Endwalls and end sections shall be used where stormwater runoff
enters or leaves the storm sewer horizontally from a natural or manmade
channel.
I. Inlets shall be placed on both sides of the street at low spots, at changes
in the horizontal or vertical directions of storm sewers, and at points
where the flow in gutters exceeds three inches. Inlets shall normally be
along the curbline at or beyond the curb radius points. For the purpose
of inlet location at corners, the depth of flow shall be considered for
each gutter. At intersections, the depth of flow for the twenty-five-year
storm across the through streets shall not exceed one inch. Inlets shall
be depressed two inches below the grade of the road-side swale,
curbline, or ground surface. An access/maintenance port may either be
an inlet or manhole. Manholes may be substituted for inlets at locations
where inlets are not required to collect surface runoff.
J. Material consistency and placement depths for storm sewer pipe
backfill shall be (at a minimum) per all applicable pipe manufacturer's
recommendations, further providing it should be free of large (not
exceeding six inches in any dimension) objectionable or detritus
material.
K. Within the public street right-of-way, the gutter spread based on the
twenty-five-year storm shall be no greater than 1/2 of the travel lane
and have a maximum depth of three inches at the curbline. A parking
lane shall not be considered as part of the travel lane. In the absence of
pavement markings separating a travel lane from the parking lane, the
parking lane shall be assumed to be seven feet wide if parking is
permitted on the street.
L. Inlets or manholes shall be placed at all points of changes in the
horizontal or vertical directions of conveyance pipes. Curved pipe
sections are prohibited.
§ 187-28 MANHEIM CODE § 187-28
1:250
M. All inlets placed in paved areas shall have heavy-duty, bicycle-safe
grating consistent with PennDOT Publication 72M, latest edition. A
note to this effect shall be added to the SWM site plan or inlet details
therein.
N. Inlets, junction boxes, or manholes greater than five feet in depth shall
be equipped with nonaluminum ladder rungs and shall be detailed on
the SWM site plan.
O. Where the connecting pipe has a diameter of 18 inches or greater,
headwalls and endwalls shall be provided with a protective barrier
device to prevent entry of the storm sewer pipe by unauthorized
persons. Such protection devices shall be designed to be removable for
cleaning.
P. Stormwater roof drains and pipes, wherever possible, shall discharge
water to encourage dispersion or infiltration and not into storm sewers
or street gutters.
Q. All existing and natural watercourses, channels, drainage systems, and
areas of surface water concentration shall be maintained in their
existing condition unless an alteration is approved by the Borough.
R. In addition to the material requirements in this section, culverts
designed to convey waters of the commonwealth may be constructed
with either a corrugated metal arch or a precast concrete culvert.
S. Flow velocities from any storm sewer shall not result in a degradation
of the receiving channel.
T. Energy dissipaters shall be placed at the outlets of all storm sewer
pipes where flow velocities exceed maximum permitted channel
velocities.
U. The capacities of swales shall be computed from the Manning Equation
using the following design parameters: Permissible open channel
velocities and design standards shall be in accordance with good
engineering practice as documented in the Engineering Field Manual
for Conservation Practices, USDA, SCS, or in Design Charts for Open-
Channel Flow, Hydraulic Design Series No. 3, United States
Department of Transportation.
(1) Vegetated swales:
(a) The first condition shall consider swale stability based upon a
low degree of retardance ("n" = 0.03);
(b) The second condition shall consider swale capacity based upon
a higher degree of retardance ("n" = 0.05); and
(c) All vegetated swales shall have a minimum slope of 1% unless
otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer.
§ 187-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-28
1:251
§ 187-29. Design standards - aboveground storage facilities.
(2) The "n" factors to be used for paved or riprap swales or gutters
shall be based upon accepted engineering design practices, as
approved by the Municipal Engineer.
(3) All swales shall be designed to maximize infiltration and
concentrate low flows to minimize siltation and meandering, unless
geotechnical conditions do not permit infiltration.
A. Aboveground storage facilities shall consist of all stormwater facilities
which store, infiltrate/evaporate/transpire, clean or otherwise affect
stormwater runoff and the top of which is exposed to the natural
environment. Aboveground storage facilities shall be located above the
finished ground elevation. Aboveground storage facilities do not include
stormwater management facilities designed for conveyance or cisterns.
B. Facilities with a facility depth greater than eight feet shall not be
permitted in residential areas.
C. Aboveground storage facilities shall comply with the design criteria in
the following table:
Aboveground Storage Facility Design Criteria
Facility Depth
Less Than 2
Feet
2 Feet to 8
Feet
Greater Than
8 Feet
(1) Embankment geometry
(a) Top width
(minimum)
2 feet 5 feet 8 feet
(b) Interior side
slope
(maximum)
2:1 3:1 5:1
(c) Exterior side
slope
(maximum)
2:1 3:1 3:1
(2) Embankment construction
(a) Key trench Not required Required Required
(b) Pipe collar Not required Required Required
(c) Compaction
density
Not required Required Required
(3) Internal construction
(a) Dewatering
feature
N/A Required Required
(b) Pretreatment
elements
Not required* Required Required
§ 187-28 MANHEIM CODE § 187-29
1:252
Aboveground Storage Facility Design Criteria
Facility Depth
Less Than 2
Feet
2 Feet to 8
Feet
Greater Than
8 Feet
(4) Outlet structure
(a) Pipe size
(minimum)
6 inches 12 inches 15 inches
(b) Pipe material SLHDPE, PVC,
RCP
SLHDPE, RCP RCP
(c) Anticlogging
devices
Required Required Required
(d) Antivortex
design
Not required Required Required
(e) Watertight
joints in
piping?
No Yes Yes
(5) Spillway requirements
(a) Spillway
freeboard
(minimum)
3 inches 3 inches 6 inches
(b) Width
(minimum)
Not required 10 feet 20 feet
(c) Width
(maximum)
Not required 50 feet 50 feet
(d) Spillway
channel design
Not required Required Required
(e) Routing of
100-year storm
Permitted Permitted Permitted
D. All basins shall be structurally sound and shall be constructed of sound
and durable materials. The completed structure and the foundation of
all basins shall be stable under all probable conditions of operation and
shall be capable of discharging the peak discharge of a postdevelopment
one-hundred-year storm event through the emergency
spillway facilities, in a condition that assumes the primary outlet(s) are
blocked, which will not damage the integrity of the facility or the
downstream drainage areas. Use of the spillway to convey flows greater
than the fifty-year design storm shall be permitted.
E. An easement shall be provided from the basin spillway outfall to a
natural or artificial watercourse.
F. The effect on downstream areas if the basin embankment fails shall be
considered in the design of all basins. The basin shall be designed to
§ 187-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-29
1:253
minimize the potential damage caused by such failure of the
embankment.
G. The maximum depth of water for basins without restricted access shall
not exceed six feet unless approved by modification by the Borough
Council. Access to basins with a maximum depth of water greater than
six feet shall be restricted by fencing that will discourage access.
H. Basins without restricted access shall have impoundment areas with
side slopes no greater than five horizontal to one vertical. Access to
basins with steeper side slopes shall be restricted by fencing that will
discourage access.
I. All detention basins shall include an outlet structure to permit draining
the rate control volume to a completely dry position within 24 hours,
exclusive of BMP storage.
J. All outlet structures and emergency spillways shall include a
satisfactory means of dissipating the energy of flow at its outlet to
assure conveyance of flow without endangering the safety and integrity
of the basin and the downstream drainage area.
K. An impervious core/key trench, when required, shall consist of a cutoff
trench (below existing grade) and a core trench (above existing grade).
A key trench may not be required wherever it can be shown that
another design feature, such as the use of an impermeable liner,
accomplishes the same purpose. Materials used for the core shall
conform to the Unified Soil Classification GC, SC, CH, or CL and must
have at least 30% passing the No. 200 sieve.
(1) The dimensions of the core shall provide a minimum trench depth
of two feet below existing grade, minimum width of four feet and
side slope of 1H:1V or flatter.
(2) The core should extend up both abutments to the ten-year water
surface elevation or six inches below the emergency spillway
elevation, whichever is lower.
(3) The core shall extend four feet below any pipe penetrations
through the impervious core. The core shall be installed along or
parallel to the center line of the embankment.
(4) Compaction requirements shall be the same as those for the
embankment to assure maximum density and minimum
permeability.
L. All pipe collars, when required, shall be designed in accordance with
Chapter 7 of the DEP E&S Manual. The material shall consist of
concrete or otherwise nondegradable material around the outfall barrel
and shall be watertight.
M. When required, embankments shall be compacted by sheepsfoot or pad
roller. The loose lift thickness shall be nine inches or less, depending on
§ 187-29 MANHEIM CODE § 187-29
1:254
§ 187-30. Design standards - volume control.
Stormwater runoff volume controls shall be implemented using the Design
Storm Method in Subsection A below.
roller size, and the maximum particle size is six inches or less (2/3 of the
lift thickness). Five passes of the compaction equipment over the entire
surface of each lift are required. Embankment compaction to visible
nonmovement is also required.
N. The embankment fill material shall be taken from an appropriate
borrow area which shall be free of roots, stumps, wood, rubbish, stones
greater than six inches, or frozen or other objectionable materials.
O. The minimum freeboard shall be provided above the one-hundred-year
design elevation of the water surface at the emergency spillway in a
condition that assumes the primary outlet(s) is(are) blocked.
P. No outlet structure from a detention basin or swale shall discharge
directly onto any publicly used Borough, state, or private road but shall
discharge into a culvert under or along the road.
Q. Wherever possible, basins shall have a nonuniform (naturalistic) shape,
rather than a geometric design in the form of a square or rectangle.
R. The minimum bottom slope of facilities not designed for infiltration
shall be 1%. A flatter slope may be used if an equivalent dewatering
mechanism is provided.
S. When required, dewatering shall be provided through the use of
underdrain, surface device, or an alternate approved by the Borough
Engineer. If the facility is to be used for infiltration, the dewatering
device should be capable of being disconnected and only be made
operational if the basin is not dewatering within the required time
frame.
T. When required, pretreatment elements shall consist of forebays, or an
alternate approved by the Municipal Engineer, to keep silt to a smaller
portion of the facility for ease of maintenance.
U. Within basins designed for infiltration, existing native vegetation shall
be preserved, if possible. For existing unvegetated areas or for
infiltration basins that require excavation, a planting plan shall be
prepared in accordance with this chapter and the BMP Manual which is
designed to promote infiltration.
V. All discharge control devices with appurtenances shall be made of
reinforced concrete and stainless steel. Bolts/fasteners shall be
stainless steel.
W. For facilities with a depth less than two feet, no outlet structure shall be
required.
§ 187-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-30
1:255
A. The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable to
any size of regulated activity. This method requires detailed modeling
based on site conditions.
(1) The post-development total runoff volume shall not increase for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year, twenty-four-hour storm
event.
(2) For modeling purposes:
(a) Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas must be
considered meadow in good condition.
(b) Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present,
shall be considered meadow in good condition in the model for
existing conditions.
(c) The maximum loading ratio for volume control facilities in
karst areas shall be 3:1 impervious drainage area to infiltration
area and 5:1 total drainage area to infiltration area. The
maximum loading ratio for volume control facilities in nonkarst
areas shall be 5:1 impervious drainage area to infiltration
area and 8:1 total drainage area to infiltration area. A higher
ratio would be acceptable if proper justification is submitted
and approved.
B. A detailed geologic evaluation of the development site shall be
performed in areas of carbonate geology to determine the design
parameters of recharge facilities. The evaluation shall be performed by
a state licensed/certified professional geologist (PG) and shall, at a
minimum, address soil permeability, depth to bedrock, susceptibility to
sinkhole formation, and subgrade stability.
C. Any portion of the volume control storage that meets the following
conditions may also be used as rate control storage:
(1) Volume control storage that depends on infiltration and is designed
according to the infiltration standards in § 187-25R.
(2) The volume control storage which will be used for rate control is
that storage which is available within 24 hours from the end of the
design storm based on the stabilized infiltration rate and/or the
evapotranspiration rate.
D. Volume control BMPs shall be designed in accordance with the BMP
Manual. All applicable worksheets from Chapter 8 of the BMP Manual
must be used when establishing volume controls.
E. Actual field infiltration tests at the location of the proposed elevation of
the stormwater BMPs are required when 5,000 square feet or greater of
new impervious surface is added. Infiltration tests shall be conducted in
accordance with the BMP Manual. The Borough shall be notified 24
§ 187-30 MANHEIM CODE § 187-30
1:256
§ 187-31. Design standards - subsurface storage facilities.
hours prior to infiltration tests being conducted as to provide an
opportunity for the Borough to witness the tests.
A. Subsurface storage facilities shall consist of all stormwater facilities
which store, infiltrate/evaporate/transpire, clean or otherwise affect
stormwater runoff and the top of which is not exposed to the natural
environment. Subsurface facilities shall be located below the finished
ground elevation. Subsurface facilities shall not include stormwater
management facilities designed for conveyance.
B. Subsurface storage facilities shall comply with the design criteria in the
following table:
Subsurface Storage Facility Design Criteria
Facility Type
Infiltration and
Storage
Storage Without
Infiltration
(1) Facility geometry
(a) Depth from surface
(maximum)
2 feet less than
limiting zone
N/A
(b) Loading ratio
(maximum)
Per BMP Manual* N/A
(2) Distribution system requirements
(a) Pipe size (minimum) 4 inches 4 inches
(b) Pretreatment Required Required
(c) Loading/balancing Required Not required
(d) Observation/access
ports
Required Required
C. The facility shall be designed to provide a method to eliminate solids,
sediment, and other debris from entering the subsurface facility.
D. The facility shall be designed to provide a means of evenly balancing
the flow across the surface of the facility to be used for infiltration.
E. For facilities with the bottom less than five feet below the average
grade of the ground surface, a cleanout shall be an acceptable
observation port. For facilities with the bottom five feet or more below
the average grade of the ground surface, a manhole or other means
acceptable to the Borough shall be provided for access to and
monitoring of the facility. The number of access points shall be
sufficient to flush or otherwise clean out the system.
F. Distribution system piping shall be PVC, SLHDPE, or RCP.
§ 187-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-31
1:257
G. The stone used for infiltration beds shall be clean-washed, uniformly
graded coarse aggregate (AASHTO No. 3 or equivalent approved by the
Borough). The void ratio for design shall be assumed to be 0.4.
H. Material consistency and placement depths for backfill shall be (at a
minimum) per all applicable pipe manufacturer's recommendations,
further providing it should be free of large (not exceeding six inches in
any dimension) objectionable or detritus material. Select nonaggregate
material should be indigenous to the surrounding soil material for
nonvehicular areas. Backfill within vehicular areas shall comply with
this section unless otherwise specified in governing municipal road/
street or subdivision and land development ordinances. Furthermore, if
the design concept includes the migration of runoff through the backfill
to reach the infiltration facility, the material shall be well-drained, free
of excess clay or clay-like materials, and generally uniform in gradation.
I. Nonwoven geotextiles shall be placed on the sides and top of
subsurface infiltration facilities. No geotextiles shall be placed on the
bottom of subsurface infiltration facilities.
J. When located under pavement, the top of the subsurface facility shall
be a minimum of three inches below the bottom of pavement subbase.
Where located under vegetative cover, the top of the subsurface facility
shall be a minimum of 12 inches below the surface elevation or as
required to establish vegetation.
K. Subsurface facilities shall be designed to safely convey and/or bypass
flows from storms exceeding the design storm.
L. The following principles shall be applied to the design plan and
construction schedule to minimize soil erosion and sedimentation:
(1) Stripping of vegetation, grading or other soil disturbance shall be
done in a manner that will minimize soil erosion.
(2) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and
protected.
§ 187-31 MANHEIM CODE § 187-31
1:258
ARTICLE VI
Maintenance, Financial Security, Modifications and Prohibited
Activities
For the purposes of this article, drainage courses, swales, stormwater
inlets, pipes, conduits, detention basins and other SWM facilities, including
BMPs, shall be included under the term "SWM facilities."
§ 187-32. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
§ 187-33. Operation and maintenance agreements.
A. The Borough shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site
plan. The Borough may require a dedication of such facilities as part of
the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a
requirement is not an indication that the Borough will accept the
facilities. The Borough reserves the right to accept or reject the
ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the SWM
facilities.
B. Facilities, areas, or structures used as SWM BMPs shall be enumerated
as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed
restrictions or conservation easements that run with the land.
C. The O&M plans and agreements shall be recorded as a restrictive deed
covenant that runs with the land.
D. The Borough may take enforcement actions against a landowner for any
failure to satisfy the provisions of this article.
A. Prior to final approval of the development site's SWM site plan, the
record owner of the development site shall sign and record an O&M
agreement covering all stormwater control facilities that are to be
privately owned. Said agreement, designated as Appendix A, is
attached and made part hereto.40 The agreement shall stipulate that:
(1) The landowner, successor, and assignees shall maintain all facilities
in good working order in accordance with the approved
maintenance schedule and shall keep all facilities in a safe and
attractive manner.
(2) The landowner shall convey to the Borough conservation
easements and/or rights-of-way to assure access for periodic
inspections by the Borough and maintenance, if required.
(3) The owner shall keep on file with the Borough the name, address,
and telephone number of the person or company responsible for
40.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 187-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-33
1:259
§ 187-34. Performance guarantee.
maintenance activities; in the event of a change, new information
will be submitted to the Borough within 10 days of the change.
(4) In the case of condominium and planned communities, separate
agreements will be entered and be in legal form capable of being
enforced against the common elements and the ownership
interests of the individual units or properties, as the case may be,
so that the Borough has the ability to force compliance with the
provisions of such agreements and to assess the cost (as set forth in
this chapter) against all owners so that the Borough does not incur
out-of-pocket expenses.
(5) The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of
the SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M
agreement, the Borough may perform the services required and
charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result
in a lien against the property.
(6) Where the NPDES permit for the project requires that BMPs be
installed, annual written reporting of the inspection and
maintenance of those BMPs shall be included in the program.
B. The operation and maintenance agreement shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Municipal Solicitor and governing body.
C. Municipalities are exempt from the requirement to sign and record an
O&M agreement.
A. For SWM site plans that are required to have an NPDES permit and a
financial guarantee to the Borough is required, evidence of the NPDES
permit's executed "notice of termination" shall be provided to the
Borough prior to release of the financial security.
B. A financial security (bond, restricted account or letter of credit) for
stormwater-related improvements shall be supplied by the developer in
conjunction with the subdivision/land development approval, or in
conjunction with the stormwater management site plan approval if no
subdivision/land development plan is required.
C. The applicant shall provide a financial security to the Borough for the
timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater
management facilities, including E&S BMPS, as required by the
approved stormwater management site plan and this chapter and, as
applicable, in accordance with the provisions of Sections 509, 510, and
511 of the MPC.
D. As the work of installing the required stormwater management
facilities proceeds, the party posting the financial security may request
the Council to release or authorize the release of, from time to time,
such portions of the financial security necessary for payment to the
§ 187-33 MANHEIM CODE § 187-34
1:260
§ 187-35. Maintenance responsibilities.
contractor or contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall
be in writing addressed to the Council, and the Council shall have 45
days from receipt of such request within which to allow the Borough
Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Council that such portion of the
work upon the stormwater management facilities has been completed
in accordance with the approved stormwater management site plan.
Upon such certification, the Council shall authorize release by the
bonding company or lending institution of an amount as estimated by
the Borough Engineer fairly representing the value of the stormwater
management facilities completed. The Council may, prior to final
release at the time of completion and certification by its Engineer,
require retention of 10% of the estimated cost of the aforesaid
stormwater management facilities.
E. In the event that any stormwater management facilities which may be
required have not been installed as provided in the approved
stormwater management site plan, the Council is hereby granted the
power to enforce any corporate bond or other security by appropriate
legal and equitable remedies. If proceeds of such bond or other security
are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or
corrections to all the stormwater management facilities covered by said
security, the Council may, at its option, install part of such stormwater
management facilities and may institute appropriate legal or equitable
action to recover the moneys necessary to complete the remainder of
the stormwater management facilities. All of the proceeds, whether
resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable action
brought against the developer, or both, shall be used solely for the
installation of the stormwater management facilities covered by such
security and not for any other municipal purpose.
A. Maintenance of SWM facilities shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
(1) Regular inspection of the SWM facilities to assure proper
implementation of BMPs, maintenance and care, as per § 187-42.
(2) All pipes, swales and detention facilities shall be kept free of any
debris or other obstruction and in original design condition.
(3) Removal of silt from all permanent structures which trap silt or
sediment in order to keep the material from building up in grass
waterways, pipes, detention or retention basins, infiltration
structures, or BMPs, and thus reducing their capacity to convey or
store water.
(4) Mowing grass areas as necessary to maintain adequate growth and
to control weeds. Chemical weed control may be used to maintain
the specified planting (i.e., grass, wetlands plants, etc.) if federal,
state and local laws and regulations are met.
§ 187-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-35
1:261
§ 187-36. Maintenance of existing facilities/BMPs.
§ 187-37. Modifications.
(5) Liming and fertilizing vegetated channels and other areas
according to the specifications in the "Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Handbook of Berks/Chester/Lancaster County."
(6) Reestablishment of vegetation by seeding and mulching or sodding
of scoured areas or areas where vegetation has not been
successfully established. Selection of seed mixtures shall be
subject to approval by the Borough.
(7) Where the NPDES permit for the project requires that BMPs be
installed, annual written reporting of the inspection and
maintenance of those BMPs shall be provided to the Borough. LID
practices shall be included in the annual written report. A form for
reporting shall be available at the Borough Office. Failure to
provide such reports may result in enforcement and penalties by
the Borough.
B. The Borough reserves the right to accept or reject any proposal to
dedicate ownership and operating responsibility of any SWM facilities
to the Borough.
A. SWM facilities existing on the effective date of this chapter, which have
not been accepted by the Borough or for which maintenance
responsibility has not been assumed by a private entity such as a
homeowners' association, shall be maintained by the individual
landowners. Such maintenance shall include, at a minimum, those
items set forth in § 187-35 above. If the Borough determines at any time
that any permanent SWM facility has been eliminated, altered, blocked
through the erection of structures or the deposit of materials, or
improperly maintained, the condition constitutes a nuisance, and the
Borough shall notify the landowner of corrective measures that are
required and provide for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30
days, within which the property owner shall take such corrective action.
If the landowner does not take the required corrective action, the
Borough may either perform the work or contract for the performance
of the work and bill the landowner for the cost of the work plus a
penalty of 10% of the cost of the work. If such bill is not paid by the
property owner within 30 days, the Borough may file a municipal claim
against the property upon which the work was performed in accordance
with applicable laws. The Borough shall have the right to choose among
the remedies and may use one or more remedies concurrently.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
an SWM facility or within a drainage easement that will limit or alter
the functioning of the facility or easement in any manner.
A. Modification of chapter provisions.
§ 187-35 MANHEIM CODE § 187-37
1:262
(1) The provisions of this chapter not related to water quality are
intended as minimum standards for the protection of the public
health, safety, and welfare. The Borough reserves the right to
modify or to extend them conditionally in individual cases as may
be necessary in the public interest; provided, however, that such
variation shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purpose of this chapter, and that the applicant shows that to the
satisfaction of the Borough that the applicable regulation is
unreasonable, or will cause undue hardship, or that an alternative
proposal will allow for equal or better results. The list of such
modifications shall be listed on the plan.
(2) In granting waivers/modifications for provisions of this chapter, the
Borough may impose such conditions as will, in its judgment,
secure substantially the objectives of the standards and
requirements of this chapter.
(3) The Borough may, after consultation with the DEP, approve
measures for meeting the state water quality requirements other
than those in this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum
requirements of, and do not conflict with, state law, including, but
not limited to, the Clean Streams Law. The Borough shall maintain
a record of consultations with DEP pursuant to this subsection.
Where an NPDES permit for stormwater discharges associated
with construction activities is required, issuance of an NPDES
permit shall constitute satisfaction of consultation with the DEP.
(4) Where a written erosion and sediment control plan associated with
earth disturbance of 5,000 square feet to one acre is required,
review of the written erosion and sediment control plan shall
constitute satisfaction of consultation with the DEP.
B. Modification of approved plans and facilities.
(1) Any modification which involves a change in stormwater
management control methods or techniques, or which involves the
relocation or redesign of control measures, or which is necessary
because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the approved
plan shall require the submission of a revised plan by the developer
in accordance with the plan requirements as set forth in Article IV
of this chapter.
(2) Any replatting, revision, or resubdivision of recorded plans or any
replatting, revision, or resubdivision of any approved final plan
which has not been recorded, including lot grading plans in
subdivisions, shall be considered as a new application and shall
comply with all the requirements of this chapter.
§ 187-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-38
1:263
§ 187-38. As-built plans.
Prior to the final release of the financial security, the developer shall provide
the Borough with one Mylar and two prints of the final as-built plan showing
the following:
§ 187-39. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Actual horizontal and vertical location of cartway center line versus
right-of-way center line.
B. Actual location of floodplain by elevation and dimensions from property
line.
C. Actual location and cross section of swales and accompanying
easements.
D. Actual horizontal and vertical location of stormwater management
facilities, including type and size of storm drainage pipes.
E. Stormwater management facility:
(1) Actual contours of the stormwater management facility.
(2) Actual outlet structure details, including type, size and inverts of
outlet pipes.
(3) Actual elevation of the embankment and emergency spillway.
(4) A table showing the stage/storage/discharge curve for the
constructed conditions.
(5) A table providing a comparison of the approved design vs. the asbuilt
discharge rates from all stormwater management facilities.
F. When a digital submission of an as-built plan is required, all coordinates
as depicted on the plan shall be based on the PA South Zone State Plane
Coordinate System (NAD83 for horizontal and NAVD88 for vertical).
G. The as-built record plan submission shall include a certification of
completion signed by the owner's qualified professional verifying that
all permanent SWM BMPs have been constructed according to the
approved plans and specifications. If any qualified licensed
professionals contributed to the construction plans, then a qualified
licensed professional must sign the completion certificate.
A. The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in
Subsection C below:
(1) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
that allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage,
process wastewater, and wash water, to enter a separate storm
sewer system (if applicable) or waters of this commonwealth and
§ 187-38 MANHEIM CODE § 187-39
1:264
any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks; and
(2) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the separate storm sewer system (if
applicable) which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by the Borough.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into surface waters
of this commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater,
except:
(1) As provided in Subsection C below; and
(2) Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of this
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including water line flushing.
(3) Irrigation and landscape irrigation drainage.
(4) Air-conditioning condensate.
(5) Springs.
(6) Water from crawl space pumps.
(7) Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(8) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, diverted stream flows.
(9) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(10) Lawn watering.
(11) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(12) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater, rising groundwater, and
groundwater infiltration.
(13)Water from individual residential car washing.
(14) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
D. In the event that the Borough or the DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection C above significantly contribute to
pollution of the waters of this commonwealth, the Borough or DEP will
notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
§ 187-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-40
1:265
§ 187-40. Roof drains and sump pumps.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge, to the maximum extent
practicable, to infiltration or vegetative BMPs and to the maximum extent
practicable satisfy the criteria for DIAs.
§ 187-41. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, or structures without the written approval of the Borough.
§ 187-42. Inspection.
SWM BMPs shall be inspected by the landowner, or the landowner's
designee, according to the following list of minimum frequencies:
A. Annually for the first five years.
B. Once every three years thereafter.
C. During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm.
D. Those BMPs related to an NPDES permit shall be inspected to the postconstruction
stormwater management plan, with annual written
reports provided to the Township.
§ 187-40 MANHEIM CODE § 187-42
1:266
ARTICLE VII
Administration
§ 187-43. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of
the Borough may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the
Borough to investigate or ascertain the condition of the subject property in
regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 187-44. Notification of violation.
In the event that any person fails to comply with the requirements of
this chapter, or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued
hereunder, the Borough shall provide written notification of the violation.
Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a
reasonable time limit for correction of these violation(s). Failure to comply
within the time specified shall subject such person to the penalty provisions
of this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not
preclude by the Borough from pursuing any and all other remedies.
§ 187-45. Enforcement; violations.
A. The Borough Council is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of
the provisions of this chapter. All inspections regarding compliance
with the stormwater management site plan shall be the responsibility of
the Borough Engineer or other qualified persons designated by the
Borough.
(1) A set of SWM site plans approved by the Borough shall be on file at
the development site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity. Periodic inspections may be made by the Borough or its
designee during construction.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
undertake any activity under § 187-5 on any property except as
provided for in the approved stormwater management site plan and
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to
alter or remove any control structure required by the stormwater
management site plan pursuant to this chapter or to allow the
property to remain in a condition which does not conform to the
approved stormwater management site plan.
(3) Any approval or permit issued by the Borough pursuant to this
chapter may be suspended or revoked for:
(a) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of
the approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
(b) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other
applicable law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the
regulated activity.
§ 187-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-45
1:267
§ 187-46. Penalties and remedies.
(c) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act
during the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a
hazard, nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life or property
of others.
(4) A suspended approval may be reinstated by the Borough when:
(a) The Borough has inspected and approved the corrections to
the violations that caused the suspension.
(b) The Borough is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
(5) An approval that has been revoked by the Borough cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
(6) If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the Borough may provide a limited
time period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases,
the Borough will provide the landowner, or the landowner's
designee, with a written notice of the violation and the time period
allowed for the owner to correct the violation. If the owner does not
correct the violation within the allowed time period, the Borough
may revoke or suspend any, or all, applicable approvals and permits
pertaining to any provision of this chapter.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter to commit any of the following acts:
(1) To commence regulated activities prior to obtaining unconditional
approval of an SWM site plan or in violation of the terms or
conditions of an SWM site plan approved under this chapter.
(2) To install, repair, modify or alter SWM facilities prior to obtaining
approvals under this chapter or in a manner which violates the
terms and conditions of any approval issued under this chapter.
(3) To misuse or fail to maintain any SWM facility installed upon a
property.
(4) To construct any improvements upon, grade, fill or take any other
action which will impair the proper functioning of any SWM facility.
(5) To place false information on or omit relevant information from an
application for approval under this chapter.
(6) To fail to comply with any other provisions of this chapter.
A. For each violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner, agent,
lessee, or contractor or any other person who commits, takes part in, or
assists in any such violation shall be liable, upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding, to pay a fine of not less than $200 nor more than
§ 187-45 MANHEIM CODE § 187-46
1:268
§ 187-47. Appeals.
§ 187-48. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
pending in any court, or any rights or liability incurred, or any permit
issued, or any approval granted, or any cause or causes of action existing
prior to the enactment of this chapter.
$1,000 for each offense, together with the costs of prosecution. Each
day or portion thereof in which a violation exists shall be considered
a separate violation of this chapter, and each section of this chapter
which is violated shall be considered a separate violation. In
accordance with Section 3321(6) of the Borough Code, any person
found guilty of violating this chapter may be assessed reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceeding.
B. The Borough may also institute suits to restrain, prevent, or abate a
violation of this chapter in equity or at law. Such proceedings in equity
or at law may be initiated before any court of competent jurisdiction. In
cases of emergency where, in the opinion of the court, the
circumstances of the case require immediate abatement of the unlawful
conduct, the court may, in its decree, fix a reasonable time during which
the person responsible for the unlawful conduct shall correct or abate
the same. The expense of such proceedings shall be recoverable from
the violator in such manner as may now or hereafter be provided by law.
In accordance with Section 3321(6) of the Borough Code, any person
found guilty of violating this chapter may be assessed reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceeding.
C. The Borough Council may also take actions relating to suspension or
revocation of permits set forth in § 187-45.
D. The Borough Council may, by resolution, appoint a Code Enforcement
Officer to enforce this chapter and may authorize such Code
Enforcement Officer to institute summary criminal proceedings without
prior action by the Borough Council.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Borough or its designee may
appeal to the Borough Council within 30 days of that action. Any such
appeal shall be governed by the procedures of Article V of the Local
Agency Law, 2 Pa. C.S.A. § 401 et seq.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of Borough Council may appeal to
the Lancaster County Court of Common Pleas within 30 days of that
decision, in accordance with Article VII of the Local Agency Law, 2
Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 187-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-49
1:269
§ 187-49. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect and be in force five days after its enactment
by the Manheim Borough Council, as provided by law.
§ 187-49 MANHEIM CODE § 187-49
1:270
Chapter 190
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 100.
Sewers — See Ch. 172.
Water — See Ch. 210.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 187-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-49
1:271

ARTICLE I
Unlawful Obstructions
[Adopted by Ord. No. 6-10-1889I (Ch. 21, Part 4, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 190-1. Obstructions around fire hydrants. [Added by Ord. No.
5-28-1913B]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to place a pile of stone,
lumber, brick, mortar beds, boxes, barrels, merchandise, household goods,
furniture or any other articles or things whatsoever within a radius of four
feet on the sidewalk or pavement and a radius of 10 feet on the street or
highway of any fire hydrant or plug within the limits of said Borough of
Manheim.
§ 190-2. Penalty for unlawful obstructions around hydrants. [Added
by Ord. No. 5-28-1913B; amended 9-21-1955 by Ord. No. 282;
7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 524]
Any person or persons violating any provision of § 190-1 of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof before the Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not less than $5 nor more than $600 and costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not
more than 30 days.
§ 190-3. Obstruction or damage to gutters and watercourses
prohibited.
It shall not be lawful for any person to willfully obstruct or damage any
watercourse or gutter along any street, lane or alley in the Borough.
§ 190-4. Clearance of trees and other overhanging things above
streets and sidewalks. [Amended 9-21-1955 by Ord. No. 278]
All persons owning any property abutting upon any street or alley in the
Borough shall keep all trees overhanging such street or alley trimmed so
that no part thereof shall be closer than eight feet above the surface of
the sidewalk or 14 feet above the surface of the street and so that no part
of the roots or trunk shall extend into the cartway, and shall maintain no
permanent or temporary structure or thing overhanging the sidewalk with
any part thereof closer than eight feet above the level of such sidewalk,
provided that nothing in this section shall authorize the construction or
maintenance of any overhanging thing that is prohibited by or does not
conform to the requirements of any other valid ordinance of the Borough.
§ 190-5. Snow and ice to be removed from sidewalks. [Amended
9-21-1955 by Ord. No. 278; 6-28-1966 by Ord. No. 371; 11-27-2018
by Ord. No. 660]
The owner, occupant or tenant of every property fronting upon or alongside
any of the streets or alleys of the Borough shall remove or cause to be
§ 190-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-5
1:273
removed from all of the sidewalks in front of or alongside of such property
all snow or ice thereon fallen or formed within 24 hours after the same shall
have ceased to fall or to be formed, or after the same has been deposited
thereon in any manner, so that a pathway for pedestrians of not less than
three feet in width is cleared, provided that the owner of a property shall
be responsible for carrying out the requirements of this section where such
property is occupied by him or is unoccupied or where the property is a
multiple-business or multiple-dwelling property designed to be occupied by
more than one tenant; the tenant or occupier shall be responsible where
such property is occupied by such tenant only. No snow or ice removed from
any sidewalk for the pathway or removed by an owner, occupant or tenant
from any street or alley along any curb for a parking area for vehicles or
for other purposes shall be deposited at places in the streets or alleys of the
Borough which have been plowed or cleared of snow or ice.
§ 190-6. Violations and penalties; removal of obstructions.
[Amended 6-28-1966 by Ord. No. 371]
Any person or persons who shall violate any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$600 and costs of prosecution for each and every violation and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, undergo an imprisonment for a period of not
more than 30 days, provided that, in any case where any person or persons
shall fail to remove any obstruction or to remedy any condition prohibited
by this article, Borough Council may cause such obstruction to be removed
or condition to be remedied and the cost of such work, together with an
additional charge of 10%, shall be collected from such person or persons,
which may be in addition to any penalty imposed under this section.
§ 190-5 MANHEIM CODE § 190-6
1:274
ARTICLE II
Street Plan; Numbering of Properties
[Adopted 2-27-1918 by Ord. No. 2-27-1918AA (Ch. 21, Part 1, of the
1992 Code)]
§ 190-7. Dividing lines established for street designations.
A line drawn through the center of East High Street, Market Square and
West High Street and a line drawn through the center of Prussian Street,
as said streets are laid out on the Borough Plan of streets (adopted by
Ordinance No. 4-25-1893, April 25, 1893, and as extended and laid out
by Ordinance No. 3-9-1911, March 9, 1911), and as may hereafter be
further extended and laid out by ordinance or otherwise, extending from the
eastern Borough boundaries on the East to the western Borough boundaries
on the West, and from the northern Borough boundaries on the North to
the southern Borough boundaries on the South, through the center of said
streets, be and the same are hereby respectively designated and made the
dividing lines between North and South, and East and West within the
corporate limits of the said Borough of Manheim; and that all points north
of said line extending east and west in and through the center of said
East High Street, Market Square and West High Street shall be known as
"North," and all points south of said line shall be known and designated as
"South," and that all points east of said Prussian Street shall be known and
designated as "East," and all points west of said line shall be known and
designated as "West."
§ 190-8. Streets to be designated "North," "South," "East" and
"West."
A. All streets, alleys, lanes, highways and avenues within the said Borough
of Manheim as now laid out and opened, or hereafter to be laid out and
opened, which shall be north of and run northward from or begin at any
point north of and run northward from the center line of East High
Street Market Square and West High Street, as set forth in § 190-7 of
this article, and the same shall have prefixed before the names as now
designated on the said Borough Plan of Streets, and as further extended
and laid out by ordinance as aforesaid or as shall or may be by
ordinance or otherwise hereafter laid out, the name or word "North,"
and in like manner all streets, alleys, lanes, highways and avenues
which shall be south of and run southward from said center line of East
High Street as set forth in § 190-7 of this article, the same shall have
prefixed before the names as now designated on said Borough Plan of
Streets, and as further extended and laid out by ordinance as aforesaid
or as shall or may by ordinance or otherwise hereafter be laid out, the
name or word "South."
B. All streets, alleys, lanes, highways and avenues within the said Borough
of Manheim as now laid out and opened or hereafter to be laid out and
opened, and which shall be east of and run eastward from or begin at
any point east of and run eastward from said center line of Prussian
§ 190-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-8
1:275
§ 190-9. Exceptions from requirement for direction designation.
Section 190-8 of this article shall not apply to nor affect the name of Market
Square, nor such streets, alleys, lanes, highways and avenues as were
heretofore or are now properly by ordinance named or prefixed with the
words "North," "East," "South" or "West" so as to conform with foregoing
sections of this article, but that all other streets, alleys, lanes, highways
and avenues having their names prefixed with the words "North," "East,"
"South" or "West," and the same not being in conformity with the
geographical division of the said Borough of Manheim as set forth in § 190-7
of this article, be and the same are hereby renamed with the proper prefix of
"North," "East," "South" or "West," as they may lie in relation to the several
dividing lines as set forth in § 190-7 aforesaid and as provided in § 190-8 of
this article.
§ 190-10. System for numbering properties fronting on streets.
Street, as set forth in § 190-7 of this article, the same shall have
prefixed before the names as now designated on the said Plan of
Streets, and as further extended and laid out by ordinance as aforesaid
or as shall or may be by ordinance hereafter laid out and opened, the
name or word "East." And in like manner, all streets, alleys, lanes,
highways and avenues which shall be west of and run westward from
or begin at any point west of and run westward from said center line of
Prussian Street as set forth in § 190-7 of this article, the same shall have
prefixed before the names as now designated on said Borough Plan of
Streets, and as further extended and laid out by ordinance as aforesaid
or as shall or may be hereafter laid out by ordinance or otherwise, the
name or word "West."
A. Properties, lots or parts of the same situated or fronting on any one or
more of the streets, avenues, squares or other highways of the said
Borough of Manheim now laid out and open or hereafter to be laid out
and opened by ordinance or otherwise shall be designated by numbers,
such to run north, east, south or westward from the dividing lines as set
forth in § 190-7 of this article; the lots and properties on north and west
sides of streets, avenues, squares and highways to be designated by
odd numbers, and those on the south and east sides of streets, avenues,
squares and highways to be designated by even numbers; the
numbering to begin at the nearest point to the division line as above
stated with number "1" on the south and east sides of said streets,
avenues, squares and highways, and number "2" on the north and west
sides of same, and to continue consecutively, northward, eastward,
southward, or westward as the direction of said streets, avenues,
squares or highways may be; 100 numbers, that is, 50 on each side of
same to be contained in block or square, the second block or square to
be numbered by beginning at any number "101" to be continued
throughout the length of the street, avenue, square or highway with
consecutive hundreds to each block or square. Streets, avenues,
squares and highways which begin or open or run from or intersect any
§ 190-8 MANHEIM CODE § 190-10
1:276
§ 190-11. Procedure for numbering lots and properties; preparation
of plan. [Amended 9-21-1955 by Ord. No. 283]
The Street Committee of the Borough Council shall lay out and properly
divide and subdivide the lots and properties fronting on the several streets,
avenues, squares, alleys and lanes in the Borough, assigning to each square,
division or subdivision the proper number as provided and intended by the
several sections of this article and shall make a plan and record thereof,
which shall be kept by the Borough Secretary and shall be revised from
time to time as new streets, alleys, avenues and squares may be laid out
and opened and as the numbering of lots and properties may be requested
by owner or owners thereof. Such plan and record shall be open to the
inspection of the public during business hours.
other street, avenue, square or highway, which does not intersect or
have one terminus at or upon any one of the several streets whose
center lines are above designated as the division lines, shall be
numbered with odd and even numbers as above designated, and in
consecutive hundreds with the first or lowest number beginning at the
nearest terminus to said division lines corresponding to the hundred or
hundreds of the block, street, avenue, square or highway next north,
east, south or west which crosses or opens on same and which runs
parallel or in the same general direction with such street, square,
avenue or highway not having its beginning or one terminus or
intersect any one of the said streets designated as division lines in
§ 190-7 of this article.
B. It is further ordained that alleys, lanes and other byways not now or
usually recognized as streets, avenues, squares or highway, shall be
numbered as in this section provided, in the same manner and upon the
same conditions as is provided in § 109-10 of this article, that is, by
request of owners and occupiers of houses and buildings.
§ 190-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-11
1:277

ARTICLE III
Sidewalks and Curbs
[Adopted by Ord. No. 10-27-1943 (Ch. 21, Part 3, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 190-12. Property owners to construct and maintain sidewalks and
curbs. [Amended 6-9-1970 by Ord. No. 404; 5-29-1973 by Ord. No.
431]
From and after the effective date of this article, it shall be the duty of every
owner of real estate in the Borough of Manheim to construct and maintain
a proper curb and sidewalk on his property, the sidewalk to be of the width
prescribed by ordinance, provided that curbing and sidewalk installation
will not be required on streets and/or alleys whose width does not exceed
25 feet unless Borough Council by resolution determines that traffic flow or
control of surface water warrants such installation for purposes of proper
maintenance of such street or alley.
§ 190-13. Notice to property owners to construct or maintain curb
or sidewalk. [Amended 9-21-1955 by Ord. No. 286]
Upon the neglect of any owner of real estate to construct or properly
maintain a curb and sidewalk, the Borough Council may service upon such
owner, in the manner prescribed by law, a notice stating that, unless the
work is done within 30 days after such notice, the Borough shall cause such
work to be done at the expense of such owner.
§ 190-14. Authority for Borough to do work and collect costs and
additional charges.
If the notice is not complied with, the Borough shall cause the work
specified in the notice to be done, and the cost of doing the work and 10%
additional, together with all charges and expenses, shall be collected from
the owner of the property either by filing a municipal claim therefor or suit
in assumpsit.
§ 190-15. Grade and slope of sidewalks; material or construction
thereof.
From and after the effective date of this article, all newly constructed
sidewalks shall be laid to the proper Borough grade, shall have a slope
toward the curb of 1/4 inch to each one foot, and shall be constructed of one
of the following materials:
A. Good quality concrete, at least four inches thick and properly finished;
B. Good quality brick, imbedded in and interspaced with good quality
cement mortar; or
C. Flagstones imbedded in and interspaced with good quality cement
mortar.
§ 190-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-16
1:279
§ 190-16. Private crossings.
All private crossings shall maintain the same pitch and levels as specified
for sidewalks and be constructed of like material.
§ 190-17. Curbs. [Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 524]
From and after the effective date of this article, all newly constructed curbs
shall be of concrete, eight inches in width and 18 inches in depth, and shall
be laid to the proper Borough grade.
§ 190-16 MANHEIM CODE § 190-17
1:280
ARTICLE IV
Sledding, Skateboarding on Streets and Sidewalks
[Adopted 9-21-1955 by Ord. No. 296; amended in its entirety
7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 524 (Ch. 21, Part 5, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 190-18. Sledding prohibited on sidewalks and on streets not set
apart for the purpose.
No person or persons shall coast or ride upon any sled or similar
conveyance upon any of the sidewalks in the Borough of Manheim or upon
any street or alley unless such street or alley shall have been especially set
apart and designated by the Borough Manager for the purpose of sledding
and shall have been blocked off and adequately protected from vehicular
traffic.
§ 190-19. Prohibited activities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in roller-skating,
skateboarding or to ride upon or propel any coaster or other toy vehicle
upon:
§ 190-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment thereof, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
A. Any street except in order to cross the roadway at a crosswalk.
B. Any sidewalk adjacent to the following streets:
(1) North and South Main Streets.
(2) North and South Charlotte Streets from Gramby Streets to
Railroad Avenue.
(3) East and West High Streets from Hazel Street to Grant Street.
(4) Market Square.
(5) East and West Ferdinand Street from Hazel Street to Grant Street.
§ 190-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-20
1:281

ARTICLE V
Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 3-25-1980 by Ord. No. 471 (Ch. 21, Part 2, of the 1992
Code)]
§ 190-21. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any person as hereinafter defined who makes application for
a permit.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Manheim, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, or
its delegates as authorized by Borough Council.
CALENDAR YEAR — January 1 through December 31, inclusive.
CONCRETE — Soil cement, plain cement concrete, or reinforced cement
concrete.
COST — Actual expenditures incurred by the Borough for labor, equipment
and materials, including, without limitation, all fringe benefits and
overhead.
DEGRADATION FEE — A fee paid by the permitted to the Borough of
Manheim to defray a percentage of the costs for resurfacing and
reconstruction of Borough streets resulting from the depreciation of streets
associated with street openings.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance which calls for immediate
action to protect or safeguard life or property.
INSPECTION FEE — A fee paid by the permitted to the Borough of
Manheim to defray street opening inspection costs.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — Any municipal authority created, in whole or in
part, by Borough Council under the Pennsylvania Municipality Authorities
Act of 1945,41 as amended, to administer a revenue-producing public
enterprise.
PERMIT FEE — A fee paid by the permittee to the Borough of Manheim to
cover the costs of issuing, processing and filing the street opening permit.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been issued a permit and who shall
have, by acceptance thereof, agreed to fulfill all provisions of this article.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association, public utility,
corporation or similar entity.
41.Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed
by Act 22 of 2001 (June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22). See now the Municipality Authorities
Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 190-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-21
1:283
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any utility company, excluding municipal authorities
created by the Borough, licensed by the Public Utility Commission of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SIDEWALK AREA — That portion of the street right-of-way reserved for
sidewalks, as defined in the Borough Plan
STREET — The entire right-of-way of the public street, public highway,
public alley, public road or public easement within the Borough limits,
excluding the designated curb and sidewalk areas.
§ 190-22. General provisions.
§ 190-23. Permit required and emergency openings.
A. The permit issued pursuant to this article shall be issued in the name of
the owner of the facility, hereafter called the "permittee," and shall be
binding upon the permittee, its agents, contractors, successors,
personal representatives and assigns. The permittee shall cause its
agents, contractors, successors and assigns to comply with all the
terms and conditions of the permit. The permit shall be maintained as a
permanent record and remain in effect, subject to the condition hereof,
as long as the permittee's facilities authorized therein occupy the public
right-of-way.
B. The work authorized by the permit issued pursuant to this article is
subject to all applicable laws, rules and regulations, including but not
limited to Act No. 247,42 approved October 26, 1972, of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, concerning environmental control
measures related to pollution and the preservation of public natural
resources.
C. All work done as authorized by the permit issued pursuant to this article
shall be done at such time and in such manner as shall be consistent
with the safety of the public and shall conform to all requirements and
standards of the Borough.
D. If at any time it shall be found by the Borough that the work is not being
done or has not been properly performed, the permitted and/or its
contractor, upon being notified in writing by the Borough, shall
immediately commence the necessary steps, at its own expense, toward
placing the work in condition to conform to said requirements or
standards.
A. The opening of the surface of any Borough street is prohibited unless a
permit is obtained for that purpose in the manner hereinafter
described. Such a permit shall be granted through the Borough Council
or by a person so delegated by Borough Council when the person
applying for such permit files an application with the Borough
42.Editor's Note: Former 53 P.S. § 1611, environmental impact statement, was repealed May
15, 1998 by P.L. 358, No. 57, § 6(a).
§ 190-21 MANHEIM CODE § 190-23
1:284
§ 190-24. Street openings prior to reconstruction or resurfacing.
Secretary in compliance with the provisions of this article and pays into
the Borough Treasury the amounts hereinafter provided.
B. Any person working in the vicinity of a Borough street who in any
manner disturbs such street or who in any manner causes damage to a
street shall be required by this article to obtain a permit and correct
such damage in accordance with the standards of the Borough. Street
opening permits will not be required for persons excavating adjacent to
the curb for the express purpose of installing or replacing curbs and/or
sidewalks, provided a curb and sidewalk permit has been obtained from
the Borough Secretary prior to performing such work. The obtaining of
street opening permits by Borough departments and municipal
authorities shall be waived when work is to be performed completely by
their own personnel.
C. All contractors performing work under contract for the Borough or
Borough Authority shall obtain the street opening permit for street
openings.
D. Public utilities shall obtain street opening permits for street opening
and for excavations to be performed by their own crews or forces or by
contractors.
E. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to permit the issuing of a
permit for the making of a tunnel under any street, alley or highway in
the Borough. Tunneling will be permitted only after successful petition
to Borough Council.
F. In the event that street openings are necessitated by emergencies,
street opening permits shall be obtained on the first regular business
day following the street opening and said permit shall be retroactive to
the date when the work was begun. A person performing street
openings for an emergency must certify the emergency nature of the
circumstance in writing to the Borough Council within five days after
such emergency.
G. No permit shall be granted to any applicant unless the applicant shall
have paid into the Borough any and all monies then due to the Borough
for prior excavations made or for any loss, damages or expenses in any
manner occasioned by or arising from the excavation of streets of the
Borough under prior permits.
A. When the Borough shall propose to reconstruct or resurface any street,
Borough Council shall serve written notice by certified mail of such
improvements to all persons owning property abutting the street about
to be improved and to all public utility companies operating in the
Borough. Within 90 calendar days from receipt of such notice, all
notified persons shall complete or cause to be completed all necessary
repairs and replacement of utility mains, service under the street and
§ 190-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-24
1:285
§ 190-25. Prerequisites to obtaining permit.
Street opening permits shall only be granted upon compliance with the
following express provisions:
designated curb and sidewalk areas. Notified persons shall also
complete any new installations under the street and designated curb
and sidewalk areas required for use within a five-year period thereafter.
All repairs, replacements and new installations shall be in first-class
condition so that the same cannot reasonably be expected to require
repairs within a period of at least five years thereafter.
B. Upon failure of any of the notified person or persons to comply with the
notice from the Borough Council to place the same in first-class
condition as hereinbefore provided, the Borough Council may cause
existing utility mains, service connections and/or laterals to be placed
in first-class condition as aforesaid, or to be entirely removed, if not
used or necessary for public convenience, whereupon the Borough shall
be entitled to collect the cost of such renewals, repairs, caulking,
removal or other work from the aforesaid responsible person or
persons, either by invoicing the person or persons or, in the case of
water or sewer house connections, by filing municipal liens therefor
against the abutting properties benefited by such connections.
C. This section shall not forbid, however, the installation of new pipes,
conduits or other services or structures, or the repair, replacement or
removal of those already existing in or under the portions of such
highways improved as aforesaid, in accordance with the ordinances of
the Borough and the direction of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation or the Borough Council or its authorized delegates,
upon obtaining a permit and payment to the Borough of the same fees
as prescribed by the provisions of this article for making a surface
opening in the highway.
A. A written application shall be filed with the Borough Secretary for
making all street openings or excavations, and the same shall be signed
by the person desiring such permit. Such application shall set forth the
purpose for which such excavation is to be made; the size and location
of the same; the full scope of work to be included in the project; a
sketch of the proposed opening site; the date such excavation is to be
refilled and resurfaced in the manner hereinafter provided, and shall
provide that the applicant will faithfully comply with each and every
provision contained in this article. An applicant shall furnish a drawing
of the proposed opening site, upon request of the Borough Council.
Items required on the drawing shall be specified at the time of request.
B. Prior to the issuing of such permit, every such applicant shall pay to the
Borough Finance Director the amount hereinafter provided and shall
exhibit to the Borough Secretary a receipt for the amount aforesaid.
§ 190-24 MANHEIM CODE § 190-25
1:286
§ 190-26. Bond.
C. Where the street opening permit is required for water supply purposes,
the application shall be countersigned by the Borough Manager or
someone authorized by him before the permit will be granted. Where
the street opening permit is required for sewer service purposes, the
application shall be countersigned by an authorized employee of the
Borough before the permit will be granted.
D. Except in emergency situations, the Borough shall, at its discretion, be
permitted to deny the opening of a street which has been resurfaced or
reconstructed within a five-year period prior to the date of request for
the street opening.
E. Except in emergency situations, applications for street openings shall
be submitted to the Borough at least two workdays prior to the
proposed date of excavation. The Borough shall review each application
and grant or deny the applicant a permit upon completion of the review.
F. No street opening shall be performed, except in the case of
emergencies, when seasonally prohibited or, in the judgment of the
Borough, working conditions are unreasonable for such work.
G. Applicant shall agree to save the Borough, its officers, employees and
agents from any and all costs, damages and liabilities by reason of
personal injury or property claim, which may accrue or be claimed to
accrue, whether directly or indirectly, by reason of said work,
irrespective of the cause of such injury or damage. The acceptance of
any permit under this article shall constitute such an agreement by the
applicant whether the same is expressed or not.
H. An applicant shall supply a certificate of insurance to the Borough
Manager and have the certificate of insurance properly executed by the
applicant's insurance agency. Properly executed certificates of
insurance shall be filed with the Borough and verify that the applicant is
insured against claims for personal injury as well as against claims for
property damages which may arise from or out of the performance of
the excavation work, whether such performance be by the applicant or
anyone directly or indirectly employed by him. Such insurance shall
include protection against liability arising from completed operations,
underground utility damage, and collapse of any property. Liability
insurance for bodily injury shall be in an amount not less than $500,000
for each person and $500,000 for each occurrence, and for property
damages, an amount not less than $100,000. Such insurance shall also
provide hold-harmless coverage pursuant to § 190-25G. Failure of an
applicant to file a certificate of insurance shall be sufficient reason for
denying a permit.
A. Public utility companies desiring to open a street shall establish an
escrow account in the name of the Borough of Manheim, in the amount
of 10% of the total cost of the project or $1,000, whichever is the
§ 190-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-26
1:287
§ 190-27. Fees. [Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 524]
greater. In the event that a public utility company is engaged in two
or more unrelated street opening projects, said public utility company
shall execute a separate and distinct escrow account for each street
opening project. A public utility may, upon petition to Borough Council,
establish an annual deposit account or make such other arrangement
and in such amounts as are approved by Borough Council.
B. All other persons, including contractors performing work for Borough
municipal authorities, desiring to open a street shall furnish a properly
executed corporate surety bond. Said bond shall be executed by a
reputable surety company licensed to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All bonds secured by contractors
performing work under contract with Borough municipal authorities
must be countersigned by the Borough Manager. Any person may, upon
petition to Borough Council, request that a deposit or irrevocable
letters of credit be established in lieu of a bond, with the same terms for
bonds as set forth in this article, upon approval by Borough Council.
C. Said bond shall cover street opening work performed during one
calendar year. The bond shall be in effect for a twenty-four-month
period in accordance with § 190-37. The amount of the surety bond
shall be $1,000 unless any street excavation and restoration work for a
single project exceeds the $1,000. In this case, a person must secure
additional bonding in an amount equal to the difference between the
$1,000 and the dollar amount computed in accordance with the
following schedule:
Pavement Structure Amount of Bond
Sidewalk, concrete $20 per square yard
Curbing, box $10 per lineal foot
Curbing, roll $7 per lineal foot
Street, bituminous concrete surface with
bituminous or stone base
$25 per square yard
Alley, unpaved $5 per square yard
A. A permit fee, inspection fee, and degradation fee (for Borough streets
only) shall be paid to the Borough Finance Director prior to permit
issuing. The Borough shall have the right in its discretion to waive fees
for contractors performing work under contract with the Borough.
B. The permit fee shall be in an amount established, from time to time, by
resolution of Borough Council.
C. The degradation fee and inspection fee to accompany the application as
herein provided are to be in an amount established, from time to time,
by resolution of Borough Council. The Borough Finance Director shall
place collected degradation fees into the Borough Highway Fund.
§ 190-26 MANHEIM CODE § 190-28
1:288
§ 190-28. Cancellation of permit.
In all cases where a permit has been issued and the work set forth in
such permit has not been completed, the amount not completed shall be
cancelled. The degradation fee along with the inspection fee paid shall be
recalculated on the basis of the work actually completed and the actual
extent of excavation. All degradation fee and inspection fee paid in excess of
this adjustment shall be refunded without interest by the Borough Finance
Director, upon warrant properly drawn. The permit fee shall not be
refunded upon permit cancellation.
§ 190-29. Revocation of permit.
§ 190-30. Time extension and fee.
If any permittee is unable to complete the street opening work on or
before the date specified in the permit, the permittee shall file a written
application for an extension of time with the Borough Manager, who shall
have discretion to grant or deny such application. The written application
shall be in letter form and shall thoroughly explain the reasons for the
extension of time plus the additional length of time required. A fee of
$1 shall accompany the application. This fee shall defray the costs of
processing and filing the application.
§ 190-31. Backfilling and paving.
The permittee shall be responsible for backfilling and paving the opening
and restoring the street surface to its original condition. The Borough
Council shall have the full authority to establish by resolution standards
A. All street opening permits are subject to revocation at any time by the
Borough after written notice, for:
(1) Violation of any condition of permits;
(2) Violation of any provision of this article or any other applicable
ordinance or law relating to the work; or
(3) The existence of any condition or doing of any act consisting or
creating a nuisance or endangering the lives or property of others.
B. Written notice of such violation shall be served upon the person to
whom the permit was granted or his agent or employee engaged in the
work. Such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to
the person to be notified or by United States mail, postage paid,
addressed to such person to be notified. The permittee shall be granted
24 hours to correct such violations, unless specifically stated otherwise
within the letter of notification of violation.
C. Upon revocation of the permit, the degradation and inspection fees will
be refunded to the permittee for that portion of the project not
completed.
§ 190-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-31
1:289
for paving and backfilling materials and associated procedures. Details
specifying paving and backfilling procedures and materials shall be
obtained from the Borough prior to any street opening work.
§ 190-32. Backfilling and replacing surface; when done by Borough.
In case the work has not been completed before the date of expiration, as
shown on the permit, which time shall be fixed when the permit and/or time
extension is granted, the Borough may take steps to backfill the trench and
replace the street surface over the opening for which the permit has been
issued. The Borough shall invoice the permittee for all costs incurred by
the Borough in the performance of this work; payment not made within 30
days will be chargeable against the posted bond deposit or letter of credit,
including all fees and costs involved in the collection of this payment.
§ 190-33. Responsibility; extra inspections; other rules.
The permittee shall assume all responsibility for the excavation made by
such party for refilling the same and for all damages that may arise by
reason of the digging of such trenches or excavations. Whenever it is
determined by the Borough that, in the best interests of the Borough, it
is necessary to assign additional street opening inspectors or supervise
excavation, backfill or pavement restoration operations, such inspectors
shall be paid by the Borough at a rate to be fixed by the Borough. The
Borough shall invoice the permittee for all costs incurred by the Borough
necessitated by the assignment of additional inspectors. Borough Council
is authorized to make such other rules and regulations for the excavation
of streets which it may deem necessary for the proper maintenance of
the street surface due to excavations, which rules and regulations shall be
printed upon the permit granted or forwarded from the Borough, in writing,
from time to time.
§ 190-34. Test holes.
A street opening permit shall be obtained for any test hole work. No test
holes shall be made in or upon a greater surface of the highway than as
specified in such permit, and no excavation or test holes shall interfere
with any of the water pipes, sewers, drains of the Borough, or any other
underground utility service. Test holes having an area of four square inches
or less shall be filled by the applicant with grout composed of one part
cement and two parts sand and a sufficient quantity of water, filled to the
surface of the highway, and the surrounding surface of the highway shall be
placed in the same condition as before. Test holes greater than four square
inches in area shall be backfilled in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
§ 190-35. Lights and identification.
A. All gutters must be left open so as not to obstruct the free passage of
water, and the sidewalk and footways must be kept in a safe and
§ 190-31 MANHEIM CODE § 190-35
1:290
§ 190-36. Additional work.
In no case shall a permittee open or remove a greater area of street
surface than specified in the original application. The permittee shall not
open any street area at any location not specified in the original street
opening permit. If the permittee determines during construction that an
additional area of the street will have to be opened, he shall notify and
secure permission from the Borough for the additional opening. Upon
receipt of permission, the permittee shall file a supplementary application
for the work no later than the next workday. Fee amounts specified in
this article shall be followed for any subsequent fees associated with
supplementary applications.
§ 190-37. Guarantee of work.
The permittee shall guarantee and maintain his work for 24 months from
the completion of the restoration and replacement work. Within this twentyfour-
month period, upon notification from the Borough of necessary
correction work required, the permittee shall correct or cause to be
corrected all restoration work required within five calendar days of receipt
of notification. The Borough shall determine the extent of restoration
required and the method of correction. Any and all work not completed
within this five-day period may be completed by the Borough at the
discretion of the Borough. The Borough shall invoice the permittee for all
costs incurred by the Borough in performance of this work. Payment not
made within 30 days of the invoice date will be chargeable against the
posted bond deposit or letter of credit, including all fees and costs involved
in the collection of this payment.
passable condition. All excavations of material from them shall have
placed upon them sufficient lights and barricades to identify them from
all directions during the day and after dark. If, for safety purposes,
the Borough deems it necessary to install additional warning devices,
i.e., lights, barricades or signs, the permittee shall be notified of the
decision and shall receive instructions on the installation. In case of
emergencies, the Borough may install all additional warning devices
deemed necessary by the Borough. The Borough shall invoice the
permittee for rental and installation costs incurred from the date of
installation until the permittee installs the required warning devices.
If the permittee fails to install such devices, the Borough shall invoice
the permittee for rental and installation costs incurred from the date
of installation until the date of removal. Payment not made by the
permittee within 30 days of the invoice date will be chargeable against
the posted bond deposit or letter of credit. including all fees and costs
involved in the collection of this payment.
B. All openings shall have a sign at least 12 inches by 18 inches clearly
displayed with the contractor's name and phone number.
§ 190-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-38
1:291
§ 190-38. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No.
524]
A. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine not less than $100 nor more than $600 for
each and every offense together with costs and, in the default of
payment thereof, to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Each failure to obtain a permit, or having obtained a permit, to comply
with any of the requirements of this article, and each and every day
during which such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. The Borough reserves the right to deny the issuance of future street
opening permits to any person who violates the provisions of this
article.
§ 190-38 MANHEIM CODE § 190-38
1:292
ARTICLE VI
Breaking Pavement or Surface of Streets
[Adopted 3-26-2002 by Ord. No. 576 (Ch. 21, Part 6, of the 1992
Code)]
§ 190-39. Permit required.
No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall break the pavement or
surface of any public street of the Borough of Manheim, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, between the right-of-way lines thereof, until a permit to do so
is obtained from the Borough of Manheim.
§ 190-40. Form of permit.
Permit application to break the pavement or surface of any public streets
of the Borough of Manheim shall be made on the form provided by the
Borough of Manheim, shall include all information requested, and shall be
signed by the permittee.
§ 190-41. Fees.
§ 190-42. Computation of area.
In computing the square yards of the pavement or surface to be charged,
12 inches shall be added to all sides of the proposed street cut. All fees
and charges shall be paid by the permittee or a legally binding letter
of agreement, acceptable by the Borough of Manheim, with appropriate
security as determined by the Borough Solicitor, before the issuance of the
requested permit.
§ 190-43. Additional fees.
A. Permit applications shall also be accompanied by the permit fee
according to the currently adopted Schedule of Fees for permit
issuance and inspection for each requested street break and a payment
to defray the cost of street restoration by the Borough of Manheim in
accordance with the following schedule, unless otherwise specified:
Bituminous on Stone Base Fee
Not to exceed 5 square yards $135 per square yard
Each additional square yard $100 per square yard
B. The aforementioned Schedule of Fees may from time to time be
amended by resolution of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Manheim.
A. Permits for pavement or surface cuts on streets paved within five years
preceding the date of application for the cut shall be issued at the
following additional costs: 100% additional for the first year after the
paving; 80% additional for the second year; 60% additional for the third
§ 190-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-43
1:293
§ 190-44. Compliance with other provisions.
year; 40% additional for the fourth year; and 20% additional for the fifth
year. These additional costs are percentages of the street restoration
costs listed in § 190-41.
B. Where, in the opinion of the Engineer of the Borough of Manheim and
at his sole discretion, site conditions are such that additional effort is
required to protect the integrity of the street(s) of the Borough of
Manheim, the permittee may be required to perform additional work
and pay additional costs. This option could include permanent
restoration of the street surface by the permittee along with payment of
all above stipulated fees and charges or the reconstruction and/or
resurfacing of an area of street exceeding the area directly affected by
the street break or cut at the permittee's expense. Where additional
work is required, a legally binding letter of agreement acceptable to the
Borough of Manheim, with appropriate security as determined by the
Borough Solicitor, shall be provided by the applicant before issuance of
the permit.
C. Upon inspection, if it is determined that the permittee actually
removed, disturbed or damaged, either in the initial or subsequent
restoration, an area of yardage greater than that set forth in the permit,
the permittee shall forthwith pay a proportionate additional amount, to
be fixed by the Engineer of the Borough of Manheim, within 10 days
after demand therefor shall be made in writing.
A. No permit shall be issued to any person, firm, corporation or any other
entities indebted to the Borough of Manheim because of any previous
application or permit.
B. All permits are issued subject to all ordinances of the Borough of
Manheim and all state and federal statutes, rules and regulations and to
the following conditions:
(1) Bore holes. Bore holes will be considered street cuts, and a
restoration charge of $5 will be levied for each bore hole made. A
permit will be required for each bore hole grouping. The permittee
shall plug or seal bore holes, in a manner and with materials
approved by the Engineer of the Borough of Manheim, to the street
surface within 30 days of boring. If the permittee does not plug or
seal these holes within the time, the Borough of Manheim reserves
the right to take any steps deemed necessary to repair the street,
and the associated costs shall then be paid by the permittee.
(2) Emergency cuts. Emergency street cuts and excavations required
to access leaking utility mains or other installations that pose a
potential hazard, or bore holes required to search out threatening
conditions, may be made in advance of a permit at the discretion of
the party or parties conducting the investigation and repairs. If the
investigation indicates an emergency condition exists, the Borough
§ 190-43 MANHEIM CODE § 190-44
1:294
of Manheim Police Department shall be notified immediately at
telephone number 911; otherwise, an authorized representative of
the responsible party(ies) shall notify the Engineer of the Borough
of Manheim, at telephone number (610) 777-1311, the next
business day, and a proper permit application, accompanied by
appropriate fees or a legally binding letter of agreement, shall
be submitted to the Borough of Manheim within seven days of
commencing the work.
(3) Ahead-of-paving permit. Permits for street cuts performed in
advance of Borough of Manheim scheduled street improvements at
the same location, where the required work is completed in
accordance with a schedule approved by the Engineer of the
Borough of Manheim, will be issued at no charge. A detailed
construction plan must accompany each application for an aheadof-
paving permit. Excavation, backfilling and temporary street cut
restoration will be performed by the permittee at its cost, as
directed by the Engineer of the Borough of Manheim. By January 1
of each year, or no later than six months prior to commencement of
construction, the Engineer of the Borough of Manheim shall
provide all utilities operating in the Borough of Manheim with a list
of all road projects proposed by the Borough of Manheim during
the succeeding calendar year.
(4) Subsurface plans. Upon completion of work, the permittee shall
furnish to the Engineer of the Borough of Manheim completely
dimensioned plans showing, accurately and distinctly and in such
detail as required, the size, shape and kind of structure installed or
altered and its location with reference to the street surface and the
nearest curbline and curb intersection.
(5) Time limit. In case the work has not been completed on or before
the date as shown on the permit, the Engineer of the Borough of
Manheim may, if he deems it advisable, take steps to backfill the
trench and replace a permanent pavement over the opening for
which the permit has been issued. If an extension of time beyond
said date is necessary for the completion of the work, a written
application therefor must be filed with and approved by the
Borough.
(6) Excavation notice. Act of Assembly No. 1986-17243 requires those
who intend to excavate, demolish or blast to file certain notices
(one-call, etc.) before commencing work. Permittees for permits to
break the pavement or surface of any public street of the Borough
of Manheim shall comply with all the requirements of this Act.
Permits issued in the Borough of Manheim shall be deemed null
and void unless the requirements of the Act have been met.
43.Editor's Note: See PA Act 287, as amended by Act 187 of 1996, 73 P.S. § 176 et seq.
§ 190-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-44
1:295
(7) Cutting of trenches. Trenches in paved areas shall be cut to a neat
edge using an asphalt/concrete saw or jackhammer.
(8) Barricade cover, lighting and traffic control.
(a) All street openings shall be completely barricaded and
protected by the permittee. Excavations left open or
incompletely repaired after dark shall be marked by PennDOT
approved flashing lights. Where work is interrupted, the
permittee shall secure and cover the excavation with an
appropriate metal plate.
(b) All required traffic control shall be provided by the permittee
in accordance with PennDOT Publication 203 (Work Zone
Traffic Control).
(c) Nothing contained in this article or other legislation of the
Borough of Manheim shall release the person, firm,
corporation or other entity opening the street from any liability
associated with claims for injury or damage resulting
therefrom.
(9) Backfilling. All openings made in the improved area shall be
backfilled by the permittee in accordance with the following
minimum standards:
(a) The opening shall first be backfilled with material suitable for
insulation to a height not to exceed one foot over the top of the
facility, compacted in not more than four-inch layers.
(b) The opening shall then be backfilled with either No. 2 RC
aggregate or other material specified in the permit and
compacted throughout its full width in layers not to exceed
four inches if a tamper or wacker is used or in layers not to
exceed eight inches if approved vibratory compaction
equipment is used.
(c) Where the existing pavement structure includes a course of
subbase material, it shall be replaced to a depth equal to the
existing course depth with material meeting the requirements
of Section 350, PennDOT Form 408.
(10) Paving restoration. Immediately following backfilling and
compaction, the permittee shall apply ID-2 bituminous binder
course (or cold patch, if hot mix is not available) to a minimum
depth of two inches and compacted to the level of the abutting
surface. The surface materials shall be tamped with a gravity roller
or vibrating compactor subject to the approval of the Engineer of
the Borough of Manheim. The permittee shall maintain the
restoration by reexcavating and/or applying additional surface
material in order to provide a smooth riding surface for a period of
one year after temporary restoration or until the Borough of
§ 190-44 MANHEIM CODE § 190-44
1:296
Manheim provides a permanent surface repair. Repairs shall be
made by the permittee within 24 hours' notice by the Borough of
Manheim, or by performing a street cut whether or not he/she is
notified by the Borough of Manheim to perform additional work.44
(11) Shoulder restoration.
(a) Paved and stabilized shoulders. Paved and stabilized shoulders
shall be reconstructed and restored to a serviceable condition
of the same type as existed before the start of work.
(b) Other shoulders. Other shoulders shall be restored according
to the following:
[1] Suitable material shall be used for backfill of openings in
shoulders.
[2] If the length of the facility exceeds 50 feet, the shoulder
shall be graded, rolled and penetrated with RT-2C or
MC-30 bituminous material at a minimum rate of 0.25
gallon per square yard and chipped or lightly sanded to
prevent tracking of oil onto the pavement. All shoulder
restoration shall be the responsibility of the permittee.
(12) Restoration at appurtenances.
(a) The top of every manhole, valve box or other access to the
facility shall be of the same elevation as the surface in which it
is located.
(b) The surface surrounding manholes or valve covers located in
shoulders shall be paved in such a manner as to prevent
washouts.
(c) All manholes, including those cast-in-place, shall be
constructed in compliance with current industry standards and
PennDOT Form 408, Section 713.2(c).
(13) Additional restoration.
(a) All disturbed portions of the street, including all
appurtenances and structures such as guide rails or
drainpipes, shall be restored to a condition equal to that which
existed before the start of any work authorized by the permit.
(b) If the permittee opens any street pavement having a
bituminous concrete surface, whether to install a new facility
or to modify an existing facility, the permittee shall, in addition
to the restoration conditions outlined in the permit and in this
article, overlay the street pavement in accordance with the
following conditions:
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 190-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-44
1:297
[1] When a longitudinal opening longer than 10 feet and wider
than three feet is made in the street pavement, the
permittee shall overlay the traffic lanes in which the
opening was made for the entire length of street that was
opened, as directed by the Engineer of the Borough of
Manheim.
[2] When two or more transverse trench openings are made in
the street pavement less than 200 feet apart, the permittee
shall overlay all traffic lanes in which the openings were
made for the entire length of street between such
openings, as directed by the Engineer of the Borough of
Manheim.
[3] When five or more emergency openings have been made
by the same permittee in the street pavement less than
200 feet apart within five years of the last resurfacing by
the Borough of Manheim, the permittee shall overlay all
traffic lanes in which the openings were made, in
accordance with the PennDOT Maintenance Manual, for
the entire length of street between such openings.
[4] Where disturbed lanes adjacent to shoulders are overlaid,
the shoulder shall be raised so that the overlaid pavement
and shoulder edges are at the same elevation.
(c) Regardless of the age of the wearing course:
[1] When both longitudinal and transverse trench openings
are made in the street pavement, the Engineer of the
Borough of Manheim may require the permittee to overlay
all traffic lanes in which such openings were made for the
entire length of street that was opened, if the Engineer of
the Borough of Manheim determines that the present
serviceability index of the street, as discussed in Chapter 3
of the PennDOT Maintenance Manual, has been impaired
by the opening; or
[2] When five or more openings are made by the same
permittee in the street highway pavement less than 100
feet apart, the Engineer of the Borough of Manheim may
require the permittee to overlay the entire disturbed area.
(14) Notice to Borough. The Codes Compliance Officer at the Manheim
Borough office, at telephone number 717-665-2461, shall be
notified when the opening in the pavement is to be made and shall
be further notified when a cut is to be backfilled and completed.
(15)Work for Borough of Manheim. No permit will be required of
contractors doing work of this nature for the Borough of Manheim.
Contractors doing work of this nature for the Borough of Manheim
§ 190-44 MANHEIM CODE § 190-44
1:298
§ 190-45. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who breaks or cuts in any
manner the pavement or surface of any public street of the Borough of
Manheim without first having obtained the proper permit and paid the
application fees and charges hereinbefore set forth, including any extension
fee, or who violates any of the other provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction before a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine
not exceeding $600 for each offense plus costs and, in default of the
payment of such fine and costs, said person and/or the responsible agents or
officers of firms or corporations violating the provisions of this article shall
be imprisoned in the Lancaster County Prison for a period not exceeding 30
days.
shall be required to obtain a permit therefor; however, said permits
shall be issued free of charge.
(16)Work to conform to Borough of Manheim standards. The work shall
be done at such time and in such manner as shall be consistent with
the safety of the public and shall conform to all requirements and
standards of the Borough of Manheim. If the Borough of Manheim
discovers that the work has been discontinued or has not been
properly performed, the Borough of Manheim shall immediately
take all necessary steps, at his or her own expense, to place the
work in such condition as to conform to the Borough of Manheim's
Codes Compliance Officer or designee. The Codes Compliance
Officer or designee shall have the authority to suspend work until
the matter can be referred to and be decided by the Engineer of the
Borough of Manheim.
(17) Additional inspection fees. If the Borough of Manheim determines
that the permitted work is of sufficient magnitude or importance to
warrant assignment of one or more employees to inspect the
permitted work on a more than spot-inspection basis, the permit
will so indicate, and the permittee shall be charged for all costs
incurred by the Borough of Manheim for inspection of the
permitted work on a more than spot-inspection basis, the permit
will so indicate, and the permittee shall be charged for all costs
incurred by the Borough of Manheim for inspection.
§ 190-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-45
1:299
Chapter 192
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 100.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 187.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
Chapter 195
TAXATION
§ 190-45 MANHEIM CODE § 190-45
1:300
ARTICLE I
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 5-27-1997 by Ord. No. 550 (Ch. 24, Part 4, of the 1992
Code)]
§ 195-1. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business, trust
or banking institution, which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory or foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT(S) — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys,
transfers, devises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or devise of
title to real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or
other instruments of like character given as security for a debt, and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof, unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 195-6 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
FAMILY FARM PARTNERSHIP — A partnership of which at least 75% of
its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of
the interests in the partnership are continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
§ 195-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-1
1:301
MEMBER(S) OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Manheim, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof and, as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
Recreational activities, such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
Any lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Borough, including,
without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees
and other improvements, immovables or interests which by custom,
usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently
attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate.
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
§ 195-1 MANHEIM CODE § 195-1
1:302
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold.
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that, where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale.
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio of assessed values
to market values of the taxing district as established by the State Tax
Equalization Board, or a commensurate part of the assessment where
the assessment includes other real estate.
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest.
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
D.
§ 195-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-1
1:303
§ 195-2. Imposition of tax.
Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be subject
to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, or for or
in respect of the vellum parchment or paper upon which such document is
written or printed, a tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate
represented by such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier
of the time the document is presented for recording or within 30 days of
acceptance of such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired
company.
§ 195-3. Exempt parties.
The United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any of their
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from
payment of the tax imposed by this article. The exemption of such
governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a
transaction from liability for the tax.
§ 195-4. Excluded transactions. [Amended 7-29-1997 by Ord. No.
551]
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
A. The tax imposed by § 195-2 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the concerning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments, provided said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania is
prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or statutes of the
United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff's sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
§ 195-1 MANHEIM CODE § 195-4
1:304
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between person who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce; between parent and
child or the spouse of such child; between brother or sister or the
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister; and between grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries that are entitled to receive the property
or proceeds from the sale of the property under the trust, whether
or not such beneficiaries are contingent or specifically named. A
trust clause which identifies the contingent beneficiaries by
reference to the heirs of the trust settlor as determined by the laws
of the intestate succession shall not disqualify a transfer from the
exclusion provided by this subsection. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of a
living trust from the settlor of the living trust. No such exemption
shall be granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a
copy of the living trust agreement.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of
an ordinary trust to a specifically named beneficiary that is entitled
to receive the property under the recorded trust instrument or to a
contingent beneficiary where the transfer of the same property
would be exempt if the transfer was made by the grantor of the
property into the trust to that beneficiary. However, any transfer of
real estate from a living trust during the settlor's lifetime shall be
considered for the purposes of this article as if such transfer were
made directly from the settlor to the grantee.
§ 195-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-4
1:305
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of
a living trust after the death of the settlor of the trust or from a
trustee of a trust created pursuant to the will of a decedent to a
beneficiary to whom the property is devised or bequeathed.
(12) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from the trustee
of a living trust to the settlor of the living trust if such property was
originally conveyed to the trust by the settlor.
(13) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(14) A transfer: for no or nominal consideration between principal agent
or straw party, from or to an agent or straw party where, if the
agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would be imposed
under this article. Where the document by which title is acquired
by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that the
property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit of, his
principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is the
property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee
claims an exemption from taxation under this section.
(15) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Borough reasonably determines that the primary
intent for such merger, consolidation or division is avoidance of the
tax imposed by this article.
(16) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(17) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(18) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture.
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
§ 195-4 MANHEIM CODE § 195-4
1:306
(19) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure, or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(20) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(21) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities or a transfer from such a
conservancy to the United States, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or to any of their instrumentalities or agencies.
(22) A transfer of real estate to the business of agriculture to a family
farm corporation by a member of the same family which directly
owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(23) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm partnership by a member of the same family which
family directly owns at least 75% of the interests in the
partnership.
(24) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company, family farm corporation or family
farm partnership which owns real estate.
(25) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(26) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
(27) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 ([8A
Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(C)(3)] and which has as its primary purpose
preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural
or open space opportunities or a transfer from such a conservancy
to the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or to any
of their instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivision, or any
transfer from such a conservancy where the real estate is
encumbered by a perpetual agricultural conservation easement as
defined by the Act of June 30, 1981, (P.L. 128, No. 43), known as the
"Agricultural Area Security Law,"45 and such conservancy has
owned the real estate for at least two years immediately prior to
the transfer.
45.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 901 et seq.
§ 195-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-4
1:307
§ 195-5. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided in § 195-4, documents which make, confirm or
evidence any transfer or devise of title to real estate between associations
or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or stockholders
thereof are fully taxable. For purposes of this article, corporations and
associations are entities separate from their members, partners,
stockholders or shareholders.
§ 195-6. Acquired company.
§ 195-7. Credits against tax.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be known on the statement of
value. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement of
value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such document is
not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change:
(1) Does not affect the continuity of the company.
(2) Of itself or together with prior changes, has the effect of
transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or more of the total
ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. A family farm partnership is an acquired company when, because of
voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm
partnership or when, because of transfer of partnership interests or
because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to the
business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a
family farm partnership under this article.
D. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of Deeds for the
affixation of documentary stamps and recording. Such declaration shall
set forth the value of real estate holdings of the acquired company in
the Borough.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
§ 195-4 MANHEIM CODE § 195-7
1:308
§ 195-8. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 195-9. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made and the sheriff or other officer conducting said sale shall
pay the tax herein imposed out of the first moneys paid to him in connection
therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax
herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for the remaining tax.
§ 195-10. Stamps.
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is devised by the grantor,
a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the devise shall be
given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
A. The payment of the tax imposed by this article shall be evidenced by the
affixing of a stamp or stamps to every document by the person making,
executing, delivering or presenting for recording such document. Such
stamps shall be affixed in such manner that their removal will require
the continuous application of steam or water, and the person using or
affixing such stamps shall write or stamp or cause to be written or
§ 195-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-10
1:309
§ 195-11. Commission for Collection; Remittance.
§ 195-12. Rules and regulations.
The Borough is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to:
§ 195-13. Failure to affix stamps.
No document upon which tax is imposed by this article shall, at any time,
be made the basis of any action or other legal proceeding, nor shall proof
thereof be offered or received in evidence in any court of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or recorded in the office of the Recorder
of Deeds, unless a stamp or stamps, as provided in this article, have been
affixed.
§ 195-14. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax
under this article. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
excludable real estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based on
family relationship. Other documents presented for the affixation of stamps
stamped thereon the initials of his name and the date upon which
such stamps are affixed or used so that such stamps may not again be
used, provided that the Borough may prescribe such other method of
cancellation as it may deem expedient.
B. The use of documentary license meter impressions or similar indicia of
payment in lieu of stamps as required by this article may be permitted,
in the discretion of the Borough.
A. The Borough shall allow Lancaster County a commission equal to 1% of
the face value of the tax collected. The Recorder of Deeds shall remit to
the Borough the gross amount of the tax collected less the commission
allowed on or before the 10th day of the month following the month in
which the tax was collected.
B. All moneys paid to the Borough during the effective period of this
article shall be credited to the Borough's general fund.
A. The method and means to be used in affixing or canceling of stamps in
substitution for or in addition to the method and means provided in this
article.
B. Any other matter or thing pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article.
§ 195-10 MANHEIM CODE § 195-14
1:310
shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the transaction showing such
connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof or the
reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 195-15. Civil penalties.
§ 195-16. Unlawful acts; penalty.
§ 195-17. Calculation of tax where land lies partly within and partly
without Borough.
Where land lying partly within the boundaries of the Borough and partly
without said boundaries is transferred, the tax herein imposed shall be
calculated on such portion of the value as shall be represented by the
portion of such land lying within the boundaries of the Borough.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Accept or present for recording or cause to be accepted or
presented for recording any document without the full amount of
tax thereon being duly paid.
(2) Make use of any documentary stamp to denote payment of any tax
imposed by this article without canceling such stamp as required
by this article or as prescribed by the Borough.
(3) Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or violate the rules and
regulations prescribed, adopted and promulgated by the Borough
under the provisions of this article.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of Subsection A of this
section shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be guilty of a summary offense.
C. A person who makes a false statement of value or declaration of
acquisition, when he does not believe the statement or declaration to be
true, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
§ 195-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-17
1:311

ARTICLE II
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 1-7-2008 by Ord. No. 604]
§ 195-18. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meaning subscribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
BOROUGH OF MANHEIM or BOROUGH — These terms are
interchangeable terms and, when used herein, shall be understood to
represent the area within the corporate limits of the Borough of Manheim.
CALENDAR YEAR, FISCAL YEAR or YEAR — The period of time beginning
on the first day of January and ending on the 31st day of December of each
year.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of
Dec. 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, limited liability partnership,
limited liability corporation, association, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity that engages the services of one or more individuals
and makes payment to said individual whether by salary, wages, commission
or other compensation basis, including a self- employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — When used in the singular, shall also apply to the plural
number as well as male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL or EMPLOYEE — Any person, male or female, engaged in any
occupation, trade, profession or other activity of any nature, type or kind
whatsoever within the corporate limits of the Borough of Manheim, whether
in the employ of another or self-employed, during the calendar year 2005 or
any calendar year thereafter.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession; or other activity as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1251, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION — The exercising or carrying on by any manner or means
of any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any type, kind or
character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or performed
within the corporate limits of the Borough of Manheim for which
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or otherwise, or wherein the individual is self-employed,
payment or fees are provided for services rendered.
§ 195-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-18
1:313
RETURN — A form designated, prepared and supplied by the Tax Collector
for reporting the amount of any tax deducted from an employee or
otherwise owed to the Borough of Manheim under this enactment.
TAX — According to the enabling legislation, any amount between $10 and
$52 which may be adopted by a local municipality as a local services tax
in place of the emergency and municipal services tax and/or the preceding
occupational privilege tax.
TAX COLLECTOR or COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private
agency designated by the Borough Council of the Borough of Manheim by
resolution to administer and enforce or to assist in the administration or
enforcement of the tax herein imposed in the place of the Borough Manager.
TAX YEAR — The period January 1 through December 31 in any year in
which the tax is payable; a calendar year.
§ 195-19. Levy of tax.
For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax known as the "local services
tax" is hereby levied and assessed, replacing taxes previously known as
the "emergency municipal services tax" and/or "occupational privilege tax."
The local services tax shall be collected commencing January 1, 2008,
upon the privilege of engaging in an occupation with a primary place of
employment within the Borough of Manheim during the tax year. Each
individual who exercises such privilege for any length of time during any
tax year shall pay the tax for that year in the amount not to exceed $52,
as it may be adopted and modified from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council of the Borough of Manheim, which shall be assessed on
a pro rata basis in accordance with the provisions of this article. This
tax may be used solely for the following purposes as the same may be
allocated by the Borough of Manheim from time to time: 1) emergency
services, which shall include emergency medical services, police services
and/or fire services; 2) road construction and/or maintenance; 3) reduction
of property taxes; or 4) property tax relief through implementation of
a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A.
Chapter 85, Subchapter F (relating to homestead property exclusion). The
Borough of Manheim shall use no less that 25% of the funds derived from
the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of
any kind or nature heretofore levied by the Borough of Manheim. The tax
shall be no more than $52 on each individual for each tax year, irrespective
of the number of political subdivision within an individual may be employed.
§ 195-20. Amount of tax.
Beginning on January 1, 2008, each individual engaged in an occupation
within the Borough of Manheim shall be subject to the annual payment of
the tax of $52, said tax to be paid by each individual exercising the privilege
of engaging in any occupation.
§ 195-18 MANHEIM CODE § 195-21
1:314
§ 195-21. Exemption and refunds.
For the purpose of this tax the following shall be exempt from payment
during the tax year.
A. Salary/wage exemption. Any individual whose total earned income and
net profits from all sources within the political subdivision is less that
$12,000 for any calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from
the payment of the tax for the calendar year. In addition, the following
individuals are also exempt of the tax.
(1) Any individual who has served in any war or armed conflict in
which the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged
or release under honorable circumstances from active service, if as
a result of military service the individual is blind, paraplegic or a
double or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any individual who serves as a member of a reserve component of
the armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
tax year shall be exempt for that tax year. For the purposes of this
subparagraph, "reserve component of the armed forces" shall mean
the United States' Army Reserve, Navy Reserve, Marine Corps
Reserve, Coast Guard Reserve, Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania
Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedures to claim exemption:
(1) An individual seeking to claim an exemption from the tax shall
annually file an exemption certificate with the Borough and with his
employer, affirming that he reasonably expects to receive earned
income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for which the
exemption certificate is being filed. The Borough will forward a
copy of the exemption certificate to the Collector. The individual
seeking exemption shall attach a copy of his last pay stub(s) or W-2
forms from the year prior to the fiscal year for which he is
requesting to be exempted from the tax. Upon receipt of the
exemption certificate and until otherwise instructed by the
Borough or its Collector, the employer shall not withhold the tax
from the individual during the calendar year or the remainder of
the calendar year for which the exemption certificate applies.
Exemption certificates will be available from the Borough or its
Collector and will be provided annually to each employer.
Employers shall furnish each new employee with information
regarding the tax, including the exemption provisions, at the time
of hiring.
(2) An individual who claimed an exemption from the tax for a given
calendar year and later becomes aware that his earnings will equal
or exceed the $12,000 threshold is at that time responsible for
§ 195-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-21
1:315
§ 195-22. Duty of employer to collect tax by withholding.
payment of the full value of the tax for that calendar year.
Beginning at that time the employer shall withhold the tax from the
individual in accordance with the following;
(3) The employer shall withhold the tax beginning with the first payroll
period following notification/realization that the individual has lost
exempt status as noted previously. A lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the employee due to the prior
claimed exemption shall be withheld in addition to the amount due
for the current payroll period. From that time on, the deductions
shall be withheld in accordance with the standard pro rata
previously established. In the event the employment of the
individual subject to the withholding of the tax is subsequently
severed in that calendar year the individual shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due and the Borough may pursue
collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2) of this section, it is the intent
that employers shall not be responsible for investigating exemption
certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or exempting any
employee from the tax.
C. Refunds. The Borough, in consultation with the Collector and DCED,
shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims for any
tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which procedures
shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal law relating
to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments. Refunds
made within 75 days of a properly submitted and documented refund
request or 75 days after the last day the employer is required to remit
the tax for the last quarter of the calendar/tax year, whichever is later,
shall not be subject to interest. No refunds shall be made for amounts
overpaid in a calendar/tax year that do not exceed $1. The Borough or
the Collector shall determine eligibility for exemption and provide
refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the Borough of Manheim, including those
employers situated outside the Borough of Manheim but who engage in
business within the Borough of Manheim, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the Borough of Manheim and making a
return and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is
hereby authorized to deduct this tax from each employee in his employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wages or commission and
whether or not part or all such services are performed within the
Borough of Manheim.
B. An individual subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro
rata share of the tax for each payroll period in which the individual is
engaging in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on
§ 195-21 MANHEIM CODE § 195-22
1:316
§ 195-23. Returns.
All employers shall prepare and file a return on forms supplied by the
Borough or Collector showing a computation of the tax being collected and
remitted. If an employer fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether
or not the employer makes collection thereof from the salary, wages or
commissions paid by him to an employee, except as provided hereafter in
this article, the employer shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in
full as though the tax had been originally levied against the employer.
the individual for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing
the rate of the tax levied for the tax year by the number of payroll
periods established by the employer for the tax year. For the purposes
of determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of
a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll-period basis for
each payroll period in which the individual is engaged in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section.
C. No individual shall be subject to the payment of the LST to more than
one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the individual provides a recent pay statement
from a his principal employer that includes the name of the employer,
the length of the payroll period and the amount of tax withheld and a
written statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer. The individual employee shall notify his
employers of a change of status related to his principal place of
employment within two weeks of such occurrence. The employee's
statement shall be provided on the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each individual for each tax/
calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions
within which an individual may be employed. All such political
subdivisions shall provide a taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request
by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of money to the political subdivision if the failure to withhold
taxes arise from incorrect information submitted by the employee as to
the employee's place or places of employment, the employee's principal
employer. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the employer if the
employer complies with the provisions of § 195-21B of this article and
this section and remits the amount so withheld in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the tax within 30 days after the
end of each quarter of the tax/calendar year.
§ 195-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-24
1:317
§ 195-24. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year each employer shall use his employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each tax year.
§ 195-25. Self-employed individuals.
Every self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the Borough shall be required to comply with this article
and pay the prorate portion of the tax due to the Collector on or before the
30th day following the end of each calendar quarter of each tax year.
§ 195-26. Individuals with multiple occupations or in more than one
political subdivision.
A. Each individual who has more than one Occupation within the Borough
of Manheim shall be subject to the payment of this tax on his principal
occupation and his principal employer shall deduct this tax and deliver
to the individual evidence of deductions on a form to be furnished to the
employer by the Borough of Manheim or the tax collector, which form
shall be evidence of deductions having been made and when presented
to any other employer shall be authority for such employer to not
deduct this tax from the individual's wages, but to include such
individual on his return by setting forth his name, address and the name
and account number of the employer who deducted this tax.
B. An individual who works multiple jobs which are located in more than
one political subdivision that levies the tax shall be subject to the
payment of the local services tax solely upon the privilege of engaging
in his principal occupation. As such, his principal employer shall deliver
to the individual a certificate of payment, as described above, certifying
to any other employer of such individual that said local services tax has
been paid by the employee at this principal place of occupation and, in
turn, remitted by said employer to the Tax Collector of said political
subdivision. Any employer receiving such original certificate of
payment of the tax by another employer shall not deduct or collect the
tax imposed by this article. The priority of claim to collect and remit the
local services tax shall be in the following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which the individual maintains his
principal offices or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the individual resides and
works if the local services tax is levied by that political subdivision;
or
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which the individual is employed
and which imposes the tax nearest to the individual's home.
§ 195-24 MANHEIM CODE § 195-26
1:318
§ 195-27. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
Borough of Manheim do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and
subject themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated
under this article with the same force and effect as though they were
residents of the Borough of Manheim. Further, any individual engaged
in an occupation within the Borough of Manheim and an employee of a
nonresidential employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered
a self-employed person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the
Borough shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or
the employee for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 195-28. Administration of tax/powers and duties of the Tax
Collector.
C. In case of a dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority fir that
calendar year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment shall
constitute certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer or self-employed individual,
together with the date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to proscribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any
individual aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the
right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Lancaster County as in
other cases provided.
C. The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by any employer on behalf of his employees or, if no return was
made, to ascertain the tax due. Each employer in the Borough of
Manheim is hereby directed and required to give to the Tax Collector
the means, facilities and opportunity for such examinations and
investigations.
D. The records, books and accounts of the Tax Collector shall be audited
from time to time by the Borough of Manheim or its appointed auditors.
§ 195-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-29
1:319
§ 195-29. Suits for collection.
§ 195-30. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his custody and control setting forth the number of employees subject
to this tax who are in his employment, or whoever fails or refuses to file
any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to enforce the penalty
herein prescribed may be instituted against any person in charge of the
business of any employer who shall have failed or who refuses to file a
return required by this article.
§ 195-31. Interpretation.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 195-29 MANHEIM CODE § 195-31
1:320
ARTICLE III
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 10-11-2011 by Ord. No. 624]
§ 195-32. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Manheim Borough
Earned Income Tax Ordinance."
§ 195-33. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act shall have the meanings set
forth therein. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein:
COLLECTOR — The person or entity appointed as Tax Officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act46 to collect the tax.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2012.
ENACTMENT — This article.
GOVERNING BODY — The Council of the Borough of Manheim.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth
in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., while such numbering and provisions remain in
effect under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.,
when such numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as
amended in the future.
TAX — The tax imposed by this enactment.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the Collector for reporting the
amount of tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted,
or reported under this enactment or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TAXING AUTHORITY — Manheim Borough.
TCC — The tax collection committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TCD — Any tax collection district to which the taxing authority or any part
of the taxing authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 195-34. Imposition of tax.
A. General purpose resident tax. The taxing authority hereby imposes a
tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 0.5% on earned income
and net profits of individual residents of the taxing authority.
B. General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The taxing authority also
imposes a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1.0% on
46.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 195-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-34
1:321
§ 195-35. Exemption from tax; individuals under age 16.
This governing body finds that:
§ 195-36. Exemption from municipal nonresident tax: residents of
other states if similar exemption in other state.
Individuals who are residents of a state other than Pennsylvania are exempt
from liability for the tax, but only if all local governments of the locality
where the individual resides either:
earned income and net profits derived by an individual who is not a
resident of the taxing authority from any work, business, profession
or activity of any kind engaged in within the boundaries of the taxing
authority.
C. Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this enactment is repealed or the rate is changed.
D. Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this
enactment. Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that
are required to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will
automatically become part of this enactment upon the effective date of
such amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this
enactment, to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
E. Applicable laws, regulations, policies and procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with: 1) all applicable laws
and regulations; and 2) regulations, policies and procedures adopted by
the TCC or by the Collector. This includes any regulations, policies and
procedures adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1
Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
A. Minors of various age groups have traditionally, and with judicial
sanction, been considered as comprising separate classes for many
legislative purposes; and
B. Minors under the age of 16 are generally unemancipated and subject to
compulsory school attendance and child labor laws, and therefore have
limited earned income and net profits and control of money such that
enforcement of reporting and collection of tax hereunder against them
would yield inconsequential amounts and be unduly difficult, expensive
and not in the public interest. For these reasons, individuals under the
age of 16 years are exempt from liability for the tax.
A. Impose no tax on the income of a Pennsylvania resident derived from
activities within the locality; or
§ 195-34 MANHEIM CODE § 195-36
1:322
§ 195-37. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
§ 195-38. Employer withholding, remittance, tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold and remit tax, and file tax returns in
accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 195-39. Tax Collector.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the Collector.
§ 195-40. Interest, penalties, costs, fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by
the Collector in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
B. Exempt that income from tax. In addition to this exemption from
municipal nonresident tax, certain credits and deductions against tax
are permitted under certain circumstances as provided in applicable
law and regulations.
§ 195-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-40
1:323
Chapter 205
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 145.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 160.
Sledding, skateboards — See Ch. 190, Art. IV.
§ 195-40 MANHEIM CODE § 195-40
1:324
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 205-1. Definitions and interpretation. [Amended 8-26-1997 by
Ord. No. 553]
§ 205-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action.
§ 205-3. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred or any suit or prosecution pending or
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code47 (the Act of June 17,
1976, P.L. 162 No. 81), as amended, except that, in this chapter, the
word "street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway"
and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in
the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holiday" as used in this chapter shall mean and include
New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine.
D. Although the streets in the Borough of Manheim run generally in a
northeast–southwest and northwest–southeast direction, for the
purpose of this chapter, Main Street and the streets running parallel or
generally parallel to Main Street shall be deemed to run in a
north–south direction and High Street and the streets parallel or
generally parallel to High Street shall be deemed to run in an east–west
direction.
E. MOTOR CARRIER — A truck, truck tractor or combination having a
gross weight or registered gross weight in excess of 17,000 pounds, as
cited in Section 102 of the Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 102).
47.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 205-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-3
1:325
to be instituted under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
§ 205-4. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 205-5. Experimental regulations.
The Borough Council may, from time to time by resolution, designate places
upon and along the highways in the Borough of Manheim where, for a
period of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate
such locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective as if they had been specified in this
chapter. No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of
any such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by
authority of this section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth
in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and
in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law
or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25 together with
costs of prosecution, provided that the purpose of this section is to allow for
the test and experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of
permanent changes in the ordinances of the Borough of Manheim relative
to traffic and parking.
§ 205-6. Traffic on streets closed or restricted for construction,
maintenance or special events.
A. The Manager shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any
such regulations or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$25 together with costs of prosecution.
§ 205-3 MANHEIM CODE § 205-6
1:326
§ 205-7. Use of streets by processions and assemblages.
A. Borough Council shall have authority to close any street or specific part
of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police
officers at each end of the closed portion while construction or
maintenance work is under way or a special event is being conducted
on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. Borough Council shall have authority to establish a restricted traffic
area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is under
way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion. It shall
be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such restricted
traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign directing
that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other device,
not to proceed.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the words "assemblage" and
"procession" shall have the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street.
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral caravan or
military convoy.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit from the Borough Council, which shall be issued
without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least one week
in advance of the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held,
but in any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to be
used, application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall state the place where and the date
when the assemblage is to be held, the hour when the assemblage may
convene and the hour by which it shall have been completely dispersed.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any
assemblage unless the permit has been granted or at any time or place
other than that authorized by the permit.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit from the Borough Council, which shall be issued
without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least two weeks
in advance of the day when the procession is proposed to be held, but in
any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to be used,
§ 205-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-7
1:327
§ 205-8. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Borough of Manheim are hereby given authority
to direct traffic on the highways of the Borough of Manheim and at
intersections thereof.
§ 205-9. Authorization for use of speed-timing devices.
application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall specify the date on which the
procession is to be held, the route to be followed by the procession, the
hour when and place where participants may commence to assemble
and form before the procession is under way, the time when the
procession may commence to move along its route and the time by
which the end of the procession shall have reached the end of the route
of the procession and the procession shall have been disbanded. It shall
be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any procession
unless the permit shall have been granted, or under any conditions as
to time or route or otherwise than those stated in the permit.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The Borough of Manheim Police Department is hereby authorized to
use all speed-timing devices for the determination of speed of a motor
vehicle as are approved or will be approved by the Department of
Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance
with 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3368.
B. This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways within
the Borough of Manheim, be they Borough of Manheim, county or state
highways and does also hereby elect to exercise all power granted to
"local authorities" under the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6101 et seq., as hereafter amended,
supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania.
§ 205-7 MANHEIM CODE § 205-9
1:328
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 205-10. Maximum speed limits established on certain streets.
[Amended 12-9-1997]
§ 205-11. Maximum speed limits established on certain bridges and
elevated structures.
A. Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specific streets, as
follows, and it shall unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any
part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies at a higher speed
than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street: [Amended
7-9-2019 by Ord. No. 664]
Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Hours
All streets In the Borough 25
East Gramby
Street
From a distance
100 feet west of
North Hazel
Street to a
distance 100
feet east of
North Linden
Street
15 School hours
North Hazel
Street
East Gramby
Street and Scout
Alley
15 School hours
North Linden
Street
East Gramby
Street and Scout
Alley
15 School hours
South Oak
Street
East Stiegel
Street and the
southern
boundary of the
Borough of
Manheim
35
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
§ 205-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-11
1:329
§ 205-12. Maximum speed limits established for certain vehicles on
hazardous grades.
§ 205-13. Maximum speed limits established in parks.
A. Maximum speed limits are established as follows on certain bridges and
elevated structures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle on any such bridge or elevated structure at a higher speed than
the maximum prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure:
Bridge or Elevated
Structure Location
Maximum Speed
Limit
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. The following are declared to be hazardous grades, and upon any such
hazardous grade, no person shall drive a vehicle having a gross weight
in excess of that referred to for that grade, in the direction stated for
that grade, at a speed in excess of that established in this section for
that grade, and if so stated for a particular grade, the drive of every
such vehicle shall stop the vehicle before proceeding downhill:
Street Between
Direction
of Travel
Maximum
Gross
Weight
Maximum
Speed
Limit
Required
to Stop
Before
Proceeding
Downhill
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. A speed limit of 15 miles per hour is established on all streets and
roadways in the public parks maintained and operated by the Borough
of Manheim, except in the following locations, where the lower
maximums, as specified, shall apply:
Park Street Location
Maximum
Speed Limit
(Reserved)
§ 205-11 MANHEIM CODE § 205-13
1:330
§ 205-14. Traffic signals at certain locations.
§ 205-15. Intersections where turn prohibited on red signal.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those
locations shall be directed by those signals:
Location Type of Signal
Charlotte Street and West High
Street
Traffic control signal
East High Street, 200 feet east of
Linden Street
15-miles-per-hour school zone
when flashing
East High Street, east of Wolf
Street
15-miles-per-hour school zone
when flashing
Main Street and East High Street Traffic control signal
North Main Street and Gramby
Street
Traffic control signal
South Main Street and Ferdinand
Street
Traffic control signal
South Main Street and Stiegel
Street
Traffic control signal
West High Street, east and west of
Grant Street
School crossing warning
B. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another
one-way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection
Vehicles Traveling
On Facing
Market Square and East High
Street
North Main Street South
Market Square and North
Main Street
East High Street West
Market Square and West High
Street
South Charlotte
Street
North
§ 205-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-15
1:331
§ 205-16. One-way streets established. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord.
No. 572]
B. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other
than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Alley "A" Main Street Linden Street East
Alley "B" Main Street North Charlotte
Street
West
Alley "C" North Charlotte
Street
North Main
Street
East
Alley "F" South Main Street South Charlotte
Street
West
Alley "M" West Ferdinand
Street
West Stiegel
Street
South
Eby Street South Main Street Cherry Street West
Logan Avenue Main Street Linden Street East
Logan Avenue South Charlotte
Street
Main Street East
Logan Avenue* Hazel Street Rettew Alley East
Memorial
Drive
North Laurel
Street
East High Street East from North
Laurel Street
South toward
East High Street
New Charlotte
Street
Railroad Avenue Intersection of
South Charlotte
Street and West
Stiegel Street
North
Rettew Alley Logan Avenue East Ferdinand
Street
South
South Alley "J" West Ferdinand
Street
West Stiegel
Street
South
West Bache
Alley
South Charlotte
Street
South Veterans
Alley
West
NOTE:
* Avenue is closed during school hours and made two-way from the
eastern edge of the present school property lines to Linden Street.
§ 205-15 MANHEIM CODE § 205-16
1:332
§ 205-17. Rotary traffic islands established.
§ 205-18. Turning at certain intersections prohibited or restricted.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 572]
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are designated as rotary traffic islands, and every vehicle
passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of
the island:
(Reserved)
B. Any person who drives a vehicle otherwise than to the right of any
rotary traffic island shall be guilty of a violation of this section and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type indicated,
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following
intersection, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to
make a left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as
indicated, at any time when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
Vehicles
Traveling
On
Direction
of Travel
Not to
Make Into When
Type of
Vehicle
Applicable
to
West
Ferdinand
Street
East or
west
Left or
right turn
South
Veterans
Alley
which lies
north of
West
Ferdinand
Street
All times All vehicles
West
Logan
Avenue
between
South
Charlotte
Street and
South
Main
Street
East Right turn South
Veterans
Alley
All times Trucks
larger than
a pickup or
passenger
van
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 205-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-19
1:333
§ 205-19. Right turns only permitted at certain intersections.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 572]
§ 205-20. U-turns prohibited at certain locations.
§ 205-21. No-passing zones established.
§ 205-22. Through highways established.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a right turn at any
time stated, both left turns and straight-across traffic being prohibited:
Vehicles Traveling On
Direction
of Travel Times
Not to Make
Left Turn Into
or Travel
Straight Across
West Bache Alley from
South Veterans Alley to
South Main Street
East All times South Main
Street
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle traveling upon any of
the following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated
for that street, to make a U-turn:
Street Portion Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as no-passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another
vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no-passing
zone:
Street
Direction of
Travel Between
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching
every intersection with the through highway except for those
intersections with traffic signals or with exceptions or modifications as
§ 205-19 MANHEIM CODE § 205-22
1:334
§ 205-23. Stop intersection established. [Amended 8-27-1996 by
Ord. No. 545; 8-26-1997 by Ord. No. 553; 1-26-1999 by Ord. No.
559; and 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 572]
indicated below. Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield
sign authorized by this section shall stop the vehicle or yield right-ofway
as required by § 3323(b) or (c) of the Vehicle Code, as the case may
be, and shall not proceed into or across the through highway until he
has followed all applicable requirements of that section of the law:
Highway Between
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 205-22) are established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the intersecting or through street) on the firstnamed
street (the stop street) in the direction or directions indicated
for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the
intersection on the first-named or stop street, in the direction indicated
in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(b) of the
Vehicle Code and shall not proceed into or across the second-named or
intersecting or through street until he has followed all applicable
requirements of that section of the law:
Stop Street
Intersecting or Through
Street
Direction of
Travel
Adele Avenue Manheim Central High
School driveway by the
concrete mountable curbed
island
West
Alley "A" Hazel Street East
Alley "A" Linden Street East
Alley "A" Wolf Street East
Alley "B" Hart Street West
Alley "B" Pitt Street East and west
Alley "B" Wolf Street East and west
Alley "C" North Main Street East
Alley "D" Alley ""J" East and west
Alley "D" Alley "Q" East and west
Alley "D" Charlotte Street East
Alley "D" Grant Street East and west
§ 205-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-23
1:335
Stop Street
Intersecting or Through
Street
Direction of
Travel
Alley "D" Linden Street East and west
Alley "D" Oak Street East
Alley "D" Pitt Street East and west
Alley "D" South Penn Street East and west
Alley "E" Alley "M" East
Alley "F" Alley "M" West
Alley "F" South Charlotte Street West
Alley "H" Charlotte Street East
Alley "H" Cherry Street West
Alley "J" Alley "D" North and south
Alley "J" Ferdinand Street South
Alley "J" Stiegel Street South
Alley "M" Alley "F" South
Alley "M" Ferdinand Street North and south
Alley "M" Logan Avenue North
Alley "M" Stiegel Street North and south
Alley "M" West Stiegel Street South
Alley "Q" Unnamed alley North and south
Charlotte Street Colebrook Street North and south
Charlotte Street Ferdinand Street North and south
Charlotte Street Gramby Street North and south
Charlotte Street Railroad Avenue South
Cherry Street Railroad Avenue North
Cherry Street Stiegel Street North
Chestnut Street Fulton Street East and west
Chestnut Street Grant Street East and west
Chestnut Street Meadow Lane East and west
Chestnut Street Penn Street East and west
Chestnut Street Pitt Street East
Clay Street Colebrook Street North
Clay Street Gramby Street North and south
Colebrook Street North Main Street East
Crescent Drive High Street North
Dover Street Fulton Street West
Dover Street Penn Street East
§ 205-23 MANHEIM CODE § 205-23
1:336
Stop Street
Intersecting or Through
Street
Direction of
Travel
East Logan Avenue Linden Street West
Eby Street Charlotte Street West
Eby Street Cherry Street West
Federal Alley Wolf Street East
Ferdinand Street Charlotte Street East and west
Ferdinand Street Fulton Street East and west
Ferdinand Street Grant Street East and west
Ferdinand Street Linden Street East and west
Ferdinand Street Penn Street East and west
Fulton Street High Street North and south
Fulton Street Stiegel Street South
Fulton Street West End Avenue North and south
Gramby Street Charlotte Street East and west
Gramby Street Hazel Street East and west
Gramby Street Main Street East and west
Gramby Street North Grant Street East and west
Gramby Street North Penn Street East and west
Grant Street Colebrook Street North and south
Grant Street Ferdinand Street North and south
Grant Street High Street North and south
Grant Street Rapho Street North
Grant Street Stiegel Street South
Hart Street Alley "C" South
Hart Street Colebrook Street North
Hart Street Gramby Street North and south
Hazel Street Ferdinand Street North and south
Hazel Street Gramby Street North and south
Hazel Street High Street North and south
Hazel Street Stiegel Street South
Heintzelman Street Ferdinand Street South
Heintzelman Street High Street North
Heintzelman Street West End Avenue South
Hershey Drive Adele Avenue South
Hershey Drive Hamaker Road North
Hostetter Road Oak Street West
§ 205-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-23
1:337
Stop Street
Intersecting or Through
Street
Direction of
Travel
Lakeview Drive Hamaker Road South
Laurel Street Hamaker Road North
Laurel Street High Street South
Laurel Street Memorial Drive North and south
Linden Street Ferdinand Street North and south
Linden Street Gramby Street North
Linden Street High Street North and south
Linden Street Mill Street South
Logan Circle Snyder Street East
Lorraine Avenue Meadow Lane East
Meadow Lane High Street South
Mill Street Hazel Street West
Mill Street Main Street West
Mill Street Oak Street East
Mill Street South Linden Street East and west
Mill Street Wolf Street East and west
Miller Drive High Street South
Miller Drive Lorraine Avenue South
North Laurel Street Adele Avenue North and south
North Laurel Street Adele Avenue intersection North and south
Oak Street Adele Avenue North
Oak Street Ferdinand Street North and south
Oak Street Gramby Street North and south
Oak Street High Street North and south
Oak Street Stiegel Street South
Old Colebrook Street Colebrook Street South
Parkview Drive Hamaker Road South
Parkview Drive Lakeview Drive West
Penn Street Alley "D" South
Penn Street Colebrook Street North
Penn Street Ferdinand Street North and south
Penn Street Fuller Drive South
Penn Street High Street North and south
Pitt Street Alley "D" North and south
Pitt Street Colebrook Street North and south
§ 205-23 MANHEIM CODE § 205-23
1:338
Stop Street
Intersecting or Through
Street
Direction of
Travel
Pitt Street Ferdinand Street North and south
Pitt Street Gramby Street North and south
Pitt Street High Street North and south
Pitt Street Stiegel Street South
Railroad Avenue New Charlotte Street East
Rambler Road Orchard Lane (both ends of
Rambler Road, a looping
road intersecting Orchard
Lane twice)
East
Rapho Street North Main Street East
Rapho Street Rambler Road North
Rettew Lane High Street North
Scout Alley Hazel Street East and west
Scout Alley Linden Street East
Snyder Street Ferdinand Street South
Snyder Street West High Street North
South Marshall Lane West Dover Street North and south
Stiegel Street Charlotte Street East and west
Stiegel Street Penn Street East and west
Twilight Drive Clay Street East and west
Twilight Drive Grant Street East
Twilight Drive Penn Street West
West Bache Street South Charlotte Street West
West End Avenue Penn Street East
West Logan Avenue Main Street West
Wolf Street Adele Avenue North
Wolf Street Ferdinand Street North and south
Wolf Street Gramby Street North and south
Wolf Street High Street North and south
Wolf Street Stiegel Street South
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 205-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-24
1:339
§ 205-24. Stop intersections established excepting right turn.
[Added 8-26-1997 by Ord. No. 553]
The following intersection (in addition to intersections with stop
intersections established by § 205-23) are established as stop intersections,
except right turns are permitted without stopping, and official signs shall be
erected in such a position as to face traffic approaching the second-named
street on the first-named street in the direction or directions indicated for
that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on
the first-named street or stop street, in the direction indicated in each case,
and intending to make a right turn onto the second-named street or through
street, shall be permitted to continue on the intended course of travel by
slowing down or stopping the vehicle as required by § 3323(c) of the Vehicle
Code and then yielding the right-of-way as required by that subsection of
the Vehicle Code:
Stop Street
Intersections or Through
Street
Direction of
Travel
North Laurel Street Adele Avenue North
§ 205-25. Yield intersections established. [Amended 8-26-1997 by
Ord. No. 553]
§ 205-26. Operation of motor vehicles restricted on public lands.
[Amended 8-26-1997 by Ord. No. 553]
No motor vehicle or motorcycle or minibike shall be operated on any
lands owned by the Borough of Manheim or any other public body or
agency within the Borough of Manheim except on those lands specifically
designated for the operation of motor vehicles, motorcycles or minibikes by
resolution of the Borough Council.
A. The following intersection (in addition to intersections with the through
highways established by § 205-22) are established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the through street) on the first-named street (the
yield street) in the direction or directions as indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on
the first-named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(c) of the
Vehicle Code and then yield the right-of-way as required by that
subsection of the Vehicle Code.
Yield Street Through Street
Direction of
Travel
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 205-24 MANHEIM CODE § 205-27
1:340
§ 205-27. Restrictions on use of pushcarts. [Amended 8-26-1997 by
Ord. No. 553]
§ 205-28. Jake brake prohibition. [Added 4-27-1999 by Ord. No.
560]
A. The word "pushcart," as used in this section, shall mean a vehicle, other
than a pedalcycle, propelled solely by human power and used or
intended for use for the display, transport, exhibit or sale of goods,
wares or merchandise.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any
sidewalk in any business district except as necessary to move the
pushcart to a location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded or from
which goods, wares or merchandise are to be sold or dispensed under
permit from Borough Council as provided in Subsection C of this
section.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a pushcart upon any sidewalk
except for the purpose of selling or dispensing from that pushcart
goods, wares or merchandise to passersby under permit from Borough
Council. Every such permit shall be issued to the person making
application for the permit upon payment of a fee, which shall be for the
use of the Borough of Manheim, of $100 for any calendar year, $50 for
any six-month period or $25 for any three-month period. The permit
shall be granted to the applicant upon payment of the fee and upon his
signing an agreement with Borough Council that he shall be bound by
the conditions imposed by the Borough Council and made a part of the
permit dealing with the following matters:
(1) Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or more
stated locations upon the sidewalk and to stated days and hours at
each location.
(2) Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the
disposal of garbage and refuse resulting from the operations
carried on.
(3) Requiring that there be no violation of any law, ordinance or
regulation pertaining to health, sanitation and the handling of food
or drink.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section or any condition of
any permit granted under this section shall be guilty of a summary
offense and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and
costs.
A. No person shall operate or use or cause to be operated or used any
vehicle-engine-compression brake, also known as a "jake brake," within
the limits of Manheim Borough.
§ 205-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-28
1:341
B. This section shall not apply to emergency situations requiring the
utilization of a jake brake to protect the health, safety or welfare of the
residents or business owners of Manheim Borough, other motor vehicle
operators, pedestrians or the operator and passengers of the motor
vehicle involved in said emergency situation.
C. Any person, firm, corporation or organization violating any of the
provisions of this section shall, upon summary conviction before a
Magisterial District Judge having jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $300 plus costs of prosecution.
§ 205-28 MANHEIM CODE § 205-28
1:342
ARTICLE III
Restrictions on Size, Weight and Type of Vehicle and Load
§ 205-29. Vehicle weight limits established on certain streets and
bridges.
§ 205-30. Restrictions on size of vehicles on certain streets and
bridges.
§ 205-31. Restriction as to weight and size of vehicles on certain
streets and bridges.
A. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination having a gross
weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that bridge or
street or part of street, as the case may be:
Street or Bridge Between
Maximum Gross
Weight
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under § 4902(a) and (g-1) of the Vehicle Code and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 plus $150 for each
500 pounds or part thereof in excess of 3,000 pounds over the
maximum allowable weight, and costs.
A. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for any
person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the size
restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street:
Street or Bridge Between Restriction
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under § 4902(a) and (g-1) of the Vehicle Code and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $75, and costs.
A. By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by
authority granted by § 4902(b) of the Vehicle Cod, it shall be unlawful
for any person to drive any vehicle or combinations in violation of the
restriction prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street:
Street or Bridge Between Restriction
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under § 4902(b) and (g-1) of the Vehicle Code and, upon
§ 205-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-31
1:343
§ 205-32. Truck traffic restricted on certain streets. [Amended
8-26-1997 by Ord. No. 553; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 572]
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 and not
more than $100, and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a
passenger car on any of the following streets or parts of streets:
Street Between
Chestnut Street North Penn Street on the east and a
point 235 feet west of the western
right-of-way line of North Penn Street
South Veterans Alley,
northernmost portion
East High Street and East Gramby
Street
B. Exemptions.
(1) Emergency equipment.
(2) Recreational vehicles.
(3) Mass transit vehicles.
(4) Government vehicles.
(5) Tow trucks and roll backs.
(6) School buses.
(7) Vehicles involved in local pickup or delivery, having a bill of laden
for service.
§ 205-31 MANHEIM CODE § 205-32
1:344
ARTICLE IV
General Parking Regulations
§ 205-33. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 205-34. Angle parking required on portions of certain streets.
§ 205-35. Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations.
[Amended 8-27-1996 by Ord. No. 545; 8-26-1997 by Ord. No. 553;
1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 559; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 572; 9-24-2001 by
Ord. No. 575; 7-9-2019 by Ord. No. 664]
"Parking shall be prohibited at all times (except that vehicles may be parked
there during loading and unloading) in the following locations:
Street Side Between
Alley "A" Both Main Street to Linden
Street
Alley "B" Both Main Street to Charlotte
Street
Alley "C" Both Charlotte Street to
Hazel Street
Alley "D" Both Charlotte Street to Penn
Street
Alley "D" Both Wolf Street to Oak
Street
A. Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of
streets:
Street Side Between
Adele Avenue North Hershey Drive east to end
Adele Avenue South Laurel Street east to street
end
Market Square Adjacent to
center island
Main Street and Charlotte
Street
Memorial Drive East High Street to 800 feet north
at Rettew Field
B. On all streets where angle parking is required, every vehicle parked at
the angle shall be parked with its front nearest the curb.
§ 205-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-35
1:345
Street Side Between
Alley "E" Both Main Street to Charlotte
Street
Alley "F" Both Ally "M" to Main Street
Alley "F" Both Main Street to Penn
Street
Alley "G" Both Main Street to Cherry
Street
Alley "G" Both New Charlotte Street to
Main Street
Alley "H" Both Charlotte Street to
Cherry Street
Alley "J" Both Ferdinand Street to
Stiegel Street
Alley "K" Both Alley "G" to Alley "H"
Alley "L" Both Alley "G" to Charlotte
Street
Alley "M" Both Logan Avenue to Alley
"G"
Alley "O" Both High Street to Borough
line
Chestnut Street Both Grant Street to Penn
Street
Chestnut Street Both North Fulton Street to
West High Street
Colebrook Street North Main Street west to
Borough line
East High Street North Main Street to Wolf
Street
East High Street South East Borough line to
Main Street
East High Street North From eastern curbline of
North Hazel Street to a
point 30 feet eastward
Eby Street South Main Street to Cherry
Street
Federal Alley Both Main Street to Wolf
Street
Ferdinand Street South Hazel Street to Penn
Street
Gramby Street North Oak Street to Grant
Street
§ 205-35 MANHEIM CODE § 205-35
1:346
Street Side Between
Hart Street East Gramby Street to
Colebrook Street
Hazel Street West Stiegel Street to
Ferdinand Street
Logan Avenue North Main Street to Charlotte
Street
Main Street East From north boundary
line to the south
boundary line on the
east side
Main Street West 150 feet north of Square
to 150 feet south of
Square
Memorial Drive North Oak Street to Laurel
Street
Memorial Drive South and West Laurel Street to High
Street
New Charlotte Street Both Main Street to Railroad
Avenue
New Charlotte Street Southwest Railroad Avenue east to
Charlotte Street
North Laurel Street West East High Street and
East Gramby Street
North Hazel Street East From a distance 285
feet south from the
southern curbline of
East Gramby Street to a
point 75 feet southward
North Main Street West End of curb radius of
West Gramby Street to a
point 175 feet
northward and to a
point 200 feet
southward
North Main Street West End of curb radius of
Market Square to point
201 feet northward
Oak Street Both Hostetter Road to
Gramby Street
Penn Street East Stiegel Street to 200
feet north
§ 205-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-35
1:347
Street Side Between
Pitt Street East Ferdinand Street to
Chestnut Street
South Alley "J" Both Ferdinand Street to
Stiegel Street
South Charlotte Street West At the intersection of
West Stiegel Street
south of the
intersection, the noparking
zone shall be 50
feet in length measured
from the extension of
the southern curbline of
West Stiegel Street
South Charlotte Street West At the intersection of
West Stiegel street
north of the
intersection, the noparking
zone shall be 58
feet in length measured
from the extension of
the northern curbline of
West Stiegel Street
South Main Street West End of curb radius of
Market Square to West
Logan Avenue
South Main Street West End of curb radius of
West Ferdinand Street
to a point 172 feet
northward and to a
point 184 feet
southward
South Main Street West End of curb radius of
West Stiegel Street to a
point 159 feet
northward and to a
point 193 feet
southward
South Main Street West From a distance 45 feet
south from the southern
curbline of West Logan
Alley to a point 90 feet
southward
South Penn Street East West Kline Alley south
to West Stiegel Street
§ 205-35 MANHEIM CODE § 205-35
1:348
Street Side Between
South Pitt Street West From the intersection of
South Dover Street
north 145 feet and south
210 feet
South Wolf Street East At the intersection with
East Mill Street north of
the intersection, the noparking
zone shall be 20
feet in length from the
northern edge of East
Mill Street
South Wolf Street West At the intersection of
East Ferdinand Street
south of the
intersection, the noparking
zone shall be 26
feet in length measured
from the southern curb
line of East Ferdinand
Street
Stiegel Street North Hazel Street to
Charlotte Street
Stiegel Street South Main Street to Hazel
Street
West High Street North End of curb radius of
Market Square (north
side) to a point 150 feet
westward
West High Street South Charlotte Street to
Fulton Street
West High Street (S.R.
0772)
Both Meadow Lane to Snyder
Street
West Logan Avenue South Main Street to a point
230 feet west
West Stiegel Street South At the intersection of
New Charlotte Street
east of the intersection,
the no-parking zone
shall be 80 feet in length
measured from the
southern curbline of
East Ferdinand Street
§ 205-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-35
1:349
Street Side Between
West Stiegel Street North From western curbline
of South Grant Street to
a point 40 feet westward
West Stiegel Street South From eastern curbline of
South Veterans Alley to
a point 30 feet eastward
West Stiegel Street South From western curbline
to South Penn Street to
a point 50 feet westward
West Stiegel Street North From eastern curbline of
South Penn Street to a
point 90 feet eastward
Wolf Street East Gramby Street to Logan
Avenue
Wolf Street West High Street to
Ferdinand Street
Wolf Street West Mill Street to Stiegel
Street
§ 205-36. Parking prohibited in certain locations, certain days and
hours. [Amended 1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 559; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No.
572; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 646; 7-9-2019 by Ord. No. 664]
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days
and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
Street Side Between Days Hours
East Gramby
Street
South North Hazel
Street to
North Linden
Street
Monday
through
Friday
School hours
Hershey
Drive
North/east Access drives
to Manheim
Central
School
Parking areas
School days 7:30 a.m. to
8:30 a.m. and
2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m.
North Linden
Street
West Southern
curbline of
East Gramby
Street to a
point 385 feet
southward
Monday
through
Friday
School hours
§ 205-35 MANHEIM CODE § 205-36
1:350
Street Side Between Days Hours
South
Charlotte
Street
West Intersection
of Market
Square
southward for
approximately
170 feet
Every day 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
South Penn
Street
East West Kline
Alley and
West
Ferdinand
Street
School days 7:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.,
10:15 a.m. to
11:45 a.m.,
2:00 p.m. to
3:00 p.m.
§ 205-37. Parking of trucks and certain other vehicles prohibited in
Borough; exceptions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or allow to remain parked,
on any of the Borough streets or parts of streets, any vehicle other than
a passenger car (which shall not include any bus, motor home or
passenger car attached to a trailer of any kind), with the exception of
the following streets, roads, avenues, drives, etc.:
Street Between
(Reserved)
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following classes of
vehicles:
(1) Buses, taxicabs and other motor vehicles transporting passengers
for pay or hire.
(2) School buses.
(3) Any police department or fire company vehicles and any vehicles
owned by a public utility and being used in the performance of
work connected with such public utility.
(4) Vehicles making local deliveries or necessary in services being
rendered to occupants of buildings or other persons.
(5) Vehicles owned by the United States of America, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any division, department or agency thereof.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to park and to permit the following to
remain standing on any public street or alley within the Borough of
Manheim for a period of time in excess of 12 hours: [Amended
7-9-2019 by Ord. No. 664]
(1) A boat.
§ 205-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-37
1:351
§ 205-38. Parking time limited in certain location, certain days and
hours. [Amended 8-27-1996 by Ord. No. 545; 8-26-1997 by Ord. No.
553; 1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 559; 10-12-1999 by Ord. No. 564]
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer than
the time indicated in any of the following locations at any time on the days
and between the hours indicated:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking
Time
Limit
Charlotte
Street
West Alley "D" to
Stiegel
Street
Monday
through
Saturday
All hours 12 hours
Charlotte
Street
West Gramby
Street to
Market
Square
Monday
through
Saturday
All hours 12 hours
Charlotte
Street
West Market
Square to
Alley "D"
Monday
through
Thursday;
Friday and
Saturday
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.;
8:00 a.m.
to 9:00
p.m.
2 hours
(2) A trailer, as defined in the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
(3) A camping or recreational vehicle.
(4) A commercial vehicle licensed to permit a gross vehicle weight in
excess of 7,000 pounds.
D. The following are exceptions to the provisions aforementioned in
§ 205-37C:
(1) Any motor vehicle licensed to permit a gross vehicle weight of
7,000 pounds or less, whereupon is mounted an enclosure, such as
a low-profile pickup "mini camper," which extends no more than 12
inches above the cab roof.
(2) Any motor vehicle which is being used in conjunction with
construction or property repairs, where the owner of said vehicle is
engaged in such construction or repairs and the vehicle is a
necessary part thereof.
(3) Any vehicle, trailer or boat parked on a public street or alley in
excess of 12 hours, wherein the owner or driver has received
permission from the Police Department to park such vehicle, trailer
or boat in excess of 12 hours. [Amended 7-9-2019 by Ord. No.
664]
§ 205-37 MANHEIM CODE § 205-38
1:352
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking
Time
Limit
Cherry
Street
West Railroad
Avenue to
100 feet
south of Eby
Street
Monday
through
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
2 hours
East Adele
Avenue
North North Laurel
Street and
Hershey
Drive
School days 7:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
2 hours
Ferdinand
Street
North Main to
Charlotte
Street
Monday
through
Saturday
All hours 12 hours
Hazel Street East Stiegel
Street to Mill
Street
Monday
through
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
2 hours
Market
Square
Both And center
island
Monday
through
Thursday;
Friday and
Saturday
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.;
8:00 a.m.
to 9:00
p.m.
2 hours
North Main
Street
West 17 feet north
of West Alley
"B";
northward
82 feet
towards West
Gramby
Street
Monday to
Friday;
Saturday to
Sunday
7:00 a.m.
to 9:00
p.m.;
7:00 a.m.
to 7:00
p.m.
1 hour
North Main
Street
West Alley "B" to
150 feet
north of
Market
Square
Monday
through
Thursday
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
2 hours
South Main
Street
West 50 feet North
of Alley "E"
to Ferdinand
Street
Monday
through
Thursday;
Friday and
Saturday
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.;
8:00 a.m.
to 9:00
p.m.
2 hours
§ 205-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-38
1:353
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking
Time
Limit
South Main
Street
West Logan
Avenue to 50
feet north of
Alley "E"
Monday
through
Thursday;
Friday and
Saturday
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.;
6:00 p.m.
to 8:00
a.m.
15 minutes
South Main
Street
West Market
Square to 80
feet south of
West Logan
Avenue
Monday to
Saturday
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
30 minutes
South Main
Street
[Added
7-9-2019
by Ord. No.
664]
West West Logan
Avenue to a
point 80 feet
southward
Monday
through
Saturday
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
30 minutes
South Main
Street
West West Stiegel
Street
northward to
West
Ferdinand
Street
Monday
through
Saturday
All hours 12 hours
South Penn
Street
West West End
Avenue and
West Stiegel
Street
All All hours 2 hours
South Penn
Street 100
Block
East Alley "F"
northward
approximately
250 feet
Monday to
Friday
24 hours 2 hours
West End
Avenue
North
and
south
South Penn
Street and
South Fulton
Street
School days 7:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
2 hours
§ 205-39. Special purpose parking zones established; parking
otherwise prohibited. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 563;
5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 572]
The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked
in any such zone as specifically provided for that zone:
§ 205-38 MANHEIM CODE § 205-39
1:354
Street Side Location
Authorized Purpose
or Vehicle
Market Square North 48 Market Square
(Evangelical Church)
Loading/unloading
Market Square South 45 Market Square Loading/unloading; no
parking, day-care
center, Monday through
Friday, 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Market Square South Market Square Bus stop
North Main
Street
West 55 North Main
Street (United
Church of Christ)
Loading/unloading
North Oak Street West 100 Block, at Saint
Richards Church
Loading/unloading
South Charlotte
Street
West 200 block, at the
Zern Beer
distributorship
Loading/unloading
South Charlotte
Street
West 90 South Charlotte
Street
1 part-time
handicapped parking
space, Sunday 7:00
a.m. to 12:00 noon
South Charlotte
Street
West A distance of 122
feet and 168 feet
north of the
northern curbline of
West Stiegel Street,
two designated
parking spaces shall
hereby be
established for the
express use of
patients to the
premises known as
174 South Charlotte
Street
Patient parking:
Monday and Friday,
9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.;
Tuesday, 6:00 p.m. to
9:00 p.m.; Wednesday,
9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.;
with no parking
prohibition to occur at
any other time
§ 205-40. Standing or parking on roadway for loading or unloading.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other
than a pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of any street, except that standing or parking for the
purpose of loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted
on the following named streets on Monday through Saturday between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. and between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and
4:00 p.m. and for no longer than necessary for the loading or unloading.
§ 205-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-40
1:355
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 205-41. No parking, stopping, standing. [Added 8-26-1997 by Ord.
No. 553; amended 7-9-2019 by Ord. No. 664]
No parking, stopping, standing at any time for the following streets:
Street Side Between
Charlotte Street East Colebrook Street and
Railroad Avenue
South Fulton Street East West Stiegel Street to
West End Avenue
West Stiegel Street North South Penn Street to
South Fulton Street
West Stiegel Street South South Charlotte Street
to South Penn Street
§ 205-42. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-26-1997 by Ord. No.
553; 12-30-2002 by Ord. No. 580]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs, provided that it
shall be the duty of the police officers and of parking enforcement personnel
of the Borough of Manheim to report to the appropriate official all violations
of any provision of this article, indicating, in each case, the section violated,
the license number of the vehicle involved in the violation, the location
where the violating took place and any other facts that might be necessary
in order to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances attending the
violation. The police officer or other person making the report shall also
attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle
was parked in violation of this article. The notice shall contain instructions
to the owner or driver of the vehicle that, if he will report to the office
of the Chief of Police and pay the sum of $15 within 48 hours after the
time of the notice, or if he will place the sum of $15, enclosed within the
envelope provided, in any of the special parking fine boxes installed at
various locations within the Borough of Manheim, that act will save the
violator from prosecution.
§ 205-40 MANHEIM CODE § 205-42
1:356
ARTICLE V
Off-Street Metered Parking
§ 205-43. Reserved parking spaces for handicapped may be
provided.
§ 205-44. Parked vehicles to be wholly within marked spaces.
Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the surface of the
metered parking lots adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of
delineating the parking space for which that meter shall be used. Every
vehicle parked adjacent to any parking meter shall be parked wholly within
the lines or markings so placed and applicable to that meter. It shall be
unlawful and a violation of this article for any person:
§ 205-45. Violations and penalties.
A. The Borough Council, at its discretion, may provide at convenient and
suitable locations in any one or more of the metered parking lots
reserved parking spaces for handicapped and shall designate those
spaces by appropriate signs.
B. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to park
in any such reserved parking space any vehicle unless that vehicle
bears or displays either a "handicapped registration plate," a
"handicapped parking placard," a "disabled veteran registration plate"
or a "disabled veteran placard."
C. Any person who violates this section shall be subject, upon conviction,
to such fines and penalties as established by the Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 3354.
A. To park a vehicle across any such line or marking.
B. To park a vehicle in such a position that the vehicle shall not be within
the area so delineated by the lines or markings.
C. To park a vehicle elsewhere in any such lot than in an individual parking
space adjacent to a parking meter.
A. The police officer or other person making the report shall also place on
or attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or driver of the vehicle
that the vehicle was parked in violation of § 205-44 and instructing the
owner or driver that, if he will report to the office of the Chief of Police
and pay, for the use of the Borough of Manheim, the sum of $10 within
48 hours after the time of the notice or will place the sum of $10,
enclosed within the envelope provided, in any of the special parking
fine boxes installed at various locations within the Borough of Manheim
within that time limit, that act will save the violator from prosecution
and from payment of the fine prescribed in § 205-45B hereof.
§ 205-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-45
1:357
B. Any person who violates any provision of § 205-44 and who fails to pay
the fine set forth in § 205-45A hereof shall be cited within 15 days of the
violation and, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $15 and costs.
§ 205-45 MANHEIM CODE § 205-45
1:358
ARTICLE VI
Off-Street Unmetered Parking
§ 205-46. Unmetered parking lots established.
The following are established as the unmetered parking lots operated by the
Borough of Manheim:
Lot Location
Maximum
Parking
Time
Days in
Operation
Hours in
Operation
Wolf Street municipal
parking lot [Added
10-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 630] 48 hours
§ 205-47. Unlawful to park overtime or when lot closed.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow a vehicle to
remain parked in any unmetered parking lot:
§ 205-48. Unmetered lots for certain types of vehicles.
The unmetered parking lots established by § 205-46 of this article shall be
for the use of passenger cars, passenger vans and pickup trucks only, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to park any other kind or class of vehicle in
any such lot.
§ 205-49. Manner of parking.
Every vehicle parked in an unmetered parking lot shall be parked wholly
within the lines bounding or marking the individual parking space assigned
to that vehicle and shall be parked headed into the parking space. It shall
be unlawful for any person:
§ 205-50. Parking on rental basis only.
The parking spaces in the unmetered parking lots shall be available for
parking on a monthly rental basis only. The rental fee shall be fixed by
A. For longer than the maximum parking time prescribed in § 205-46 of
this article; or
B. At any time when the lot is not in operation and is closed to public use.
A. To park a vehicle in a space not rented by him;
B. To park a vehicle otherwise than as required by this section; or
C. To park a vehicle elsewhere then in an individual parking space, the
prohibited areas including, but not limited to, the access and exit
driveways and turning and maneuvering spaces.
§ 205-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-50
1:359
Borough Council, from time to time, and shall be for a calendar month
or the part of a calendar month remaining after the rental arrangements
are made. The rental fee shall be paid in advance to the Secretary of the
Borough, for the use of the Borough of Manheim, and after the first month
shall be automatically renewable until the renter notifies the Borough of
Manheim that he wishes to terminate the rental arrangements. At any
time, however, the Borough of Manheim may, by amending § 205-46 of
this article, discontinue provision of a specific unmetered parking lot or a
portion of the parking space in any such lot or may change any unmetered
parking lot or part of an unmetered parking lot to a metered parking lot or
to metered parking spaces. The rental parking spaces shall be assigned by
the Secretary of the Borough. The name of the renter of a parking space
and/or the numbers and/or letters on the registration tag of the vehicle
entitled to be parked there shall be posted by the Borough of Manheim at
the rental space or shall be painted on the surface of that parking space.
§ 205-51. Reserved parking spaces for handicapped may be
provided.
§ 205-52. Violations and penalties.
A. Borough Council, at its discretion, may provide at convenient and
suitable locations in one or both of the unmetered parking lots reserved
parking spaces for handicapped and shall designate those spaces by
appropriate signs.
B. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to park
in any such reserved parking space any vehicle unless that vehicle
bears or displays either a "handicapped registration plate," a
"handicapped parking placard," a "disabled veteran registration plate"
or a "disabled veteran placard," provided that all provisions,
requirements and restrictions contained in other sections of this article
shall apply to vehicles lawfully parked in reserved parking spaces for
handicapped.
C. Any person who violates this section shall be subject, upon conviction,
to such fines and penalties as established by the Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 3354.
A. For violations of §§ 205-46 through 205-50, the police officer or other
person making the report shall also place on or attach to the vehicle a
notice to the owner or driver of the vehicle that the vehicle was parked
in violation of this article and instructing the owner or driver that, if he
will report to the office of the Chief of Police and pay, for the use of the
Borough of Manheim, the sum of $10 within 48 hours after the time of
the notice or will place the sum of $10, enclosed within the envelope
provided, in any of the special parking fine boxes installed at various
locations within the Borough of Manheim within that time limit, that act
will save the violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine
prescribed in § 205-52B hereof.
§ 205-50 MANHEIM CODE § 205-52
1:360
B. Any person who violates any provision of §§ 205-46 through 205-50
hereof, and who fails to pay the fine set forth in § 205-52A, shall be cited
within 15 days of the violation and, upon conviction, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs.
§ 205-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-52
1:361

ARTICLE VII
Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 205-53. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle Code
and gives authority to the Borough of Manheim to remove and impound
those vehicles which are parked in a tow-away zone and in violation of
parking regulations of this article. Vehicles which have been abandoned (as
defined by the Vehicle Code48) or which are parked in such a manner as to
interfere with traffic or pose a hazard to others may be towed under the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
§ 205-54. Authority to remove and impound.
The Borough of Manheim shall have authority to remove and impound or
to order the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked overtime or
otherwise illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were
within the conditions stated in § 205-53 of this article, provided that no such
vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the
provisions of this article or the provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 205-55. Tow-away zones designated.
The following designated streets and/or parking lots are hereby established
as tow-away zones. Signs shall be posted to place the public on notice
that their vehicles may be towed for violation of the Borough parking
regulations:
Street Side Between Parking Lot
(Reserved)
§ 205-56. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time
by Borough Council. Every such garage shall submit evidence to Borough
Council that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount
satisfactory to Borough Council as sufficient to indemnify owners of
impounded vehicles against loss or damage to those vehicles while in the
custody of the garage keeper for the purpose of towing or storage. The
approved storage garage shall submit to Borough Council its schedule of
charges for towing and storage of vehicles under this article, and when the
schedule is approved by Borough Council, those charges shall be adhered
to by the approved storage garage; no different schedule of charges shall
be demanded of or collected from any person whose vehicle is removed
or impounded under this article by any approved storage garage. Borough
48.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 101 et seq., as hereafter amended, supplemented,
modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 205-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-56
1:363
Council shall delete from its list of approved storage garages any garage
that makes any unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle removed
or impounded under this article.
§ 205-57. Payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or
driver of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation
of the provision of this article for which the vehicle was removed or
impounded.
§ 205-58. Reclamation costs.
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage
costs, plus a twenty-five-dollar fee, of which $10 shall be transferred to
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation by the garage to which the
vehicle was taken.
§ 205-59. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Borough of Manheim shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles
impounded under this article and shall be able at all reasonable times
to furnish the owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with
information as to the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 205-60. Restriction upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article or the Vehicle
Code if, at the time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the
time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness
and intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 205-61. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 together with all costs
of disposing of the vehicle under provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 7301 et seq., as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted
by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 205-62. Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles.
If after a period of 15 days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a
report shall be filed with PennDOT in accordance with § 7311 of the Vehicle
Code by the person having legal custody of the vehicle. If the vehicle
has not been claimed after 30 days, the vehicle may be transferred to a
licensed salvor, who will then be responsible for filing the proper reports
and disposing of the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
73 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7301 et seq., as
amended).
§ 205-56 MANHEIM CODE § 205-62
1:364
ARTICLE VIII
Snow and Ice Emergency
[Added 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 546]
§ 205-63. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHAINS — Full chains.
SNOW — Any precipitation depositing any accumulation on the streets of
the Borough of Manheim, including sleet, hail, ice or freezing rain.
SNOW EMERGENCY — A state declared, as herein described, under which
road conditions are hazardous for vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES — All streets within the Borough of Manheim
so designated and marked as hereinafter set forth.
SNOW TIRES — Tires having treads designated for use in mud or snow and
being in such condition as to serve the purpose for which they are designed.
VEHICLES — All motor vehicles using Borough streets, including all public
and private transportation conveyances, trucks and other powered vehicles.
§ 205-64. Declaration of emergency.
A snow emergency in the Borough can be declared either by the Governor
of Pennsylvania or the Mayor in conjunction with the Borough Manager.
Such a snow emergency declaration is intended to facilitate the movement
of traffic and to combat the hazards of snow on the snow emergency
routes named in § 205-66. After a snow emergency is declared, the Borough
Manager will advise and coordinate all efforts within the Borough.
Information on the existence of a snow emergency shall be given through
radio, newspaper or other available media and information on the
termination of the snow emergency shall be given through the same media
sources. In cases where a disaster is declared, the Emergency Management
Agency shall be activated and operable.
§ 205-65. Designation of routes.
The Borough Manager with the approval of the Borough Council shall
designate streets which are heavily traveled and are necessary
thoroughfares for the movement of vehicular traffic through the Borough
as "snow emergency routes." Such designation shall take into consideration
state highway routes, fire apparatus emergency routes and other commonly
traveled streets. Each route shall be posted with suitable signs or markers,
not less frequently than once in each direction in one block, which signs
shall bear the words "Snow Emergency Route" and may restrict parking in
such block. A map of such routes shall be filed with the Borough Secretary,
and other copies thereof shall be available for public examination in the
§ 205-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-65
1:365
office of the Borough Manager. The Borough Manager, with approval of
Borough Council, may change said map from time to time.
§ 205-66. Snow emergency routes designated.
The following streets are hereby designated as snow emergency routes.
Other such routes may be designated by Borough Council from time to time:
§ 205-67. Parking prohibited and driving restricted on snow
emergency routes during emergency.
After a snow emergency is properly declared, no person shall at any time
during the continuance of a snow emergency:
§ 205-68. Cartway widening.
§ 205-69. Violations and penalties.
A. Charlotte Street from Railroad Avenue to Colebrook Street.
B. Ferdinand Street from Snyder Street to South Oak Street.
C. Main Street.
D. High Street.
E. Hazel Street from Gramby Street to Ferdinand Street (east side only).
F. Stiegel Street from Penn Street to Main Street.
G. Gramby Street from Main Street to Laurel Street.
H. Rambler Road from Orchard Lane to Orchard Lane.
A. Park a vehicle or allow a vehicle to remain parked anywhere on any of
the snow emergency routes designated in § 205-66.
B. Drive any vehicle on any snow emergency route designated in § 205-66
unless that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
A. Within a reasonable period of time after a termination of the snow
emergency, the Borough Manager shall institute a program of clearing
the cartway of snow on all other Borough streets not designated as
snow emergency routes. By appropriate press releases to news media,
the owners and operators of vehicles shall be instructed to remove their
vehicles from Borough streets to facilitate plowing.
B. Failure to comply with the Borough's instructions may result in the
ticketing or towing, at the owner's expense, of vehicles remaining on
Borough streets.
C. The Fire Department may, through the use of its loudspeaker
equipment, assist in informing and instructing the public as to its
responsibilities in removing vehicles from Borough streets.
§ 205-65 MANHEIM CODE § 205-69
1:366
A. Any person at any time during a snow emergency parking a vehicle or
allowing a vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency
route shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 plus costs of
prosecution.
B. Any person at any time during a snow emergency who shall drive a
vehicle not equipped with snow tires or chains shall be guilty of a
violation of this article and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of $25 plus costs of prosecution.
§ 205-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-69
1:367

ARTICLE IX
Pedestrian Regulations
§ 205-70. Pedestrians to obey traffic-control signs.
At all locations in the Borough of Manheim where official traffic-control
signals are installed, pedestrians, except where directed otherwise by
pedestrian-control signals installed under § 205-71 of this article, shall obey
the directions of those traffic-control signals, as follows:
§ 205-71. Pedestrian-control signal locations established.
At the following locations, official pedestrian-control signals shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected):
§ 205-72. Locations where pedestrian crossing in unmarked
crosswalks restricted.
Except when authorized by a police officer or other appropriately attired
person authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic, it shall be unlawful
for any pedestrian to cross the roadway at any of the following streets at
the intersections with that street indicated:
A. When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the
roadway within a crosswalk.
B. When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to cross
the roadway.
C. When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the
roadway.
A. Every pedestrian facing a steady or flashing "Don't Walk" signal shall
obey the directions of that signal, as follows:
(1) When facing a steady "Don't Walk" signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any
pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk"
signal should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "Don't
Walk" signal is showing.
(2) When facing a flashing "Don't Walk" signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the indication, but any
pedestrian who has partly completed crossing the "Walk" indication
should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone.
B. Any pedestrian who fails to obey the directions of a "Don't Walk" signal,
as indicated above, shall be guilty of a summary offense and a violation
of this article.
§ 205-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-72
1:369
Street Intersection
Direction of
Travel
(Reserved)
§ 205-73. Locations where pedestrians may cross only in crosswalk.
§ 205-74. Violations and penalties.
Any pedestrian who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
$5 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian:
(1) To cross any roadway in a business district within the Borough of
Manheim except in a crosswalk.
(2) To cross the roadway, in any of the following portions of streets in
the Borough of Manheim, except in a crosswalk:
Street Between
(Reserved)
B. Provided that nothing in this section shall permit any pedestrian to
cross in a crosswalk at any location where that crossing is prohibited by
§ 205-71 of this article.
§ 205-72 MANHEIM CODE § 205-74
1:370
Chapter 210
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Manheim Water Authority — See Ch. 8, Art. II.
Construction codes — See Ch. 100.
Sewers — See Ch. 172.
Street openings — See Ch. 190, Art. V.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 205-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-74
1:371

ARTICLE I
Water Rates
[Adopted 7-26-1960 by Ord. No. 325; amended in its entirety
7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 524 (Ch. 26, Part 2, of the 1992 Code)]
§ 210-1. Water rates, rules and regulations.
The schedule of water rates and rules and regulations relating to furnishing
water service, as set forth in, and as well as all of the provisions of, tariff
filed by the Manheim Water Company with the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission, identified as "Supplement No. 1 to Water – Pa. P.U.C. No. 6,"
effective April 1, 1960, which is incorporated in this article by reference
thereto, being the last effective tariff filed and maintained by said water
company, be and the same is hereby adopted as and for the water rates
and charges to be charged by the Borough of Manheim to the users of
water service furnished by the Borough, and as the rules and regulations
under which water service will be rendered to such users, except that such
changes shall be considered as having been made in said tariff to make the
same appropriate and applicable water service rendered by said Borough.
No users shall be furnished with water service except according to said
schedule and said rules and regulations as it or they may from time to time
be revised by the Borough.
§ 210-2. Additional classifications and water rentals therefor.
Additional classifications and water rentals for such classifications not set
forth in the tariff referred to in § 210-1 of this article may be established by
the Borough from time to time.
§ 210-3. Authority vested in Borough officers.
The proper officers of the Borough are hereby authorized and directed to
do all things and take all necessary steps, including the filing of liens, to
enforce the collection of the water rates and charges provided herein and
to carry out all the provisions of this article.
§ 210-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-3
1:373

ARTICLE II
Wells
[Adopted 4-28-1981 by Ord. No. 474 (Ch. 26, Part 3, of the 1992
Code)]
§ 210-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BACKFLOW PREVENTER — A device, approved by the Borough, installed
in a customer's water system to prevent any possible flow back into the
Borough's water system.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any physical connection or arrangement between
two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains Borough
water and the other water of unknown or questionable safety, whereby
there may be a flow from one system to the other, the directions depending
on the pressure differential between the two systems.
WELL — A pit or hole sunk into the earth to reach a supply of water.
§ 210-5. Permit and registration required.
§ 210-6. Permit application and registration.
A. No person or customer shall drill or cause to be drilled a well within the
Borough without first obtaining a permit therefor.
B. All property owners and persons within the Borough who have a well on
their property as of the effective date of this article shall have 90 days
to register and record information concerning the existence of the well
and the existence of any cross-connection devices.
A. Application. Application for a well permit shall be made to the Borough.
Each application must be accompanied by plans showing the location of
the proposed well and shall indicate the size, depth and quantity of the
proposed well.
B. Registration.
(1) Registration of all existing wells in the Borough of Manheim shall
be made with the Borough. Such registration shall include the
following information:
(a) Location.
(b) Size.
(c) Depth and quantity of the well.
(d) Existence of any cross-connection device.
§ 210-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-6
1:375
§ 210-7. Permit fee. [Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 524]
Any person prior to issuance of a permit shall pay a fee as shall be
established from time to time by resolution of Borough Council. There will
be no charge for registration of a well which existed prior to the date of
enactment of this article.
§ 210-8. Criteria for granting permit.
No permit shall be granted for the drilling of any well where the premises
is accessible to receiving water from the Manheim waterworks or if the
premises is currently receiving water from the Manheim waterworks.
§ 210-9. Cross-connection devices.
§ 210-10. Backflow preventer.
Any existing property or premises with both a well supply and a supply
of water from the Manheim waterworks shall have a backflow preventer
device installed on the public water supply system. All such backflow
preventer devices shall be approved by the Borough, and the installation of
any such device shall be in accordance with specifications of the Borough
and shall be inspected and approved by the Borough. The cost of inspection
of existing and new backflow preventer devices by the Borough shall be paid
by the customer.
(2) In the event of any change in status of an existing well, notice of
change shall be made to the Borough.
A. The installation of any cross-connections shall be prohibited.
B. A cross-connection shall be considered broken if a minimum air gap of
two pipe diameters of the water supply pipe or six inches, whichever is
greater, is provided between the public water and any other supply.
§ 210-6 MANHEIM CODE § 210-10
1:376
ARTICLE III
Water Service Regulations
[Adopted 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 524 (Ch. 26, Part 1, of the 1992
Code)]
§ 210-11. Definitions.
A. The following words and terms, as used in this article, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, unless the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
APPLICANT — The property owner or his agent applying for permission
to connect to the water system. The word "owner" shall mean any
person, firm, corporation or association in whose name any property is
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — In cases where ownership of water facilities
shall apply, the term "Borough Council" shall be synonymous with
Manheim Borough Authority.
CUSTOMER — A person, partnership, political subdivision, association
or corporation, and shall mean anyone to whom water service is
supplied by the Manheim waterworks, whether as owner or tenant.
EASEMENT — The right in the owner of one parcel of land, by reason
of such ownership, to use the land of another for a special purpose not
inconsistent with the general property of the owner.
MAIN EXTENSIONS — Extensions of distribution pipe lines beyond
existing facilities and exclusive of service connections.
MAINS — The distribution pipe lines which are located in streets,
highways, public ways or private rights-of-way, and which are used to
serve the general public.
MG/L or PPM — Milligrams per liter (or parts per million) in water and
sewage analysis.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Any structure erected and intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or
animals and from which structure sanitary sewage or industrial wastes
are or may be discharged.
OWNER — See "applicant."
pH — The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion
concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution and indicates the degree of acidity or
alkalinity of a substance.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
§ 210-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-11
1:377
PREMISES —
PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE — Providing of water to
premises exclusively for fire protection.
The property or area, including the improvements thereon, to
which water service is or will be furnished, and as used herein shall
be taken to designate:
A building under one roof, owned or leased by one customer
and occupied as one residence or one place of business;
(a)
A group or combination of buildings owned by one customer,
in one common enclosure, occupied by one family or one
organization, corporation or firm as a residence or place of
business or for manufacturing or industrial purposes, or as a
hotel, hospital, church, parochial school, or similar institution,
except as otherwise noted herein;
(b)
The one side of a double house having a solid vertical partition
wall;
(c)
Each apartment, office or suite of offices, and/or place of
business located in a building or a group of buildings, even
though such buildings in a group are interconnected by a
tunnel or passageway, covered areaway or patio or by some
similar means or structure;
(d)
A public building devoted entirely to public use, such as
community building, firehouse, schools;
(e)
(f) A single lot, park or playground;
(g) Each house in a row of houses;
Each individual and separate place of business and/or
occupancy located in one building or group of buildings
commonly designated as shopping centers, supermarket areas,
and by such other terms; or
(h)
Each dwelling unit in a public housing development owned
and operated by the United States of America, a municipal
subdivision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or an agency
or instrumentality of the United States or the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania; by a philanthropic foundation or organization
or some such similar body or organization; or operated under
private ownership.
(i)
(1)
Each premises shall be served through a separate service line
and through a separate meter, except where physical conditions
prevent the installation of separate service facilities and meters, as
determined by the Borough Council.
(2)
§ 210-11 MANHEIM CODE § 210-11
1:378
PUBLIC FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE — Furnishing of service through
public fire hydrants.
SERVICE LINE EXTENSION — The pipe, valves and other facilities by
means of which water is conducted from the curb stop to a point on the
outlet side of the meter, to be located inside the walls of the building or
meter pit, if approved.
SERVICE PIPE — Pipe leading from the curb stop to the premises of a
customer.
SHALL — Is mandatory.
STREET — Any street, alley or lane.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of the waterworks.
TEMPORARY SERVICE — A service for circuses, bazaars, fairs,
construction work, irrigation of vacant property, trailers or trailer
camps and similar uses that, because of their nature, will not be used
steadily or permanently.
TENANT — Anyone occupying premises under lease from a lessor,
which premises are furnished sewage service.
TYPES OF SERVICE —
WASTEWATER — The spent water of a community. From the standpoint
of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and
stormwater that may be present.
WATERWORKS — The plant fixtures, mains, hydrants, reservoirs,
rights-of-way and all other properties and facilities now or hereafter
operated and maintained by the Borough Council of Manheim in order
to collect, treat and distribute water for municipal purposes and for
the use of the inhabitants thereof, and shall also include those officers
and employees of the Borough Council collectively engaged in the
management, operation and maintenance thereof.
COMMERCIAL — Premises where the customer is engaged in trade
and/or commerce and shall also include schools or religious
buildings.
(1)
INDUSTRIAL — Premises for use in manufacturing, processing and
distribution activities.
(2)
MUNICIPAL or PUBLIC — A municipal subdivision of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or agency thereof or to other
similar public bodies.
(3)
RESIDENTIAL — Water service for residential households for
customary purposes and for sprinkling lawns, gardens (not
commercial type) and shrubbery, swimming pools and other similar
purposes.
(4)
§ 210-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-11
1:379
§ 210-12. Conditions of service.
§ 210-13. Air conditioning.
The Borough Council shall require the installation of a circulating-type
water-cooling tower for all air-conditioning units using water for cooling.
The water supply to the cooling system must incorporate an air break or a
backflow preventer.
§ 210-14. Application for service and contracts.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. The waterworks of the Borough Council of Manheim, as it is now
constituted or as it shall hereafter, as the Borough Council may from
time to time direct, be extended through other portions of the Borough
shall be operated, maintained and regulated according to the provisions
of this article, subject to the authority of the Borough Council at any
time to amend, alter, change or repeal the same.
B. The Borough Council shall have charge and management of the
waterworks, subject to such delegation of authority to the
Superintendent as is provided herein.
C. The Borough Council shall, from time to time, appoint a person to serve
as a Superintendent of the waterworks, such person to serve at the
pleasure of the Council and to receive such compensation as shall be
determined by the Council from time to time and to perform such duties
as the Council shall direct.
D. The Borough Council will furnish water service in accordance with the
currently prevailing, and as hereafter revised, rates, rules and
regulations, which are made a part of every application, contract or
agreement entered into between the property owner or customer and
the Borough Council.
E. The Borough Council hereby reserves the right, so often as it may deem
necessary, to alter or amend the rates and/or the rules and regulations
which shall be a part of every application, contract or agreement for
water service.
A. Application for water service connection.
(1) Water services shall not be provided to any premises until
application shall have been made to the Superintendent by the
owner of such premises or by his authorized agent. Such
application shall be made upon a form to be prescribed by the
Borough Council, and upon such application the applicant shall
state fully all purposes for which he shall desire such water and
shall answer fairly and without concealment all necessary
§ 210-11 MANHEIM CODE § 210-14
1:380
questions. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee, which
shall be returned in the event the application is disapproved.
(2) The application shall be subject to such water service tapping fees
and charges currently in effect. The application and the rules and
regulations of the Borough Council shall regulate the water service
to such premises.
B. Application is a contract. The application for water service shall be a
binding contract on both the customer and the Borough Council, after
approval by the Borough Council. Rates for water service shall accrue
from the date the water service facilities have been completed and
water service is available to the premises.
C. Special contracts or agreements. The Borough Council may require,
prior to approval of service, special contracts or agreements other than
applications under the following conditions:
(1) For new subdivision and land developments served by the
waterworks, developer, contribution and escrow agreements are
required.
(2) If the construction of extensions and/or other facilities are
necessary.
(3) The Borough Council shall furnish no material or labor for use upon
private premises except when a person shall contract with the
Borough Council to lay service pipe to the premises.
(4) If deemed necessary by the Borough Council.
D. Contracts with delinquents. No agreement will be entered into by the
Borough Council with any applicant for water service, whether owner
or tenant, until all arrears for water rents, bills for meter repairs or
other charges due on subject property have been paid, or until
satisfactory arrangements for payment of such unpaid bills shall have
been made.
E. Governmental regulations are a part of contract. All contracts for water
service shall be subject to such changes or other modifications as may
be directed by action of the Legislature of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or other regulatory body.
F. New application upon change in ownership, tenancy or conditions of
water use. A new application must be submitted and approved by the
Borough Council upon any change in ownership of the property when
the owner is the customer, or in any tenancy where the tenant is the
customer, or in the service as described in the application. The Borough
Council shall have the right, upon five days' notice, to discontinue the
water supply until such new application has been made and approved.
The Superintendent will read the meter in order to bill the final
§ 210-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-14
1:381
§ 210-15. Bills and payments.
consumption to the seller, and all future billings shall be made to the
buyer.
(1) In connection with a change in service, any customer making any
material change in the size, character or extent of equipment or
operations utilizing water service, or whose change in operation
results in a substantial increase in the use of water, shall
immediately give the Borough Council written notice of the nature
of the change and, if necessary, amend its application.
(2) Any premises intended to be occupied by more than one
establishment, firm or family shall be provided with an independent
drain valve conveniently located for each separate establishment or
apartment into which water is to be introduced, so that any portion
of such premises which may be separately occupied can be drained
without interfering with the supply of water for the other
occupants.
A. Place of payment. All bills are payable at Fulton Bank, Farmers First or
at the Manheim Borough Council office, 15 East High Street, or such
other location as designated by the Borough Council.
B. All bills for services furnished by the Borough Council will be based on
the published rate schedules of the Borough Council.
(1) Each premises will be subject to a fixed minimum quarterly charge
for each meter, in accordance with the rate schedule. Such
minimum charge shall be nonabatable for a nonuser of water and
noncumulative against subsequent consumption. In the case of
fractional bills covering less than a quarter, minimum charges and
allowances of water shall be prorated. The charges for the use of
water in excess of the quantities allowed shall be in accordance
with the rate schedule.
(2) Should the property owner desire that the Borough Council
conduct business with the tenant of each premises, he must advise
the Borough Council in writing. The property owner shall be fully
liable for payment if the tenant moves out without paying the bill.
(3) Water bills for water used for building construction and for
occasional use shall be payable upon demand.
(4) The charges for public fire service shall be paid quarterly as billed.
(5) The charges for temporary service and other miscellaneous
services shall be as set forth in the rate schedule.
C. Bill rendered and due. The Borough Council will bill quarterly, and bills
will be rendered as soon as practicable after the receipt of necessary
meter reading information. All bills are due and payable within 30 days
§ 210-14 MANHEIM CODE § 210-15
1:382
after the end of the service period covered, and a penalty of 10% of
the amount of such bill will be added to all bills if not paid when due.
Acceptance of remittance of bills on the last day of this thirty-day period
shall be determined by the date of actual receipt of the customer's
payment at the Manheim Borough Council office, 15 East High Street,
Manheim, Pennsylvania 17545.
D. Deposits. Cash deposits are required from customers taking service for
a period of less than 30 days in an amount equal to the estimated gross
bill for such temporary period.
E. Service of notices. All notices and bills relating to the Borough Council
or its business shall be deemed to have been properly served if left upon
the premises of the customer, if mailed to the customer, or if served in
person at his address as shown on the records of the Borough Council.
(1) The Borough Council will send all such notices and bills to the
address given on the application for water supply until a notice of
change, in writing, has been filed with the Borough Council by the
applicant.
(2) All notices of general character affecting or likely to affect a large
number of customers shall be deemed to have been properly given
or served if advertised in the newspaper designated by the Borough
Council.
F. Unpaid bills. In case any water bill shall not be paid within 60 days from
the date of the bill, it shall be the duty of the Superintendent to give to
the customer who shall have been billed for such water 10 days' notice
in writing of the fact that such water bill has become delinquent and
that, at the end of such period of 10 days, all water service to the
premises upon which such bill is delinquent shall be discontinued and
shall not be resumed until said account shall have been paid in full,
together with a reasonable charge for the shutting off and restoring of
said service. At the end of such period of 10 days, it shall be the duty of
the Superintendent to shut off the water service to such premises, such
service not to be resumed until such delinquent account and service
charge shall have been paid in full.
(1) In case any water bill, together with all penalties thereon, shall not
be paid within six months of the date on which said bill is due and
payable, the delinquent bill and all penalties thereon shall be a lien
on the premises served and shall be entered as a lien against the
premises in the office of the Prothonotary of Lancaster County and
shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection
of such liens or an action in assumpsit may be brought to recover
the same in the name of the Borough of Manheim from the
customer.
G. Abatement. The following regulations shall govern abatement of
charges for water:
§ 210-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-15
1:383
§ 210-16. Complaints.
Complaints relative to the character of the service furnished, the reading of
meters, or concerning bills rendered shall be in writing and mailed to the
office of the Borough Council or shall be telephoned to the Borough Council
office.
§ 210-17. Conditions of plumbing system.
The piping and fixtures on the property of the customer shall be in
satisfactory condition at the time service facilities are connected and water
furnished. The Borough Council shall not be liable for any accidents, breaks
or leakage that are due to the connection with the supply of water or failure
to supply the same. The Borough Council is also not responsible for the
freezing of piping and fixtures of the customers or for any damage to the
property which may result from water supplied to the premises.
§ 210-18. Individual liability for joint service.
Two or more parties who join to make application for service shall be jointly
and severally liable and shall be sent periodic bills. The Borough Council
reserves the right in such individual cases, when deemed necessary, to
make one or more of said parties the guarantor for payment of said bill and
to send a single bill.
§ 210-19. Inspection.
Authorized employees of the Borough Council, identified by the proper
identification cards, shall have access to the customer's premises at all
reasonable hours for the purpose of turning the water on or off; inspection,
repair and/or replacement of service line extensions; inspection, setting,
reading, repairing and removal of meter; inspection of sump pump
connections, and for all such justifiable purposes.
(1) No abatement of charges shall be allowed for vacancy of premises
except from the date that written notice shall have been given by
the owner of such premises at the office of the Superintendent that
such premises shall have been vacated.
(2) No abatement of charges shall be allowed for absence of the
customer unless the water shall have been shut off from the
premises by the order of the Superintendent, for which a charge
shall be made.
(3) Whenever water shall be used on any metered premises for fire
protection or fire fighting, in an actual case of fire or conflagration,
no charge shall be made for the water so used, and the amount of
water so used shall be ascertained by comparison with the average
use of water during a corresponding billing period as shown by the
meter.
§ 210-15 MANHEIM CODE § 210-20
1:384
§ 210-20. Interference with Authority's property.
For the protection of the waterworks:
§ 210-21. Renewal of service.
Water service will be renewed under a proper application when the
condition under which such service was discontinued are corrected, and
upon the payment of all charges provided in the schedule of rates or rules
of the Borough Council due from the applicant.
§ 210-22. Turn-off and turn-on charge.
See current rate schedule.49
§ 210-23. Service line provisions.
A. No person shall damage, injure, molest, disturb or interfere with any
pipe, hydrant, stop cock, reservoir, machinery, tool or any other
property belonging to or appertaining to the waterworks. Where any
such damage, injury, molestation, disturbance or interference takes
place, any person observing this shall notify the Superintendent
immediately.
B. No person shall, except with authority from the Superintendent or any
person subordinate to him in the waterworks, open, close, interfere
with or attach to or connect with any fire hydrant, stop valve or stop
cock belonging to the Borough Council; provided, however, in case of
fire the opening and use of the fire hydrants needed in the fighting
thereof shall be under the direction of the Fire Chief of the Borough
Council.
A. The service pipe from the curb stop to the premises shall be the
property of the owner of the premises to which it is connected, and all
repairs to the same shall be made at the expense of such property
owner, who shall keep his pipes and fixtures in good repair, in such
condition as to avoid unnecessary waste and protected against frost at
his own expense. The property owner shall be held responsible for any
waste or damage that may result from any defective service pipe or
other pipe located within the premises or any fixture. The property
owner shall pay for the cost of opening a frozen service pipe where the
service pipe is not laid or protected in accordance with the provisions of
this article.
B. All service pipe shall be laid at least three feet below the surface of the
ground.
C. No person shall extend or cause to be extended any service pipe from
one property to another without special permission having been
49.Editor's Note: The current rate schedule is available on the Borough's website and in the
Borough office.
§ 210-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-23
1:385
§ 210-24. Service line connection installation.
granted therefor by the Borough Council, and without a stop being
placed in such a position that the supply of water for either property
can be shut off without closing off the supply of water for the other
property.
D. All pipes shall be free from jogs and snags that might obstruct the
drainage, shall be securely fastened to their places, and shall be so
pitched that when the stop is turned off, all water shall flow toward the
waste.
E. All pipes and fixtures shall be placed in such a manner as will secure
them against frost. Whenever it may become necessary to carry any
pipe along any outer wall, beneath any floor, through any open space or
through any place where such pipe might be affected by drafts of air,
such pipe shall be thoroughly boxed and packed, or otherwise protected
against cold.
F. All plumbing for business buildings, manufacturing establishments and
other premises where large quantities of water may be used shall be
done in such a manner as to enable the water consumed to be measured
by a single meter installation located as near to the main as is feasible.
G. In extending pipe from existing installations, the same rules shall apply
as are applicable under this article to new installations.
H. Every street connection, at the time of making thereof, shall be
provided with a separate stop cock and box, at the curb of the sidewalk
when practicable, for each property to be supplied. The stop and box at
the curb shall be the property of the Borough, placed there for its sole
use.
I. Every service pipe shall have a drain valve inside the premises of the
customer, so placed and kept as always to be ready for use. Such drain
valve shall control the entire supply of water for the premises and shall
drain all the pipes and fixtures thereon. It shall be secured from frost
and shall be provided with a handle approved by the Superintendent.
Such handle shall be kept in a convenient place ready for immediate
use.
A. The Borough Council will install and maintain all service line
connections; make all connections to the main lines; furnish, install, and
maintain all service lines from the mains to and including the curb stop,
which will be placed inside the curb or property line, except in such
cases where it shall be the responsibility of the developer under the
terms of the developer-Borough Council agreement. The service line
connection shall be the property of the Borough Council and remain
under its control.
§ 210-23 MANHEIM CODE § 210-24
1:386
§ 210-25. Length of service line.
The Borough Council may exercise the right in cases where the length of
the service line extension exceeds 200 feet, and in all cases where deemed
advisable, to require the customer to construct, at his expense, a watertight
meter pit provided with suitable iron cover and constructed in accordance
with a plan furnished by the Borough Council. The meter pit shall be
constructed at the property line or curbline and is to be used for the housing
of the meter required for the service of the premises.
§ 210-26. Maintenance of service line connection.
§ 210-27. Maintenance of service line extension.
B. Only duly authorized personnel shall be permitted to install a service
line connection from the mains of the Borough Council to the curb stop
on the premises of the customer.
C. The installation of all service line connections is subject to the
submission of a written application to the Borough Council, approval
thereof by the Borough Council and the payment of such required
charges for the service line connection installation as are in effect at the
time of the application. The charges are to be paid in advance. The
Borough may charge a fee for issuing a permit or permits for street or
road openings, which fee will be charged to the applicant in addition to
the other charges.
D. The Borough Council reserves the right to deter the installation of
service connections during inclement weather, until such times as in
the judgement of the Borough Council conditions are suitable for an
expeditious and economical installation.
E. The Borough Council reserves the right to determine the size and kind
of service line connection.
A. When meter boxes are located at the curb, the meter enclosure riser
pipes and connections therein will be installed by and at the expense of
the customer, and no customer or workman shall alter, change or in any
way tamper with the meter box, meter or piping connections therein
without authorization from the Borough Council.
B. In cases where services are frozen, the Borough Council will, at its own
expense, thaw out the service connection to the curb stop. The thawing
out of the service pipe from the curb stop to the premises shall be done
by the customer at his own expense. To avoid a recurrence of freezing,
the Borough Council will make an examination of customer's service
pipe and, if the same is not at a depth of three feet as required, the
Borough Council shall have the right to require it to be relocated before
service is resumed.
§ 210-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-27
1:387
§ 210-28. One service connection for each customer.
A service line will be used to supply a single customer only, and no premises
shall have more than one service connection, except where it is impossible
or impracticable to furnish an adequate water supply service through one
service connection. In this event, the Borough Council may agree to the
installation and use of more than one such connection.
§ 210-29. Other service line extension requirements.
A. Extension of distributing pipe or water main shall be made only after
petition of the owners of real estate or their authorized agents along the
proposed line and upon their entering into an agreement which shall
satisfy Council that the owner of real estate along the proposed line
shall pay the cost of laying such pipe, provided the above rule shall not
apply in cases where it may become necessary to supply short gaps in
distributing pipe or water main in order to perfect the circulation or to
increase the size of pipe already laid, which shall be done as the
Borough Council shall direct; and provided, further, that in any instance
the Borough Council may, in its discretion, extend any distributing pipe
or water main without petition or refuse any petition.
B. All service line extensions and fixtures installed by the customer shall
be maintained in satisfactory condition. All valves, meters and
appliances furnished and owned by the Borough Council and on the
property of the customer shall be protected properly and cared for by
the customer. When repairs, renewals or replacements or other
necessary work is required on the aforesaid facilities of the customer,
the customer shall employ, without delay, competent tradesmen to do
the work. All said work shall be done at the expense of the customer. All
leaks in the service line or any other pipe or fixture or in or upon the
premises supplied must be repaired immediately by the owner or
occupant of the premises under penalty of discontinuance of service by
the Borough Council.
C. The Borough Council shall in no event be responsible for maintaining
any portion of the service line or service line facilities owned by the
customer or for damage done by water escaping therefrom or from
lines or fixtures on customer's property, and the customer shall, at all
times, comply with Borough Council regulations and make changes
required on account of change of grade, relocation of mains, or
otherwise.
A. The Borough Council reserves the right to require any owner to install,
in conjunction with his service line, such valves, backflow preventers,
check valves, relief valves, pressure regulator, or other apparatus of
approved design, when and where, in its opinion, the conditions may
require it for the safeguarding and protection of the Borough Council's
property or the water supply.
§ 210-27 MANHEIM CODE § 210-29
1:388
§ 210-30. Penalty for placing obstructions over, in or around curb
boxes.
If obstructions are placed over, in or around curb boxes in a manner to
prevent normal operation of the curb box, or to result in damage to the curb
box, curb stop, or service line, the Borough Council shall shut the water
off at the curb stop and plug the curb box or disconnect the service line
or turn the water off at the corporation stop, as it may deem necessary.
Before service will be renewed, the customer shall pay to the Borough
Council the expenses incurred in shutting the water off and in turning it on
again, including the cost of necessary trenching and backfilling, of cutting
and replacing pavement, sidewalk or curbing, of any municipal permit or
permits for opening the pavement, and also shall settle any unpaid bill for
water or other service.
B. Pressure relief valves shall discharge to laundry tub, sump pump pit, or
to outside wall of building.
C. Should the use of water by any customer become excessive during
periods of peak use and cause a substantial decrease in pressure in the
distribution system of the Borough Council to the extent that normal
water service to other customers is impaired, the Borough Council may
exercise the right to require the installation of properly designed and
adequate storage facilities on the system of the premises involved. The
Borough Council reserves the right to enforce reasonable restrictions in
the use of water until such storage facilities are constructed and in use.
The customer shall be required to enter into a contract for a storage
facility within three months from the date of order by Borough Council.
D. The said facilities shall include all piping, valves, fittings, storage
structures, pumps, automatic controls, and such other appurtenances
as are required to permit the storage and delivery of water during
periods of peak water use on the premises, thereby avoiding a direct
use from the system of the Borough Council during such periods. The
basic design of such systems shall be subject to approval by the
Borough Council Engineer.
E. When steam boilers take a supply of water directly from the service
pipe, depending upon the hydraulic or hydrostatic pressure in the pipe
system of the Borough Council for their supply under working pressure,
it will be at the risk of the parties making such attachments. The
Borough Council shall not be responsible for any accidents or damages
to which such devices are frequently subject.
F. House boilers for domestic use must, in all cases, be provided with a
backflow preventer, a pressure relief valve, a feed water regulator, and
a relief valve to prevent collapsing when water is shut off from the
distributing pipes. The Borough Council will, in no case, be responsible
for accidents or damages resulting from failure to observe this rule, due
to conditions in the distributing pipes, due to the imperfect action of
any such valves, or due to any other causes.
§ 210-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-31
1:389
§ 210-31. Service line connection on private property.
Service line connections will not be installed on property other than that of
the premises to be furnished with water unless the owner of the premises
obtaining such services assumes all liability.
§ 210-32. Single service line with two or more customers.
When two or more customers are supplied through a single service line,
any violation of the rules of the Borough Council by either of the customers
shall be a violation to all, and unless said violation is corrected after
reasonable notice, the Borough Council may take such action as can be
taken for a single customer, except that such action shall not be taken until
the innocent customer who has not violated the Borough Council's rules
has been given a reasonable opportunity to attach his service line to a
separately controlled service connection.
§ 210-33. Use of curb stops.
Curb stops at the curbline shall not be used by the customer for turning
on or shutting off the water supply. The control of the water supply by the
customer shall be by means of a gate valve usually located just inside the
building wall or on the meter setting. Curb stops are for the exclusive use
of the Borough Council except when, due to a break in the service line, a
plumber is permitted to shut the curb stop.
§ 210-34. Prohibition of cross-connection.
A. A cross-connection is any actual or potential connection between the
potable water supply and a source of contamination or pollution. There
are two types of cross-connections:
(1) Inlet-type connection. Inlet-type connection is a connection used
for filling a receptacle open to the atmosphere. They can be belowrim
or submerged, such as a bottom inlet to a plating rinse tank.
They can be the over-rim type wherein a waterline enters a
receptacle over the top rim and terminates at some point below the
top rim. In these types of cross-connections, backflow occurs due to
backsiphonage only.
(2) Direct or pressure-type. Direct or pressure-type connection is one
wherein the water supply is connected to another line or a
pressurized vessel. A good example is a feed waterline to a boiler or
a primer line to a pump. In cases of direct or pressure-type
connections, backflow occurs due to backpressure when the system
pressure exceeds supply pressure.
B. No cross-connections between the mains or piping systems supplied by
the Borough Council and any other systems of water supply shall be
permitted unless the other source of supply is of safe, sanitary quality,
and both the supply and the connection have received approval of the
§ 210-31 MANHEIM CODE § 210-34
1:390
§ 210-35. Meters.
§ 210-36. Change in location of meters.
The customer shall pay for the cost of relocation of all meters made at his
request or for his convenience.
County Department of Health or the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
A. It shall be the duty of the Superintendent to install meters where the
water consumption is not now metered as soon as conveniently may be
done. Every building hereafter constructed and every building
hereafter, for the first time, furnished with water from the waterworks
shall be metered before any water shall be furnished to such building.
Construction projects may use water for building purposes without the
installation of a meter upon application made to the Superintendent
and upon payment of a fee; provided, however, the contractor or builder
does not waste water. Detection of wasting water shall be sufficient
reason to withdraw permission to use water and shall require the
immediate installation of a meter or the shutting off of the water until a
meter is installed.
B. The Borough Council shall furnish and install all meters which in the
judgment of the Superintendent are adequate. With special permission
of the Superintendent, a meter larger than the one deemed adequate by
the Superintendent may be installed if the owner of the premises pays
the additional cost. Upon notice by the Superintendent that a meter is
to be installed in a premises, the owner thereof shall, at his own
expense, prepare the pipe ready for the installation of the meter as well
as any stop, waste or valves required to drain it. When convenient to
place a meter at the curb, a suitable meter box or masonry pit shall be
built at the expense of the owner of the property, such box to have a
suitable cover with lock and key. When not convenient to place a meter
at the curb, the meter shall be placed within the property line of the
customer in a convenient, accessible and unobstructed position within a
building.
C. The customer shall, at all times, properly protect the meter upon his
property from injury by frost or other cause and shall be responsible for
the cost of all repairs to any such meter damaged through his
negligence or that of any of the members of his family, his agents,
workmen, servants or employees, such charge to be payable in full
within 10 days after a bill is submitted.
D. All meters, unless otherwise indicated, will be furnished and installed
by the Borough Council, subject to the fees currently in effect, and will
remain the property of the Borough Council and be accessible to and
subject to its control and maintenance. Meters of the "fire type" will not
be installed for "general service." A meter will be required for each
premises, except as otherwise provided herein.
§ 210-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-37
1:391
§ 210-37. Removal of meter.
The customer shall not disconnect or remove the meter or permit its
disconnection or removal without the consent of the Borough Council.
§ 210-38. Leaks.
Customers are urged to give careful attention to their plumbing and fixtures
and make immediate correction of all leaks. No allowance will be made
by the Borough Council for water used, lost, stolen or otherwise wasted
through leaks, carelessness, neglect or otherwise after the water has
passed through the water meter.
§ 210-39. Meter tests.
§ 210-40. Notification of condition of meter.
The customer shall notify the Borough Council of damage to or of the
nonworking of the meter, or of the breaking of the seal or seal wire, as soon
as he is cognizant of such a condition. The customer is liable for any damage
to the water meter on his premises and shall be billed for a new meter if the
Borough Council is unable to economically repair the damaged meter.
§ 210-41. Reading and registration of meters.
Readings of meters shall be completed quarterly by Borough Council, and
the reading on the meter shall be conclusive on both the customer and the
Borough Council, except when the meter has been found to be registering
A. All meters are accurately tested before installation and thereafter are
periodically tested. Should any customer of the Borough Council at any
time doubt the accuracy or correctness of the meter measuring water
delivered to the customer's premises, the Superintendent will make a
test of the accuracy of the meter upon a written request from the
customer. When the customer desires, either personally or through a
representative, to witness the testing of a meter, he may require the
meter to be sealed in his presence before removal. The seal shall not be
broken until the test is made in his presence. If the meter is found to be
accurate within 4%, a fee determined from the rate schedule shall be
paid to the Borough Council by the customer requesting the test. If the
meter is inaccurate, then the cost of the meter test shall be borne by the
Borough Council. When making such request, the customer shall agree
to the basis of payment specified or as currently in effect. A report of
such tests shall be made to the customer, and a complete record of such
tests shall be kept by the Borough Council.
B. If a meter fails to register or otherwise becomes out of order, such
meter shall be replaced or repaired by the waterworks, and the current
bill shall be estimated and determined by the average amount of water
used in a previous corresponding period. No deduction from any water
bill shall be allowed on account of leakage.
§ 210-37 MANHEIM CODE § 210-41
1:392
inaccurately or has ceased to register. In such case, the quantity may be
determined by the average registration of the meter when in order, such
determination to be made by the Borough Council, and which determination
shall be final.
§ 210-42. Remote reading meters.
§ 210-43. Seals.
No seal placed by the Borough Council for the protection of any meter,
valve, fitting or other water connection shall be tampered with or defaced.
It shall not be broken except upon authorization from the Borough Council
or in the presence of any Borough Council representative. Where the seal
is broken, the Borough Council reserves the right to remove the meter for
testing at the expense of the customer even though said meter registers
accurately.
§ 210-44. Size of meter.
§ 210-45. Discontinuance of service.
A. Remote reading meters shall be required of all new customers serviced
by the Borough Council. In the event a meter is relocated by reason of
any construction performed on the premises, a new remote register
shall be installed on the premises to replace the meter to be relocated.
All meters shall be installed at the cost of the owners, and the owner
may be billed and payment collected in the same manner as water rent.
B. All meters installed in newly constructed homes shall be remote
register meters, and the costs thereof shall be paid by the developer as
part of his agreement with the Borough Council.
A. The Borough Council reserves the right in all cases to stipulate the size
and type of the meter to be installed on each service line and to require
the installation of a larger-size meter in any case where the peak use of
water places any meter under undue or unusual strain and/or exceeds
the recommended meter capacity.
B. The size of a meter installed shall be the same size as the service line,
except that on a three-fourths-inch line serving a domestic customer,
the privilege of using a five-eighths-inch meter may be allowed by the
Borough Council. In no case will the service line be less than 3/4 inch.
A. By Borough. Service under any application may be discontinued for any
of the following reasons:
(1) For willful failure to supply meter readings or for willful supplying
of false information with respect to meter readings.
(2) For the use of water for the benefit of any other premises or
purposes than those described in the application.
§ 210-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-45
1:393
§ 210-46. Renewal of service after discontinuance.
Service may be renewed under a proper application when the conditions
under which such service was discontinued are corrected, and upon the
payment of all proper charges or amounts provided in the schedule of rates
or rules of the Borough Council due from the applicant.
(3) For willful waste of water.
(4) For failure to maintain the service lines and fixtures in good order.
(5) For damaging or interfering with any service pipe, meter, meter
box, curb stop, curb box, seal, meter or other fixtures and
appliances of the Borough Council.
(6) In the case of continued vacancy of the premises.
(7) For refusal of reasonable access to the premises for purposes of
inspecting the piping, fixtures and other parts of the water system
or for reading, repairing or removing meters.
(8) Where the contract has been in any way terminated by the
customer.
(9) For making or refusing to sever upon notice any cross-connection
between the pipe or fixtures carrying water furnished by the
Borough Council and a pipe or fixture carrying water from any
other source.
(10) For resale of water.
(11) For premises where the demand for water is greatly in excess of
past average or seasonal use, or where such excessive demands for
water by the premises may be detrimental, injurious to, make
inadequate, or in any way impair water service furnished to other
customers.
(12) For violation of these Rules and Regulations (this article) or other
requirements governing the supply of water furnished by the
Borough Council.
B. By customer.
(1) Any customer may terminate his service contract with the Borough
Council and have his water service discontinued upon written
notice to the Borough Council and payment of the turn-off charge.
The customer shall remain liable for water furnished to the
premises.
(2) Discontinuance of service by the Borough Council for violation of
this article shall not constitute a waiver of user charges.
§ 210-45 MANHEIM CODE § 210-47
1:394
§ 210-47. Reserve supply.
The Borough Council shall have the right to reserve a sufficient supply
of water at all times in its storage facilities to provide for fire and other
emergencies or may restrict or regulate the quantity of water used by
customers in case of scarcity whenever the public welfare may require it.
§ 210-48. Suspension of service due to emergency.
The Borough Council shall have the right to cut off the water supply
temporarily in order to make necessary repairs, connections and to do such
other work as by necessity may arise in case of breakdown, emergency
or for any other unavoidable cause. The Borough Council will use all
reasonable and practical measures to notify the customer of such
discontinuance of service. In such cases, the Borough Council shall not be
liable for any damage or inconvenience suffered by the customer or for
any claim against it at any time for interruption in service, lessening of the
supply, inadequate pressure, poor quality of water, or for any other causes
beyond its control. Such temporary shutoff of water supply shall not entitle
the customer to any abatement or deduction in water service charges,
nor the refund of any portion of such service charges paid in advance
during or for the time of such shutoff; notice will be given when practicable
to all customers affected by the shutoff, stating the probable duration of
the interruption of service and also the purpose for which the shutoff is
made. Nothing in this article contained, however, shall be construed as a
guarantee, covenant or agreement of the Borough Council to give notice of
any shutoff due to emergencies or otherwise.
§ 210-49. Private fire hydrants.
A. The private fire hydrant or fire hydrants installed on a separate fire
service main will be subject to flat charges set forth under the rate
schedule and will be subject to a special contract and to the rules and
regulations controlling such service.
B. When a special contract is entered into by the Borough Council with a
private party for a private fire hydrant which is to be located in a public
street or thoroughfare, the hydrant, with service connection, will be
installed at the expense of the applicant.
C. When a hydrant is to be located within the yard of the customer's
premises, the entire installation from the street main to and including
the hydrant shall be installed at the expense of the customer.
D. Such connections, where allowed, are to be used solely for the
extinguishment of fire and for no other purpose except upon the written
consent of the Borough Council, and any violation of this provision shall
be cause for the cancellation of the contract and discontinuance of the
service.
§ 210-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-49
1:395
§ 210-50. Application for private fire protection service.
§ 210-51. Approval of applications.
The application does not bind the Borough Council to approve the requested
special connection. The Borough Council will make an engineering study of
each proposed installation to determine whether such a connection will in
any way endanger the general water service in the vicinity. The Borough
Council shall reserve the right to refuse approval of an application for
private fire service. The Borough Council further reserves the right to make
an approval subject to the installation of adequate storage facilities and
related appurtenances on the premises thereof, if found necessary in order
to permit maintenance of adequate water service to other customers.
E. The following regulations shall apply to the installation and testing of
pipes for fire protection purposes:
(1) Pipes for fire protection purposes shall be fitted with only such
fixtures as are needed for fire protection, and such fixtures shall be
sealed by the Superintendent.
(2) Any person having connections used for fire protection may test
such apparatus at any time under the following conditions:
(a) Written notice shall be given to the Superintendent that such
test is desired, and the Superintendent shall then assign to the
applicant a day and hour when such test can begin.
(b) All tests shall be in the presence of the Superintendent or an
employee of the waterworks assigned by the Superintendent
for that purpose, and the sole duty of the Superintendent or
such employee shall be to remove and replace the seal of the
Superintendent used on such fire protection apparatus and to
note the time required for his presence.
(3) No seal shall be removed from any fire protection apparatus except
in case of fire, and in such cases the owner or occupant of the
premises where such apparatus is located shall make a written
report of that fact within 24 hours of its occurrence.
A. A written application prepared on the form furnished by the Borough
Council must be submitted for the purpose of requesting a special fire
connection for private fire protection service.
B. The application shall be accompanied by accurate plans showing the
proposed fire protection system and appurtenances and showing any
other water supply and appurtenances which may exist on the
premises.
§ 210-49 MANHEIM CODE § 210-52
1:396
§ 210-52. Cost of fire service connection.
All service connections for fire service shall be at the expense of the
customer and installed by the Borough Council. The customer will be
charged the exact cost of labor and materials used in the work with an
addition of 15% to cover the cost of supervision, etc.
§ 210-53. Meter requirements for fire service connections.
§ 210-54. Responsibility for service.
It is agreed by the parties receiving public or private fire service that the
Borough Council does not guarantee any specific pressure or capacity. It
is agreed by the parties receiving service that the Borough Council shall
be free and exempt from any and all claims for injury to any persons or
property by reason of fire, water or failure to supply water pressure or
capacity.
§ 210-55. Terms and conditions.
The final approval of an application and furnishing of private fire protection
service will be subject to the execution of a contract between the
responsible parties and the Borough Council containing the following terms
and conditions:
A. Meters shall be required on connections providing service for fire
protection if such connections are not used exclusively for fire service.
The fire service shall be subject to the flat rates for private fire service
(rate schedule). The cost of the meter and installation and structure
shall be paid by the customer.
B. If a meter is installed in connection with this type of service, payment
shall be in accordance with the regular metered rates as shown in the
rate schedule.
A. The Borough Council's designated representatives, with proper
identification, shall have the right to enter the premises of the applicant
at any reasonable time for the purpose of making such inspections as it
may deem necessary, and it shall have the right to attach any testing
device or use any means which it may elect to determine the condition
of the pipe and appurtenances.
B. All fixtures and openings (other than the control valves) shall be kept
closed and sealed and not opened or used except during times of fire.
Upon the extinguishment of each fire, the applicant shall immediately
notify the Borough Council so that said fixtures and openings can again
be closed and sealed.
C. The applicant agrees the Borough Council shall not be considered in
any manner an insurer of property or persons or to have undertaken to
extinguish fire or to protect any persons or property against loss or
damage by fire or otherwise.
§ 210-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-55
1:397
§ 210-56. Waterline extensions.
The extension of waterlines from the water system of the Borough Council
shall be in accordance with the following rules and regulations. All
waterline extensions shall be connected to main lines owned by the Borough
Council and shall be required in all or any of the following instances:
D. The applicant does not contemplate uses of fixtures other than stated. If
a supply of water for use other than extinguishment of fire is desired by
the applicant, then it shall be taken through a service pipe separately
connected, directly or indirectly, with the service pipe contemplated by
this application. Any waste of water or use of water for purposes other
than the extinguishment of fire through this connection shall be
deemed a violation of the terms and conditions of this application and
the rules and regulations of the Borough Council.
E. The rights and obligations of the applicant shall be subject at all times
to the rates, rules and regulations of the Borough Council that now exist
or which may hereafter be adopted.
F. The applicant agrees to obtain in advance the approval of the Borough
Council for any change, alteration, addition or deduction contemplated
in the fixtures, openings and uses herein specified.
G. Upon acceptance by the Borough Council and the completion of the
service connection, the application shall be in force as a contract and
shall continue as such until cancelled by written notice by the applicant.
A. For the furnishing of water service to an individual premises whose
front property line does not abut a main waterline installed in a public
right-of-way and owned by the Borough Council.
B. For the furnishing of water service to a group of individual premises
whose front property lines do not abut main waterlines installed in a
public right-of-way and owned by the Borough Council.
C. For the furnishing of water service to a group of premises located
within the limits of a recorded plan of lots where the developer of the
plan is desirous of obtaining such service for the lots.
D. For the furnishing of public or private fire service to the Borough
Council or a private individual company or others requesting such
service where no Borough Council owned lines are installed in public
rights-of-way or where existing Borough Council owned lines are not
capable of producing the requested fire flows.
E. For the furnishing of a requested quantity of water for a premises or
group of premises which is beyond the capability of the existing
Borough Council system in the area where service is required.
F. Such other similar instances.
§ 210-55 MANHEIM CODE § 210-57
1:398
§ 210-57. Application for extension.
A written application must be submitted to the Borough Council for the
purpose of requesting approval of a waterline extension and water service.
The application shall be accompanied by plans showing the proposed
location of the extension and other pertinent conditions. The application
shall be signed by the owner or owners and shall be subject to the terms
and conditions as are set forth and included and to the execution of an
agreement(s) which, together with the rules and regulations of the Borough
Council, shall regulate and control the installation of waterline extensions
and the furnishing of water service.
§ 210-58. Agreement.
The owner shall enter into an agreement with the Borough Council prior
to the execution of any work, the agreement to contain such pertinent
conditions as the following:
§ 210-59. Limits of extension.
The extension of a waterline shall include the entire quantity of pipeline and
appurtenant facilities required to conduct the supply of water from the point
of connection to the existing distribution system of the Borough Council to
and across the entire frontage of the last property for which the owner has
requested water service.
§ 210-60. Payment of cost for work done by Borough.
The owner shall deposit with the Borough Council, in cash at the time
of the execution of the escrow agreement, 130% of the estimated cost to
be held in escrow to pay for work to be done by the owner pursuant to
certain developer- Borough Council agreements. A bond, if acceptable to
the Borough Council, may be posted in lieu of cash. If a bond is posted, the
owner shall post 10% thereof in cash with the Borough Council at the time
of the posting of the bond. The cash deposit shall be used by the Borough
Council from time to time to pay actual engineering, legal, administrative,
and other costs incidental to the project of the owner. If the deposit is not
sufficient to cover all actual costs to the Borough Council, the owner shall
pay the difference within 30 days after presentation of a statement certified
by the Borough Council's Secretary. If the amount of the cash deposit is in
excess of the actual costs incurred, a refund of the unused portion will be
A. The cost of all work to be borne by the owner.
B. The materials and workmanship to be in accordance with the Standard
Specifications of the Borough Council.
C. The highways and streets in which water main extensions are to be
located must be dedicated to public use.
D. The ownership title to all installations to be conveyed to and vested in
the Borough Council.
§ 210-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-60
1:399
returned to the owner at the time of acceptance of the work by the Borough
Council.
§ 210-61. Responsibility for cost.
The entire cost of the waterline extensions, including the cost of fire
hydrants and other appurtenances and facilities, shall be borne by the
owners, the Borough Council to be subject to no cost. The cost of the
waterline extension or installation shall include the following:
§ 210-62. Water waste prevention.
The following regulations shall be in effect in order to prevent waste or
excessive use of water or irregularity of pressure.
A. The cost of waterlines at least six inches and not more than eight inches
in size. The minimum size shall be eight inches in all locations where
the line will serve as a main transmission line and/or is necessary for
proper future expansion and development of the system.
B. The cost of connections to the existing main lines.
C. The cost of all main line meters, valves, valve boxes, fittings, fire
hydrants, and all related work.
D. The cost of all land and rights-of-way.
A. The Superintendent may inquire into and investigate into the cause of
any unusual flow or apparently unnecessary waste of water upon any
premises furnished with water from the waterworks. If the said flow or
waste results from want of repair of any pipe or other fixture, the
Superintendent shall require the owner of such premises to make such
necessary repairs within 10 days, and upon failure of such owner to
make such repairs within the time limit, the Superintendent shall have
authority to shut off the supply of water leading to such premises. Such
water shall not again be turned on until the customer shall have made
the required repairs and paid the fee provided in the rate schedule.
B. No person shall use the Borough water or permit it to be used for any
purpose other than that declared at the time the permit mentioned in
§ 2.3 was obtained.
C. No person shall allow water fixtures to run when not in use for the
purpose for which intended.
D. No person shall allow water to flow continuously in order to guard
against freezing or for any other purpose, except by special permission
from the Superintendent, provided that the Superintendent may at any
time rescind such special permission when he shall deem its
continuance to be detrimental to the operation of the waterworks and
the service available to other customers.
§ 210-60 MANHEIM CODE § 210-62
1:400
§ 210-63. Responsibilities of plumbers.
All plumbers working in the Borough shall observe the following regulations
and requirements:
§ 210-64. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine and costs of prosecution for
each and every violation.
E. Except in case of fire, no large current of water shall be permitted to
flow at intervals causing irregularity of pressure. The use of fixtures
that may create water hammers is prohibited.
F. Borough Council may in time of emergency restrict the uses to which
water may be put.
G. No person or persons shall willfully injure the waterworks or open any
pipe, main, hydrant or any other device connected with the same so as
to occasion a wanton or willful waste of water or inconvenience or
damage to the citizens.
A. No plumber shall do any work within the Borough that would result in a
violation of any of the provision of this article.
B. Every plumber shall, within 24 hours after the discovery thereof, report
to the Superintendent any plumbing installation or use of water that is
contrary to any of the provisions of this article which might come to his
notice.
C. During the winter months, every plumber shall make a weekly report to
the Superintendent of all frozen water pipes and fixtures that may have
required his attention or may have been brought to his attention during
the preceding week, with the cause thereof as nearly as he can
ascertain.
D. All reports of plumbers shall be made upon official forms obtainable at
the office of the Superintendent.
E. Whenever Borough water is introduced into any premises, or changes
are made in any water pipes or fixtures that might affect the supply or
the security against frost, the plumber doing such work shall notify the
Superintendent of the location and nature of such work, and the
Superintendent shall thereupon cause such work to be promptly and
carefully inspected. No water shall be turned on permanently in any
location until the Superintendent shall be satisfied that every applicable
provision of this article has been complied with. Prior to such approval
of the Superintendent, water shall be turned on by the plumber only as
may be necessary in order to test his work.
§ 210-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-64
1:401
Chapter 220
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic Commission — See Ch. 34.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 49.
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 64.
Construction codes — See Ch. 100.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 124.
Sewers — See Ch. 172.
Solid waste — See Ch. 184.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 197.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 190.
Water — See Ch. 210.
§ 210-64 MANHEIM CODE § 210-64
1:402
ARTICLE I
Background Provisions
§ 220-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Manheim Borough
Zoning Ordinance and Map of 1993."
§ 220-2. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted to promote, protect and facilitate the public health,
safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and practical community
development, proper density of population, the provisions of adequate light
and air, police protection, vehicle parking and loading space,
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, public grounds and other public
requirements, as well as to prevent overcrowding of land, blight, danger
and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life or property
from fire, flood, panic or other dangers. This chapter is enacted in
accordance with an overall planning program and with consideration for the
character of the Borough, its various parts, and the suitability of the various
parts for particular uses and structures.
§ 220-3. Scope.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, the use in the Borough of
all land and every building or structure or portion of a building or structure
erected, altered with respect to height and area, added to or relocated, and
every use within a building or structure or use accessory thereto shall be
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Any lawfully existing use,
building or land not in conformity with the regulations on the effective date
of this chapter herein prescribed shall be regarded as nonconforming but
may be continued, extended or changed, subject to the special regulations
herein provided with respect to nonconforming buildings, structures or
uses.
§ 220-4. Interpretation.
§ 220-5. Conflict.
It is not the intention of this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or interfere
with any existing ordinances or enactments or with any rule, regulation
A. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health,
safety and general welfare of the residents of the Borough.
B. In interpreting the language of zoning ordinances to determine the
extent of the restriction upon the use of the property, where doubt
exists as to its intended meaning, the language written and enacted by
the Borough Council shall be in favor of the property owner and against
any implied extension or restriction.
§ 220-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-5
1:403
or permit adopted or issued thereunder, except insofar as the same may
be inconsistent or in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter,
provided that, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions upon the use
of buildings or land or upon the height and bulk of buildings or prescribes
larger open spaces than are required by the provisions of other such
ordinance, enactment, rule, regulation or permit, then the provisions of
this chapter shall control. Furthermore, if a discrepancy exists between any
regulations contained within this chapter, that regulation which imposes the
greater restriction shall apply.
§ 220-6. Validity.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by a court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of this chapter as a whole or of any other part thereof.
§ 220-7. Uses not provided for.
Whenever under this chapter a use is neither specifically permitted or
denied and an application is made by a landowner to the Codes Compliance
Officer for such use, the Codes Compliance Officer shall refer the
application to the Zoning Hearing Board to hear and decide such request as
a special exception. The Board shall have the authority to permit the use or
deny the use in accordance with the standards governing special exception
applications. The use may be permitted if it is similar to and compatible
with permitted uses in the zone and in no way is in conflict with the general
purposes and intent of this chapter. The burden of proof shall be upon the
applicant to demonstrate that the proposed use would not be detrimental to
the public health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood.
§ 220-8. Establishment of zones.50
For the purpose of this chapter, Manheim Borough is hereby divided into
zones, which shall be designated as follows:
Residential Zone (R-1)
Residential Zone (R-2)
Residential Zone (R-3)
Residential Zone (R-4)
Commercial Office and Apartment Zone (COA)
Central Business District (CBD)
Highway Commercial Zone (C-1)
Industrial Zone (I)
Planned Industrial/Corporate Center (PC-1)
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-5 MANHEIM CODE § 220-9
1:404
§ 220-9. Zoning Map.
The areas within Manheim Borough as assigned to each zone and the
location of the zones established by this chapter are shown upon the Zoning
Map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is attached to and
is declared to be a part of this chapter.51
§ 220-10. Zone boundary lines.
The zone boundary lines shall be as shown on the Zoning Map. Zone
boundary lines are intended to coincide with lot lines, center lines of streets
and alleys, railroad rights-of-way and streams at time of passage of this
chapter, the corporate boundary of the Borough or as dimensioned on the
map. In the event of dispute about the location of the boundary of any zone,
the Codes Compliance Officer shall investigate and render a decision on the
location of the line. Appeals from this decision shall be made to the Zoning
Hearing Board.
§ 220-11. Community development objectives.
This chapter is enacted in accordance with the Manheim Central Region
Comprehensive Plan and has been formulated to implement the purpose
set forth in § 220-2 above. The chapter is enacted with regard to those
community development objectives listed for Manheim Borough in Chapter
II of the official Comprehensive Plan (adopted March 30, 1993).
§ 220-12. Definitions. [Amended 1-30-1996 by Ord. No. 538;
1-10-1996 by Ord. No. 540; 3-28-2000 by Ord. No. 567]
A. Word usage. Words and phrases shall be presumed to be used in their
ordinary context unless such word or phrase is defined differently
within this section.
B. In this chapter, when not inconsistent with the context:
(1) Words in the present tense also imply the future tense.
(2) The singular includes the plural.
(3) The male gender includes the female gender.
(4) The word "person" includes a partnership or corporation as well as
an individual.
(5) The term "shall" or "must" is always mandatory.
(6) Within each zone, any use not specifically permitted is expressly
prohibited.
51.Editor's Note: The Official Zoning Map, as amended, is on file in the Borough office;
Zoning Map amendments are included as Article VIII of this chapter.
§ 220-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-12
1:405
C. Specific words and phrases. The following words and phrases shall have
the particular meaning assigned by this section in the appropriate
sections of this chapter.
ACCESS DRIVE — An improved cartway designed and constructed to
provide for vehicular movement between a public road and a tract of
land containing any use other than one single-family dwelling unit or
farm.52
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate
to the principal use or building and located on the same lot as the
principal use or building.
ACT — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.53
ADULT-RELATED USES — A business or club which engages in one or
more of the following areas of sales, services or entertainment:
ADULT BATHHOUSE — An establishment or business which
provides the services of baths of all kinds, including all forms and
methods of hydrotherapy, during which specified anatomical areas
are displayed or specified sexual activity occurs. This section shall
not apply to hydrotherapy treatment practiced by, or under the
supervision of, a medical practitioner. A medical practitioner, for
the purpose of this chapter, shall be a medical doctor, physician,
chiropractor or similar professional licensed by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
(1)
ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO — Any establishment or business
which provides the service of applying paint or other substance,
whether transparent or nontransparent, to or on the human body
when specified anatomical areas are exposed.
(2)
ADULT BOOKSTORE — Any establishment which has as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade:
Books, films, magazines or other periodicals or other forms
of audio or visual representation which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and
(a)
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for
use in connection with specified sexual activities.
(b)
(3)
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, theater, bar or other
establishment which features live or media representations of
performances by topless or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers,
exotic dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such
performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(4)
52.Editor's Note: The original definition of "Accessory building apartment," which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622.
53.Editor Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 220-12 MANHEIM CODE § 220-12
1:406
ADULT MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or
business which provides the services of massage and body
manipulation, including exercises, heat and light treatments of the
body, and all forms and methods of physiotherapy, unless operated
by a medical practitioner, chiropractor or professional physical
therapist licensed by the commonwealth. This definition does not
include an athletic club, health club, school, gymnasium, reducing
salon, spa or similar establishment where massage or similar
manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or
accessory service.
(5)
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed or
unenclosed building with a capacity of more than five but less than
50 persons used for presenting any form of audio or visual material
and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time
measured on an annual basis is devoted to the showing of material
which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas
(6)
ADULT MODEL STUDIO — Any place where, for any form of
consideration or gratuity, figure models who display specified
anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn,
painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by persons
paying such consideration or gratuity, except that this provision
shall not apply to any "figure studio" or "school of art" or similar
establishment which meets the requirements established in the
Education Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the
issuance or conferring of, and is in fact authorized thereunder, to
issue and confer a diploma.
(7)
ADULT MOTEL — A motel or similar establishment offering public
accommodations for any consideration, which provides patrons
with material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
(8)
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE ARCADE — Any place to which the
public is permitted or invited, wherein coin- or slug-operated or
electronically or mechanically controlled still- or motion-picture
machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at
any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(9)
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed or unenclosed
building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting
any form of audio or visual material and in which a substantial
portion of the total presentation time, measured on an annual
basis, is devoted to the showing of material which is distinguished
(10)
§ 220-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-12
1:407
ALLEY — A minor right-of-way, privately or publicly owned, primarily
for service access to the rear or sides of properties.
ALTERATIONS — Any change in the supporting members of a building
or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, joists or
rafters or enclosing walls; any enlargement of a building or structure;
the moving of a building or structure from one location to another; any
change in the means of egress from or access to a building or structure;
any change to the use of land upon a lot; and any renovation to a
structure which would change its use.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — A commercial establishment which provides,
as a principal use, amusement devices and/or games of skill or chance
(e.g., pinball machines, video games, Skee-Ball, electronic or water
firing ranges and other similar devices). This definition does not include
the use of two or less such devices as an accessory use.
ANIMAL — Any domestic animal or fowl, any wild animal or fowl, any
farm animal or any household pet.
or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT NEWSRACK — Any coin-operated machine or device which
dispenses material substantially devoted to the depiction of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(11)
ADULT OUT-CALL SERVICE ACTIVITY — Any establishment or
business which provides an out-call service which consists of
individuals leaving the premises upon request or by appointment
to visit other premises for a period of time for the purpose of
providing any service during which time specified anatomical areas
are displayed or specified sexual activity occurs.
(12)
ADULT SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — Any business, agency
or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides
a place where two or more persons, not all members of the same
family, may congregate, assemble or associate for the purpose
of engaging in specified sexual activity or exposing specified
anatomical areas, excluding psycho-sexual workshops operated by
a medical practitioner licensed by the commonwealth to engage in
sexual therapy.
(13)
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or other
similar establishment, either indoor or outdoor in nature, which
regularly features live performances which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or by
exposure of specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.
(14)
Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons
services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas."
(15)
§ 220-12 MANHEIM CODE § 220-12
1:408
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any dog, cat, hamster, guinea pig,
hedgehog, rabbit, rat, mouse, chinchilla, ferret or other
domesticated nonfarm animals which are locally available for
purchase as pets. Also includes amphibians and reptiles such as
turtles, frogs, salamanders, lizards and snakes.
(1)
DOMESTIC FOWL — Any canary, finch, parakeet, parrot, cockatiel
or other domesticated birds which are locally available for
purchase as pets.
(2)
FARM ANIMAL — Any sheep, goat (including pygmy), pig or hog
(including potbelly or Vietnamese), cows, horses, mules and
chickens normally found on a farm.
(3)
HOUSEHOLD PET — The noncommercial keeping of domestic
animals or domestic fowl, normally or ordinarily kept in or
permitted to be at large in the dwelling of its owner, as an
accessory use to a primary residential use. No more than four adult
animals shall be permitted regardless of species (e.g., one dog, two
cats and one snake equals four).
(4)
LARGE ANIMAL — Any farm animal of the bovine, equine, swine or
sheep families and any wild animal which is, by size and/or weight,
of a similar character to the aforementioned animal families; wild
fowl or game birds such as pheasants, ducks, geese, swans,
turkeys, ravens and falcons or other birds of prey and any other
wild fowl which is by size and/or nature of a similar character to
the aforementioned wild fowl or game birds.
(5)
PET PROJECT — The noncommercial keeping of limited numbers
of specific farm animals, domestic animals, wild fowl or game birds
as an accessory use within the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and COA Zones.
The purpose of which shall be educational in nature and shall be
accomplished in affiliation with a recognized program such a 4-H,
FFA and FHA.
(6)
SMALL ANIMAL — Any domestic animal or domestic fowl; any farm
animal such as chickens; wild fowl or game birds such as pigeons
or quail and any other wild fowl which is by size and/or nature of a
similar character to the aforementioned wild fowl or game birds.
(7)
WILD ANIMAL — Any nonfarm animal, amphibian or reptile not
normally or ordinarily domesticated or available locally for
purchase as pets, not normally or ordinarily raised in this area and
climate, or not capable of being kept as a household pet.
(8)
WILD FOWL or GAME BIRD — Any fowl such as pigeons, quail,
pheasants, ducks, geese, swans, turkeys, ravens and falcons or
other birds of prey not normally or ordinarily domesticated or
available locally for purchase as pets, not normally or ordinarily
raised in this area and climate, or not capable of being kept as a
household pet.
(9)
§ 220-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-12
1:409
ANTENNA HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the base
of the antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of
the incorporated structure, which shall include all appurtenances
connected thereto (support brackets, antennas, etc.). If the support
structure is on a sloped grade, the average height between the highest
and lowest grades, at the ground connection points, shall be used in
calculating the antenna height.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE (also referred to as TOWER) — All
types of poles, tripods, quad-base towers, self-supporting structures,
monopoles, telescoping masts and guy-wire-anchored facilities as well
as any other structure, as defined herein, which is designed or
proposed to support a device used in the transmitting or receiving of
radio frequency energy.
ATTIC — That part of a building which is immediately below and wholly
or partly within the roof framing. Within a dwelling unit, an attic shall
not be counted as floor area unless it is constructed as or modified
into a habitable room by the inclusion of dormer windows, an average
ceiling height of five feet or more, and a permanent stationary interior
access stairway to a lower building story.
AUTOMOBILE FILLING STATION — Any area of land, including
structures thereon, that is used for the sale of gasoline or any other
motor vehicle fuel and oil and other lubricating substances, including
any retail sales of motor vehicle accessories, which may not include
major repairing, body and fender work, painting, vehicular sales nor
rental, or automatic car washes.
AUTOMOBILE RECONDITIONING — A commercial business at which
any or all of the following services are performed upon passenger
vehicles:
AUTOMOBILE SALES — Any building or land devoted to the sales of
passenger vehicles, including accessory service and repair facilities, if
conducted within a wholly enclosed building.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE — The repair, servicing, maintenance and
reconditioning of passenger vehicles, but not including car washes per
se.
BASEMENT — See "cellar."
Washing, waxing, buffing, rubbing and/or application of paint
sealants to vehicle's exterior.
(1)
Minor touch-up to vehicle's exterior paint and/or application of pin
stripes and other similar decorative treatments.
(2)
(3) Cleaning and shampooing of vehicle's interior compartment.
(4) Replacement of minor decorative automobile parts and trim.
(5) Degreasing and cleaning of engine compartment.
§ 220-12 MANHEIM CODE § 220-12
1:410
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — An owner-occupied, single-family detached
dwelling where between one and six rooms are rented to overnight
guests on a daily basis for periods not exceeding two weeks. Meals may
be offered only to registered overnight guests.
BILLBOARD — Sign upon which images and/or messages of any kind
are printed, posted or lettered, whether freestanding or attached to a
surface of a building or other structure. A billboard is used to advertise
products, services or businesses at a location other than the premises
on which the sign is placed or to disseminate other messages.
BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of Manheim Borough.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A building or portion thereof arranged or used
for sheltering or feeding, or both, of not more than six individuals who
do not constitute a family.
BOROUGH — Manheim Borough, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
BUILDING — Any structure with a roof intended for shelter or
enclosure of persons, animals or property.
BUILDING AREA — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the
main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings,
exclusive of uncovered porches, awnings, terraces and stairs.
BUILDING HEIGHT — A building's vertical measurement from the
average level of the ground abutting the building at its corners to the
highest point of the roof.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The actual line of that face of the building
nearest an adjacent right-of-way or street line. This face includes sun
parlors and covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does
not include stairs.
CAFE — An exterior seating area associated with a restaurant or tavern
which is under constant supervision by an employee of the business.
CELLAR — A space with less than 1/2 of its floor-to-ceiling height above
the average finished grade of the adjoining ground or with a floor-toceiling
height of less than 6 1/2 feet. Within a dwelling unit, a cellar
shall not be counted as floor area.
CELLULAR SITE — A tract or parcel of land or portion thereof upon
which wireless or cellular communications antenna(s), antenna support
structures, accessory buildings, equipment and/or parking or other
uses associated with and ancillary to wireless and cellular
ATTACHED — A building which has two or more party walls in
common.
(1)
(2) DETACHED — A building which has no party wall.
SEMIDETACHED — A building which has only one party wall in
common.
(3)
§ 220-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-12
1:411
communications are either constructed or proposed to be erected,
constructed or developed.
CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the
deceased, including columbariums, mausoleums and mortuaries when
operated in conjunction with the cemetery and within the boundaries
thereof. This definition shall not include crematoria, which shall be
considered as part of a funeral home.
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY — A statement signed by a
duly authorized Borough officer, setting forth that a building, structure
or use legally complies with this chapter and other applicable codes
and regulations and that the same may be used for the purposes stated
therein.
CHURCH AND RELATED USES — A building, structure or group of
buildings or structures, including accessory uses, designed or intended
for public worship. This definition shall include rectories, convents and
church-related educational and/or day-care facilities.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION FACILITY — An activity operated as a
business open to the public for the purpose of public recreation or
entertainment, including, but not limited to, bowling alleys, drive-in
motion-picture facilities, swimming pools, health clubs, miniature golf
courses, museums, etc. This does not include adult-related uses or
amusement arcades, as defined herein.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Any area of land or water, or a combination
of land and water, within a development site, designed and intended
for use by all residents of the development or the general public. Land
included within the right-of-way lines of streets shall not be classified as
common open space. Common open spaces shall not include required
open areas nor setbacks between buildings and between buildings
and street rights-of-way, driveways, access drives, parking areas and
property lines of the development. No dwelling unit, residential
accessory buildings or parking or loading areas may be located within
common open spaces.
COMMUNITY REHABILITATION FACILITIES — Group living quarters
for persons who need specialized housing, treatment and/or counseling
that provides supervised housing as an alternative to imprisonment,
including but not limited to community confinement centers,
prerelease, work-release, probationary programs, halfway houses, and
active criminal rehabilitation facilities.[Added 7-12-2011 by Ord. No.
622]
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which may be suitable in certain localities
within the zone only when specific conditions and criteria prescribed
for such uses have been complied with. Conditional uses are reviewed
by the Borough Council after recommendations by the Planning
Commission in accordance with § 220-122 of this chapter.
CONDOMINIUM — A form of property ownership providing for
individual ownership of a specific dwelling unit or other space not
§ 220-12 MANHEIM CODE § 220-12
1:412
necessarily on ground level, together with an undivided interest in the
land or other parts of the structure in common with other owners.
CONVENIENCE STORE —
DAY CARE — The offering of care or supervision over minors or special
needs adults in lieu of care or supervision by family members. This
definition does not include the offering of overnight accommodations.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units in relation to the area of
land of a parcel in use or proposed to be used for residential purposes,
exclusive of public rights-of-way.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations.
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY — A disability of a person which has
continued or can be expected to continue indefinitely; a disability which
is:
A retail sales business which specializes in providing household
products and foods. Convenience stores may also provide any or all
of the following as an accessory use:
The rental of videotapes, provided that an adult bookstore is
specifically prohibited.
(a)
The preparation and sales of delicatessen sandwiches and
foods, provided that no patron seating is provided.
(b)
The use of no more than two amusement devices (e.g., pinball
machines, video games and other similar devices).
(c)
(1)
Convenience stores shall not include the dispensing of gasoline
or other vehicle fuels unless the appropriate approvals for an
automobile filling station (as defined herein) have been obtained.
(2)
DAY CARE, COMMERCIAL — A day-care facility that is a primary
use and is licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(1)
DAY CARE, FAMILY — A day-care facility that is operated as an
accessory use to a detached single-family dwelling that is
registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and offers care
and supervision to no more than six different persons during any
calendar day.
(2)
Attributable to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy or
autism.
(1)
Found to be attributable to any other conditions found to be closely
related to mental retardation, because such condition results in
similar impairment of general intellectual functioning or adaptive
(2)
§ 220-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-12
1:413
DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED PERSON — A person with a
developmental disability.
DISTRIBUTION — A process whereby materials, goods or products are
imported, stored by one person and then delivered to another.
DRIVEWAY — An improved cartway designed and constructed to
provide vehicular movement between a public road and a tract of land
serving a one single-family dwelling unit or a farm.
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof designed and used
exclusively for residential occupancy, including those listed below, but
not including hospitals, hotels, boardinghouses, rooming and lodging
houses, institutional houses, tourist courts and the like, offering
overnight accommodations for guests or patients. All dwellings must be
permanently affixed to a completely enclosed foundation constructed
of currently accepted materials that shall be an entire perimeter wall
and extend from below the frost line to the first floor of the building.
In addition, all dwellings shall be properly connected to approved and
permanently designed sewer, water, electrical and other utility systems.
behavior to that of mentally retarded persons or requires treatment
and services similar to those required for such persons.
Attributable to dyslexia resulting from a disability described in
subsections (1) and (2) of this definition.
(3)
DUPLEX — (Two-family; single-family, semidetached.) A
freestanding building containing two dwelling units for two
families arranged in a side-by-side or over-and-under configuration.
Those units placed on common grounds shall have one front and
rear yard and two side yards. Those units constructed on individual
lots shall have one front, side and rear yard.
(1)
MULTIPLE FAMILY — A building containing three or more dwelling
units, at least one of which must be located above or below the
remaining units.
(2)
QUADRUPLEX — One detached building that contains four
separate dwelling units, all of which share one or two points of
exterior access.
(3)
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A freestanding building containing
one dwelling unit for one family and having two side yards, one
front yard and one rear yard; in the case of a corner lot, the
building will have two front and one side and rear yard. Mobile
homes can be considered single-family detached dwellings if, in
addition to the requirements listed for all dwellings, the mobile
home is securely anchored to the permanent foundation and all
of the apparatuses used to transport the unit shall be removed,
including the towing hitch. Travel trailers shall not be construed
as dwellings. Modular homes can be considered single-family
(4)
§ 220-12 MANHEIM CODE § 220-12
1:414
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof arranged or designed
for occupancy by not more than one family and having separate cooking
and sanitary facilities. All dwelling units shall be owner-occupied or
leased for periods of not less than one continuous month.
EARTHMOVING ACTIVITY — Any construction or other activity which
disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to,
excavations, embankments, land development, subdivision
development, mineral extraction, and the moving, depositing, or storing
of soil, rock or earth.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration,
extension or maintenance by a public utility corporation, municipality,
municipal authority or which is privately owned and operated under
the approval of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission to provide
gas, electrical, telephone, television, steam or water transmission or
distribution services, stormwater controls and/or sewage disposal
services, including buildings, enclosures, wells, pumping stations,
storage facilities, poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes, conduits, cables,
fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, transformers, streetlights, traffic
signals, hydrants and other similar fixed equipment, accessories and
services in connection therewith, which are reasonably necessary for
the furnishing of adequate services for the public health, safety or
general welfare of the local residents. Wireless and cellular
communications are not considered to be essential services.
FAMILY — An individual or individuals related by blood, marriage or
adoption who maintain one common household and live within one
dwelling unit. Additionally, up to four unrelated individuals who
maintain a common household and live within one dwelling unit may be
considered a family. Finally, a family shall also expressly include eight
unrelated persons who reside within a licensed group home, as defined
herein.[Amended 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622]
FENCE — A structure designed as a barrier to restrict the movement of
persons, animals and/or vehicles.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — A bank, savings and loan association,
credit union, finance or loan company, etc.
FLOODPLAIN — An area of land adjacent to the channel of a
watercourse which has been or is likely to be flooded, or any area
subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the floor areas of a building as
measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls or the center line
detached dwellings so long as they comply with the general
requirements of a dwelling.
TOWNHOUSE — A building containing between three and eight
dwelling units arranged in a side-by-side configuration with two or
more common party walls.
(5)
§ 220-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-12
1:415
of party walls, and including all areas intended and designed for the
conduct of a business or industrial use.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — The sum of the floor areas of a dwelling
unit as measured to the interior surfaces of exterior walls and including
all rooms used for habitation, such as living room, dining room, kitchen,
bedroom, bathroom, but not including closets, hallways, stairways,
cellars or attics, or service rooms or areas such as utility rooms, nor
unheated areas such as enclosed porches.
FRONT BUILD-TO LINE — A line establishing the required location for
all or a portion of a building's front facade.
FRONTAGE — The horizontal dimension that coincides between a
street and a property.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building for the storage of one or
more automobiles and/or other vehicles accessory and incidental to the
primary use of the premises; provided, however, that one commercial
vehicle of not more than 11,000 pounds gross vehicle weight may
be stored therein. Where a garage is an attached integral part of a
dwelling unit, the garage shall not be counted as floor area unless it
is constructed or modified into a habitable room by the removal of all
vehicular access doors, and provided adequate off-street parking is still
available on the same lot as the dwelling unit.
GRADE — The ground elevation adjacent to a structure, plant or other
object.
GROUP CARE AND TREATMENT CENTER — An institutional care
facility, licensed, registered or certified under an applicable county,
commonwealth or federal agency, for persons who need temporary
and specialized housing, treatment and/or counseling for physical or
mental disabilities, including persons recovering from addiction, to
reside in while receiving therapy or counseling prior to moving into
more permanent living arrangements in a family dwelling or nursing,
convalescent or similar health care facilities.[Added 7-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 622]
GROUP HOME — A dwelling unit operated by a responsible individual,
family or organization with a program to provide a supportive living
arrangement for up to eight handicapped individuals, as defined by the
Fair Housing Act54 and the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, as
amended. A group home shall not include a group care and treatment
center or community rehabilitation facilities as defined by this chapter.
Group homes must be licensed where required by any appropriate
government agencies, and a copy of any such licenses must be
delivered to the Borough prior to beginning the use. Group homes shall
be permitted and regulated in the same manner as any other dwelling
unit within each respective zone where special care is needed by the
individual served.[Amended 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622]
54.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq.
§ 220-12 MANHEIM CODE § 220-12
1:416
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, sludge from an industrial
or other wastewater treatment plant, sludge from a water supply
treatment plant or air pollution facility, and other discarded material,
including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material
resulting from municipal, commercial, industrial, institutional, mining,
agricultural operations, and from community activities, or any
combination of the above, which because of its quantity, concentration
or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may:
HEAD-IN PARKING SPACES — Off-street parking spaces that directly
abut and access a public street. These spaces run perpendicular to or
are angled (no less than 60° interior angle) from the public street.
HEALTH AND FITNESS CLUB — A commercial business that offers
active recreational and/or fitness activities. Such activities are provided
only to club members and their guests. Such facilities do not include
golf courses.
HEIGHT, BUILDING — A building's vertical measurement from the
average ground level at the corners of the building to the highest point
of the roof.
HEIGHT, STRUCTURE — A structure's vertical measurement from the
mean level of the ground abutting the structure to the highest point of
the structure.
HIGHWAY ACCESS POINT — The vehicular entrance or exit of a use to
a public street.
HOBBY — An activity that is undertaken solely as a leisure or
recreational pastime. The sale of any product or service shall not be
considered to be a hobby.
HOME IMPROVEMENT STORE — A facility for the retail sale of a
combination of products used in the construction, repair and
improvement of homes, including, but not limited to, lumber, masonry
products, exterior siding, roofing, plumbing fixtures, pipes, electrical
supplies, floor coverings, paints and wall coverings, windows and glass,
landscaping materials, hardware, tools and other accessories. Home
improvement stores shall always involve outdoor storage of materials;
any facilities that sell the above-described products that do not have
outdoor storage can be considered to offer the general retail sale of
goods.
HOME OCCUPATION — A detached or commercial activity that is
conducted as an accessory use in a detached dwelling unit, except
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in morbidity in either an individual or the total population;
or
(1)
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
exposed of or otherwise managed.
(2)
§ 220-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-12
1:417
that a limited business or commercial activity which meets all of the
following criteria is not considered a home occupation and is permitted
by right in any dwelling unit:
HOSPITAL — An institution, licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as a hospital, which renders inpatient and outpatient
medical care on a twenty-four-hour-per-day basis, and provides primary
health services and medical/surgical care to persons suffering from
illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental
conditions. A hospital use can also include attached and detached
accessory uses, provided that all accessory uses are contained upon the
hospital property.
HOTEL/MOTEL — An establishment which is open to transient guests
and in which lodging with or without meals is offered for compensation
and in which there are more than five separate sleeping units.
IMPROVEMENT — Any type of structure, excavation or pavement,
excluding a driveway or curb.
INTERIOR DRIVE — Any on-site vehicular movement lane(s) that is
associated with a use other than a single-family dwelling.
JOINT-USE DRIVEWAY — A common driveway that serves three or four
adjoining dwellings within a village cluster development.
JUNK — Any used and/or discarded materials, including, but not limited
to, wastepaper, rags, metal, building materials, house furnishings,
appliances, tires, machinery and vehicles or parts thereof, with or
without the dismantling, processing, salvage, recycling, sale or other
use or disposition of the same. For purposes of this definition, the
storage of one or more unlicensed, wrecked or disabled vehicles, or
major parts thereof, on the lot of one principal dwelling or business
shall constitute a junkyard. (A disabled vehicle is a vehicle intended to
(1) No exterior evidence of the business shall be permitted.
No retail sales or display of goods, exclusive of telephone
solicitation, is permitted.
(2)
No on-site storage of commercial vehicles shall be permitted,
except as may be provided under the definition of "garage, private."
(3)
Only residents of the site may be engaged in the business or
commercial activity.
(4)
The business or commercial activity may be conducted only within
the dwelling unit and may not occupy more than 15% of the
habitable floor area.
(5)
The use shall not require the delivery of materials and goods by
trucks larger than standard panel trucks.
(6)
The use shall not involve regular visitation by customers, clients,
salespersons or suppliers.
(7)
§ 220-12 MANHEIM CODE § 220-12
1:418
be self-propelled that shall not be operable under its own power for any
reason or a vehicle that does not have a valid current registration plate
and a certificate of inspection.)
JUNKYARD — An area of land, with or without buildings, used for the
storage, outside a completely enclosed building, of junk.
KENNEL — Any lot on which four or more adult animals (except
relating to a farm) are kept, boarded, raised, bred, treated or trained
for a fee, including, but not limited to, dog or cat kennels.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition); a lessee, if he
is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or
other person having a proprietary interest in land, shall be deemed to
be a landowner for the purposes of this chapter.
LANDSCAPE SCREEN — A completely planted visual barrier composed
of evergreen plants and trees arranged to form both a low-level and a
high-level screen. The high-level screen shall consist of evergreen trees
planted with specimens having an initial height of not less than five
feet and planted at intervals or not more than 10 feet on center. The
low-level screen shall consist of evergreen shrubs planted at an initial
height of not less than two feet and spaced at intervals of not more than
five feet on center. The low-level screen shall be placed in alternating
rows to produce an effective visual barrier.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street paved space suitable for the loading
or unloading of goods and having direct usable access to a street or
alley.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of individual
parcels of land, excluding any area within a street right-of-way, but
including the area of any easement.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the point of intersection of and abutting
two or more intersecting streets, and which has an interior angle
of less than 135° at the intersection of the two street lines. Corner
lots shall have two front yards and two side yards.
(1)
LOT, FLAG — A lot whose frontage does not satisfy the minimum
width requirements for the respective zone but that does have
sufficient lot width away from the lot's frontage.
(2)
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot, the sides of which
do not abut a street.
(3)
LOT, THROUGH — An interior lot having frontage on two parallel
or approximately parallel streets.
(4)
§ 220-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-12
1:419
LOT COVERAGE — A percentage of the lot area which may be covered
with an impervious surface (e.g., buildings, driveways, parking areas,
sidewalks).
LOT DEPTH — The horizontal distance measured between the street
right-of-way line and the closest rear property line. On corner and
reverse frontage lots, the depth shall be measured from the street rightof-
way line of the street of address to the directly opposite property
line.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance measured between side
property lines. On corner lots, lot width shall be measured between
the right-of-way line for the nonaddress street and the directly opposite
property line.
MANUFACTURING — A function involving either the processing or
production of materials, goods or products.
MATERIALS — Articles which are components of a future product.
MEDICAL OR DENTAL CLINIC — Any building or group of buildings
occupied by three or more medical and/or dental practitioners and
related services for the purpose of providing health services to people
on an outpatient basis.
MINI WAREHOUSE — A building and/or series of buildings divided into
separate storage units for personal property and/or property associated
with some business or other organization. These units shall be used
solely for dead storage and no processing, manufacturing, sales,
research and development, testing, service and repair or other
nonstorage activities shall be permitted.
MOBILE HOME — Any structure intended for or capable of permanent
human habitation, with or without wheels, and capable of being
transported or towed from one place to the next, in one or more
pieces, by whatsoever name or title it is colloquially or commercially
§ 220-12 MANHEIM CODE § 220-12
1:420
known, but excluding transport trucks or vans equipped with sleeping
space for a driver or drivers, and travel trailers. Mobile homes shall
be considered "dwellings" and be bound by the requirements there
imposed.
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of Manheim, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
NIGHTCLUB — Any building used for on-site consumption of alcoholic
or nonalcoholic beverages where live entertainment is offered. For
the purposes of this definition, "live entertainment" is also meant to
include the use of disc jockeys for the purposes of supplying musical
entertainment. Nightclubs may also provide for the on-site consumption
of food. Additionally, nightclubs may offer the retail sale of carry-out
beer and wine as an accessory use. This is meant to include an "under
21" club which features entertainment.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial
activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly
secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no
customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian,
pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises in excess
of those normally associated with residential use. The business or
commercial activity must satisfy the following requirements:[Added
7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area or dimension of which was
lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of
the property and surrounding residential uses.
(1)
The business shall employ no employees other than family
members residing in the dwelling.
(2)
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling
or inventory of a substantial nature.
(3)
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including,
but not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
(4)
The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television
reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
(5)
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
(6)
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling
and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
(7)
(8) The business may not involve any illegal activity.
§ 220-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-12
1:421
which fails to conform to the requirements of the zone in which it is
located by reason of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of
use provisions in this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter
enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment
of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to,
nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this
chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use
was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or
amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment
to its location by reason of annexation.
NONCONFORMITY, DIMENSIONAL — Any aspect of a land use that
does not comply with any size, height, bulk, setback, distance,
landscaping, coverage, screening, or any other design or performance
standard specified by this chapter, where such dimensional
nonconformity lawfully existed prior to the adoption of this chapter or
amendment thereto.
NURSING, REST OR RETIREMENT HOME — Facilities designed for
the housing, boarding and dining associated with some level of nursing
care.
OFFICE — A place where the primary use is conducting the affairs of a
business, profession, service or government, including administration,
recordkeeping, clerical work and similar business functions. An office
shall not involve manufacturing, fabrication, production, processing,
assembling, cleaning, testing, repair or storage of materials, goods or
products, or the sale or delivery of any materials, goods or products
which are physically located on the premises. Office supplies used in
the office may be stored as an incidental use.
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The keeping in an unenclosed area of goods,
merchandise or materials for a period of longer than 24 hours.[Added
7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622]
PA DEP — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.55
PARKING COMPOUND — A primary business where passenger vehicles
may be stored for short-term, daily or overnight off-street parking, and
connected to a street by an access drive.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
This definition replaced the original definition of PA DER; the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources (PA DER) was split into two and reorganized by Act 1995-18 and
is now the Department of Environmental Protection, 71 P.S. § 510-1 et seq., or the
Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, 71 P.S. § 1340.301 et seq. For
purposes of this chapter, most former references to the PA DER have been revised to
reference the PA DEP.
§ 220-12 MANHEIM CODE § 220-12
1:422
PARKING LOT — An accessory use in which required, and possibly
additional, parking spaces are provided, subject to the requirements
listed in § 220-33 of this chapter.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for the parking of one
motor vehicle and having usable access to a street or alley.
PARKS, PRIVATE — A recreational facility owned or operated by a
nonpublic agency and/or conducted as a private gainful business.
PARKS, PUBLIC AND/OR NONPROFIT — Those facilities designed and
used for recreation purposes by the general public that are owned and
operated by a government or governmental agency/authority or are
operated on a nonprofit basis. This definition is meant to include the
widest range of recreational activities, excluding adult-related uses and
amusement arcades.
PennDOT — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, incorporator's
association or any other similar entity.
PLANNED CENTER — A group of uses planned and designed as an
integrated unit with controlled ingress and egress and shared off-street
parking provided on the property as an integral part of the unit. Such
centers also may include "planned center signs" as regulated herein.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Manheim
Borough. (See Chapter 49.)
PREMISES — The property upon which the activity is conducted as
determined by physical facts rather than property lines. It is the land
occupied by the buildings or other physical uses that are necessary or
customarily incidental to the activity, including such open spaces as are
arranged and designed to be used in connection with such buildings or
uses. The following are not considered to be a part of the premises on
which the activity is conducted, and any signs located on such land are
to be considered off-premises advertising:
Any land which is not used as an integral part of the principal
activity, including land which is separated from the activity by a
roadway, highway or other obstruction and not used by the activity;
and extensive undeveloped highway frontage contiguous to the
land actually used by a commercial facility, even though it might be
under the same ownership.
(1)
Any land which is used for or devoted to a separate purpose
unrelated to the advertised activity.
(2)
Any land which is in closer proximity to the highway than to the
principal activity, and developed or used only in the area of the sign
site or between the sign site and the principal activity, and whose
purpose is for advertising purposes only. In no event shall a sign
site be considered part of the premises on which the advertised
activity is conducted if the site is located on a narrow strip of land
(3)
§ 220-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-12
1:423
PRIVATE CLUB — An organization catering exclusively to members
and their guests, or premises or buildings for social, recreational, and
administrative purposes which are not conducted for profit, provided
there are not conducted therein any vending stands, merchandising or
commercial activities, except as required for the membership of such
club. Clubs shall include, but not be limited to, service and political
organizations, labor unions, as well as social and athletic clubs.
PROCESSING — A function involved in the manufacture of materials,
goods or products in which they are not physically changed except for
packaging or sizing.
PRODUCT — Any article whose appearance or composition has been
changed or altered but not in a completed form for ultimate disposition.
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a governmental agency
(federal, state or local, including a corporation created by law for
the performance of certain specialized governmental functions and the
Board of Education).
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the Borough Council or Planning Commission intended to inform and
obtain public comment prior to taking action on zoning-related matters.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the act of
July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the Sunshine Act.56
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough.
Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the
particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The
first publication shall not be more than three days, and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing. Public notice for rezoning, special exception, conditional use
and/or variance requests shall also include the posting of a sign(s) at a
conspicuous location along the perimeter of the subject property; this
sign(s) shall be posted at least one-week prior to the hearing and will
exhibit the nature, date, time and location of the hearing.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — A condition or activity which takes place on
a property or within a structure which creates a health or an
environmental impact on the general public or on an adjacent property
or neighborhood (e.g., odors, noise, dust, smoke, glare, wastewater,
solid waste disposal, etc.).
which is nonbuildable land, or is a common or private roadway, or is
held by easement or other lesser interest than the premises where
the activity is located.
56.Editor's Note: The Sunshine Act adopted July 3, 1986, P.L. 388, No. 84 (65 P.S. § 271 et
seq.), was repealed 10-15-1998 by P.L. 729, No. 93; see now the Sunshine Act, 65 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 701 et seq.
§ 220-12 MANHEIM CODE § 220-12
1:424
PUBLIC SEWER — A municipal sanitary sewer approved and permitted
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. Such
systems are capable of serving multiple users.
PUBLIC USES — Public and semipublic facilities that serve the
Manheim community, including parks, libraries, fire, police and
ambulance stations and municipal properties, buildings and
garages.[Amended 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622]
PUBLIC UTILITIES — A use or extension thereof which is owned,
operated and/or maintained by a public utility corporation, municipality,
municipal authority or which is privately owned and operated under the
approval of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission for the purpose
of providing essential services such as public sewage disposal and/
or treatment, public water supply, storage and/or treatment, natural
gas supply, transmission of electric energy, transmission of visual or
audio communication services via a system of underground conduits
or overhead poles, wires, cables, conduits, transformers, etc., for the
benefit of the public health, safety or general welfare.
PUBLIC WATER — A municipal water supply system permitted by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. Such systems
are capable of serving multiple users.
RECYCLING COLLECTION FACILITIES — An accessory use whereby
recycled materials are dropped off by the public for collection by a
waste hauler and/or processor.
RECYCLING FACILITIES — A principal use whereby collected
recyclables are separated, processed, cut, shredded, cleaned, ground,
crushed, bundled, bailed and/or packaged.
RENTAL — A procedure by which services or personal property are
temporarily transferred to another person for a specific time period for
compensation.
REPAIR — A function involved in correcting deficiencies of products
that affect its performance and/or appearance.
RESTAURANT — An establishment that serves prepared food primarily
on nondisposable tableware but can provide for incidental carry-out
service so long as the area used for carry-out service does not exceed
5% of the total patron seating area nor 80 square feet (whichever is
less). Caterers shall be included in this definition.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH OR FAST-FOOD — An establishment
that serves prepared food generally packaged in disposable or
recyclable wrappers, plates and containers. Such food can be consumed
either on or off the site.
RETAIL — Those businesses whose primary activities involve the
display and sales of goods and products to the general public. This term
shall not include adult-related uses as defined herein.
§ 220-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-12
1:425
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A corridor of publicly owned land for purposes of
maintaining primary vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting
properties, including, but not limited to, roads, streets, highways and
sidewalks. Abutting property owners are prohibited from encroaching
across the right-of-way line. (See also "street line.")
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — Device incorporating a reflective
surface which is solid, open mesh or bar-configured and is in the
shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn or cornucopia. Such device shall
be used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves
between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This definition is
meant to include, but not be limited to, what are commonly referred to
as satellite earth stations, TVROs and satellite microwave antennas.
SCHOOL — A principal use in which supervised education or
instruction is offered according to the following categories:
SCHOOL DISTRICT — Manheim Central School District.
COMMERCIAL SCHOOLS — A school that may offer a wide range
of educational or instructional activities (excluding vocationalmechanical
trade schools as defined below) that may, or may not,
be operated as a gainful business by some person or organization
other than the School District.
(1)
PRIVATE SCHOOL — A school that offers preschool, kindergarten,
elementary, secondary, postsecondary and/or post-graduate
education that may, or may not, be operated as a gainful business.
(2)
PUBLIC SCHOOL — A school licensed by the Department of
Education for the purpose of providing preschool, kindergarten,
elementary, secondary and adult education, and operated by the
School District.
(3)
VOCATIONAL-MECHANICAL TRADE SCHOOL — A school that
may, or may not, be operated as a gainful business that principally
offers training in any of the following occupations:
(a) Truck driving.
(b) Engineer repairs.
(c) Building construction and general contracting.
(d) Woodworking.
(e) Masonry.
(f) Plumbing.
(g) Electrical contracting.
Other similar trades, as determined by the Zoning Hearing
Board pursuant to §§ 220-8 and 220-111E of this chapter.
(h)
(4)
§ 220-12 MANHEIM CODE § 220-12
1:426
SETBACK — The required horizontal distance between a setback line
and a property or street line.
SETBACK LINE — A line within a property and parallel to a property
or street line which delineates the required minimum distance between
some particular use of property and that property or street line. Such
minimum distance shall be measured horizontally between the street
and/or property line and a vertical plane that coincides with the closest
face or projection of the structure at or above grade (except for
overhanging eaves, gutters and cornices) to the street and/or property
line.
SHADE TREE — A deciduous tree that shall have a clear trunk at least
five feet above the finished grade.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of stores planned and designed for the
site on which it is built, functioning as a unit, with shared off-street
parking provided on the property as an integral part of the unit.
SIGN — A device for visual communication that is used to bring the
subject to the attention of the public, including lettering or symbols that
are an integral part of another structure or flags or other insignia of
any government, fraternal or similar organization.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials,
including, but not limited to, solid and liquid waste materials resulting
from municipal, industrial, commercial, agricultural and residential
activities. Such wastes shall not include biological excrement nor
hazardous waste materials as defined in the Code of Federal
Regulations, Title 40, Chapter 1, Part 261, dated July 1, 1984, or as
amended.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use that is generally compatible with a
particular zone once specified criteria have been met. Special exception
uses are listed by zone and approved by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with § 220-111C of this chapter.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Less than completely and
opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, female
breasts below a point immediately above the top of areolae and/or
human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
SETBACK, FRONT — The distance between the street line and the
front setback line projected the full width of the lot. Commonly
called "required front yard."
(1)
SETBACK, REAR — The distance between the rear lot line and
the rear setback line projected the full width of the lot. Commonly
called "required rear yard."
(2)
SETBACK, SIDE — The distance between the side lot line and the
side setback line projected from the front yard to the rear yard.
Commonly called "required side yard."
(3)
§ 220-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-12
1:427
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — For the purposes of this chapter,
this term shall include any of the following:
STORAGE — A function involving the deposition of materials, goods or
products for safekeeping.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
lane, viaduct and any other dedicated and adopted public right-of-way
used or intended to be used by vehicular traffic and/or pedestrians.
STREET CENTER LINE — The horizontal line paralleling the street that
bisects the street right-of-way into two equal widths. In those instances
where the street right-of-way cannot be determined, the street center
line shall correspond to the center of the cartway.
STREET LINE (RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE) — A line defining the edge of a
street right-of-way and separating the street from abutting property or
lots. The street line shall be the same as the legal right-of-way line
currently in existence.
STRUCTURE —
Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal
intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical
stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the
context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions
in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following
depicted sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery,
coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia,
pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty.
(1)
Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation,
arousal or tumescence.
(2)
Use of human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation,
coitus, ejaculation.
(3)
Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breast.
(4)
Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the
infliction of pain.
(5)
Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other contact with an animal
by a human being.
(6)
Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal
irrigation.
(7)
Any man-made object, including buildings, having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to
the land.
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY — A structure associated with an
accessory use which is separated from and in addition to the
(a)
(1)
§ 220-12 MANHEIM CODE § 220-12
1:428
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the fair market value of the structure either before the improvement
or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being
restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this
definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of
the structure commences, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure.
SWIMMING POOL — Any pool not located within a completely enclosed
building and containing, or normally capable of containing, water to a
depth at any point greater than one foot. Farm ponds and/or lakes are
not included, provided that swimming was not the primary purpose for
their construction.
TATTOO — Any method of placing ink or other pigment into or under
the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instrument used
to puncture or burn the skin resulting in permanent coloration of the
skin or mucosa.[Added 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622]
TATTOO PARLOR — Any location where tattooing is engaged in or
where the business of tattooing is conducted.[Added 7-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 622]
TAVERN — An establishment which serves primarily alcoholic
beverages for mostly on-premises consumption and which is licensed
by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board. Taverns may also serve food,
but no live entertainment shall be permitted.
TESTING — A function involving the examination and assessment of
qualities, performances and/or capabilities of a product, good or
material.
TRANSITIONAL COTTAGES — A separate, temporary, detached
accessory dwelling unit with its own cooking, living, bathing and
sleeping facilities, to be occupied by a single family under the
supervision of recognized nonprofit housing organization (i.e.,
community or public housing group or church). For this use, the
definition of a family shall be limited as follows: an individual or
individuals related by blood, marriage or adoption who maintain one
common household.
principal structure or use located on the property (e.g.,
swimming pools, patios, antennas, tennis courts, garages,
utility sheds, etc.).
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL — A structure associated with a
primary use.
(b)
Structures shall not include such things as fences, sandboxes,
decorative fountains, swing sets, birdhouses, bird feeders,
mailboxes and any other similar nonpermanent improvements.
(2)
§ 220-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-12
1:429
TRAVEL TRAILER — A portable structure, primarily designed to
provide temporary living quarters for recreation, camping or travel
purposes. In addition to the above, any of the following attributes are
characteristic of a "travel trailer":
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a structure is designed,
arranged, intended, occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE — A modification of any provision of this chapter granted by
the Zoning Hearing Board subject to findings specified by the Act.
VETERINARIAN'S OFFICE — A building used primarily for the
treatment, by a veterinarian, of small domestic animals such as dogs,
cats, rabbits, and birds or fowl. No outdoor boarding of animals is
permitted.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook,
run, creek, channel, swale, pond, lake or other body of surface water
carrying or holding surface water, whether natural or artificial.
WETLAND — Area with the characteristics of wetland, as defined by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the U.S.
Natural Resources Conservation Service. Wetland areas are not limited
to the locations delineated on wetland maps prepared by the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service.
WHOLESALE — Any distribution procedure involving persons who, in
the normal course of business, do not engage in sales to the general
public.
The unit is of such size or weight as not to require a special
highway movement permit from the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation when self-propelled or when hauled by a standard
motor vehicle on a highway.
(1)
(2) The unit is mounted or designed to be mounted on wheels.
The unit is designed to be loaded onto, or affixed to, the bed and/or
chassis of a truck.
(3)
The unit contains, or was designed to contain, temporary storage
of water and sewage.
(4)
The unit contains some identification by the manufacturer as a
travel trailer.
(5)
USE, ACCESSORY — A use customarily incidental and subordinate
to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with
this principal use or building.
(1)
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main or primary use of property or
structures.
(2)
§ 220-12 MANHEIM CODE § 220-12
1:430
WINDOW — An opening to the outside, other than a door, which
provides all or part of the required natural light, natural ventilation, or
both, to an interior space. The glazed portion of a door in an exterior
wall may be construed to be a window in regard to provision of natural
light.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS) — Any device which
converts wind energy to mechanical or electrical energy.
WECS UNIT — Includes blades, hubs to which blades are attached,
and any device, such as a tower, used to support the hub and/or rotary
blades, etc.
YARD — An area between the permitted structures and the property
lines.
ZONING — The designation of specified districts within the Borough,
reserving them for certain uses, together with limitations on lot size,
heights of structures and other stipulated requirements.
ZONING OFFICER — The duly constituted municipal official designated
to administer and enforce this chapter in accordance with its literal
terms. In the Borough, it is the Codes Compliance Officer.57
ZONING PERMIT — Written authorization from the Codes Compliance
Officer to alter, improve, construct and/or make use of an area of land
as regulated by this chapter.
YARD, FRONT — The area contained between the street right-ofway
line and the principal structure.
(1)
YARD, REAR — The area contained between the rear property line
and the principal structure. On corner and reverse frontage lots,
the rear yard shall be considered that area between the principal
structure and the property line directly opposite the street of
address. For flag lots, the rear yard shall be all areas between the
building and every lot line.
(2)
YARD, SIDE — The area(s) between a principal structure and any
side lot line(s). On corner lots, the side yard shall be considered
those areas between the principal structure and the property lines
directly opposite the streets.
(3)
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-12
1:431

ARTICLE II
Zone Regulations
§ 220-13. Residential Zone (R-1). [Amended 1-30-1996 by Ord. No.
536; 1-30-1996 by Ord. No. 540; 3-28-2000 by Ord. No. 567]
A. Purpose. This zone accommodates the newer neighborhoods that have
developed along the periphery of the Borough. These neighborhoods
are generally characterized by single-family detached dwellings at just
under four units per acre; this zone continues that trend. In addition,
several limited nonresidential activities have been allowed because of
their complementary character; however, they are subject to strict
controls to protect the residential integrity of this zone.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Agricultural, horticultural and forestry uses, subject to the
requirements of § 220-42 of this chapter.
(2) Single-family detached dwellings.
(3) Public and nonprofit parks and playgrounds.
(4) Public uses and public utilities structures.
(5) Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses,
provided that no detached accessory building shall contain more
than 680 square feet unless a special exception is granted as
provided by Subsection C(1); and further provided that no more
than one accessory building, by use type (i.e., shed, garage, pool,
etc.), per principal building shall be permitted; however,
agricultural uses are exempt from the restrictions imposed by this
provision.
(6) No-impact home-based business. [Added 7-12-2011 by Ord. No.
622]
C. Special exception uses. (Subject to the requirements of § 220-111C of
this chapter.)
(1) Accessory buildings exceeding 680 square feet in size. (See
§ 220-46.)
(2) Family day-care facilities. (See § 220-63.)
(3) Home occupations. (See § 220-68.)
(4) Churches and related use. (See § 220-57.)
(5) Public and private school. (See § 220-76.)
(6) Commercial day-care facilities. (See § 220-58.)
§ 220-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-13
1:433
§ 220-14. Residential Zone (R-2). [Amended 1-3-1996 by Ord. No.
536; 1-30-1996 by Ord. No. 540]
D. Conditional uses. (Subject to the requirements of § 220-122 of this
chapter.)
(1) Village cluster developments. (See § 220-80.)
(2) Transitional cottages. (See § 220-82.)
(3) Wireless and cellular communications antennas and towers and
cellular site. (See § 220-83A.)
E. Minimum lot area requirements. Unless otherwise noted, all uses
within this zone shall contain a minimum of 12,000 square feet.
F. Minimum lot width: 80 feet at the building setback line; 70 feet at the
lot frontage.
G. Minimum setback requirements.
(1) Principal structures.
(a) Front yard setback. See § 220-26 of this chapter.
(b) Side yard setbacks: 15 feet on each side.
(c) Rear yard setback: 25 feet.
(2) Accessory structures.
(a) Front yard setback. No accessory structures shall be permitted
in the front yard.
(b) Side yard setbacks: five feet on each side.
(c) Rear yard setback: five feet.
H. Maximum permitted height.
(1) Principal structures: 35 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: 15 feet for structures with a flat roof and 20
feet for structures with a peaked roof. [Amended 7-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 622]
I. Maximum lot coverage: 30%.
J. All uses shall comply with those applicable general provisions listed in
Article III of this chapter.
A. Purpose. This zone acknowledges existing developed neighborhoods
within the Borough that are characterized by detached dwellings upon
deep and narrow lots. This zone will seek to protect these areas from
§ 220-13 MANHEIM CODE § 220-14
1:434
the influence of conversion apartments and other nonresidential land
uses.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Public and nonprofit parks and playgrounds.
(3) Public uses and public utilities structures.
(4) Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses,
provided that no detached accessory building shall contain more
than 680 square feet, unless a special exception is granted as
provided by Subsection C(1); further provided that no more than
one accessory building, by use type (i.e., shed, garage, pool, etc.),
per principal building shall be permitted.
(5) No-impact home-based business. [Added 7-12-2011 by Ord. No.
622]
C. Special exceptions.
(1) Accessory buildings exceeding 680 square feet in size. (See
§ 220-46.)
(2) Family day-care facilities. (See § 220-63.)
(3) Home occupations. (See § 220-68.)
D. Minimum lot area requirements. Unless otherwise noted, all uses
within this zone shall contain a minimum of 9,000 square feet.
E. Minimum lot width: 60 feet at the building setback line; 50 feet at the
lot frontage.
F. Minimum setback requirements.
(1) Principal structures.
(a) Front yard setback. See § 220-26 of this chapter.
(b) Side yard setbacks: 10 feet on each side.
(c) Rear yard setback: 25 feet.
(2) Accessory structures.
(a) Front yard setback. No accessory structures shall be permitted
in the front yard.
(b) Side yard setbacks: five feet on each side.
(c) Rear yard setback: five feet.
G. Maximum permitted height.
§ 220-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-14
1:435
§ 220-15. Residential Zone (R-3). [Amended 1-30-1966 by Ord. No.
540]
(1) Principal structures: 35 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: 15 feet for structures with a flat roof and 20
feet for structures with a peaked roof. [Amended 7-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 622]
H. Maximum lot coverage: 40%.
I. All uses shall comply with those applicable general provisions listed in
Article III of this chapter.
J. Conditional uses. (Subject to the requirements of § 220-122 of this
chapter.)
(1) Transitional cottages. (See § 220-82.)
A. Purpose and intent. This zone acknowledges the diverse character of
the Borough's older neighborhoods. These areas are characterized by a
variety of lot sizes and shapes, as well as residential unit types. This
zone establishes lot design requirements based upon the type of unit
constructed. In addition, one conversion apartment will be permitted by
special exception in existing single-family detached dwellings. Finally,
several nonresidential uses have been permitted to serve nearby
residents but will be subject to review under the special exception
process.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Duplexes.
(3) Public and nonprofit parks and playgrounds.
(4) Public uses and utilities.
(5) Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses,
provided that no detached accessory building shall contain more
than 680 square feet, unless a special exception is granted as
provided by Subsection C(1); further provided that no more than
one accessory building, by use type (i.e., shed, garage, pool, etc.),
per principal building shall be permitted.
(6) No-impact home-based business. [Added 7-12-2011 by Ord. No.
622]
C. Special exception uses.
(1) Accessory buildings exceeding 680 square feet in size. (See
§ 220-46.)
§ 220-14 MANHEIM CODE § 220-15
1:436
(2) Family day-care facilities. (See § 220-63.)
(3) Home occupations. (See § 220-68.)
(4) Churches and related uses. (See § 220-57.)
(5) Bed-and-breakfasts. (See § 220-54.)
(6) Public and private schools. (See § 220-76.)
(7) Conversion apartments. (See § 220-60.)
D. Design standards. See table below: [Amended 7-12-2011 by Ord. No.
622]
Minimum Yard Setbacks
Building
Type
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width1
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
(percent) Front
Side, Each
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Singlefamily
7,250 50 per lot2 45% See
§ 220-26
10 25 25
Duplexes 4,500 40 per lot2 50% See
§ 220-26
10 (one
side)
25 35
Other
uses
7,250 50 50% See
§ 220-26
10 25 35
Accessory
uses
N/A N/A N/A N/A Not
permitted
5 15 for
structures
with a flat
roof and 20
for
structures
with a
peaked
roof
NOTES:
1 Minimum lot width shall be measured at the building setback line; in no case shall a lot's
width, as measured along its frontage, be less than 70% of that required at the building
setback line. Lot widths required at the frontage shall be measured along a line paralleling the
street line even if it is curvilinear.
2 Minimum lot widths can be reduced for single-family dwellings and duplexes, to 40 feet and
30 feet, respectively, if vehicular access is limited to the rear yard.
E. All uses permitted within this zone shall also comply with the applicable
general provisions contained in Article III of this chapter.
F. Conditional uses. (Subject to the requirements of § 220-122 of this
chapter.)
§ 220-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-15
1:437
§ 220-16. Residential Zone (R-4). [Amended 1-30-1966 by Ord. No.
536]
(1) Transitional cottages. (See § 220-82.)
A. Purpose. This zone accommodates the higher-density residences within
the Borough. A wide range of dwelling unit types are permitted with
densities exceeding those permitted elsewhere within the Borough.
This zone also encourages the use of innovative housing types and site
planning methods through its flexible design standards.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Duplexes.
(3) Townhouses.
(4) Multiple-family dwellings.
(5) Public and nonprofit parks and playgrounds.
(6) Public uses and public utilities structures.
(7) Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above-permitted uses,
provided that no detached accessory building shall contain more
than 680 square feet, unless a special exception is granted as
provided by Subsection C(1); further provided that no more than
one accessory building, by use type (i.e., shed, garage, pool, etc.),
per principal building shall be permitted.
(8) No-impact home-based business. [Added 7-12-2011 by Ord. No.
622]
C. Special exception uses.
(1) Accessory buildings exceeding 680 square feet in size. (See
§ 220-46.)
(2) Family day-care facilities. (See § 220-63.)
(3) Home occupations. (See § 220-68.)
(4) Mobile home parks. (See § 220-71.)
D. Design standards. See table below:
§ 220-15 MANHEIM CODE § 220-16
1:438
Minimum Yard Setbacks
Use
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width1
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
(percent) Front
One Side
(feet)
(Both
Sides)
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Singlefamily
5,000 45 55% See
§ 220-26
64 (12) 25
Duplexes 3,000 30 60% See
§ 220-26
10 N/A 25
Townhouses2 1,800 18 70% See
§ 220-26
15 (End
Units)
25
Multiplefamily3
43,560 150 60% See
§ 220-26
30 (60) 50
Other
uses
10,000 80 30% See
§ 220-26
20 (40) 25
Accessory
uses
N/A N/A N/A Not
permitted
5 (10) 5
NOTES:
1 Minimum lot width shall be measured at the building setback line; in no case shall a lot's
width, as measured along its frontage, be less than 70% of that required at the building
setback line. Lot widths required at the frontage shall be measured along a line paralleling the
street line even if it is curvilinear.
2 No townhouse grouping shall contain more than eight units. For each townhouse grouping
containing more than four units, no more than 60% of such units shall have the same front yard
setback; the minimum variation of setback shall be two feet. All townhouse buildings shall be
set back a minimum of 15 feet from any parking facilities contained on commonly held lands.
In those instances where several townhouse groupings are contained upon the same lot, the
standards listed in the following footnote 3 shall apply.
3 In those instances where several multiple-family dwelling buildings and/or townhouse
groupings are located on the same lot, the following separation distances will be provided
between each building:
A. Front to front, rear to rear, or front to rear, parallel buildings shall have at least 50 feet
between faces of the building.
B. A minimum yard space of 30 feet is required between end walls of buildings.
C. A minimum yard space of 30 feet is required between end walls and front or rear faces of
buildings.
D. No more than 16 units per multiple-family building shall be permitted. No more than
eight units per townhouse grouping shall be permitted.
E. No more than 10 multiple-family dwelling units per acre shall be permitted.
4 Within the R-4 Zone, single-family detached dwellings may employ a zero-lot-line design when
the following conditions have been satisfied:
§ 220-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-16
1:439
§ 220-17. Conversion Office and Apartment Zone (COA). [Amended
1-30-1996 by Ord. No. 536; 1-30-1996 by Ord. No. 540]
A. Minimum lot width shall be 45 feet and 35 feet at the building setback and the lot
frontage, respectively.
B. One side wall of the structure may be located no less than one inch from one of the side
lot lines when adjoining another zero-lot-line dwelling lot. The opposite side yard shall
be at least 10 feet wide.
C. A perpetual six-foot wall-maintenance easement shall be provided on the lot adjacent to
the zero-lot-line, which, with the exception of freestanding walls and/or fences, shall be
kept clear of structures. This easement shall be shown on the plat and incorporated into
each deed transferring title to the property. The wall shall be maintained in its original
color and treatment, unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the two affected lot
owners.
D. Roof overhangs may penetrate the easement on the adjacent lot a maximum of 24
inches, but the roof shall be so designed that water runoff from the dwelling place on
the lot line is limited to the easement area.
E. The wall of a dwelling located along the zero-lot-line shall have no openings (e.g.,
windows, doors, air-conditioning units, vents, etc.), unless such openings are located at
least eight feet above grade and have translucent panels.
F. No zero-lot-line shall abut a conventional single-family detached dwelling.
E. Maximum permitted height.
(1) Principal buildings and structures: 35 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: 15 feet for structures with a flat roof and 20
feet for structures with a peaked roof. [Amended 7-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 622]
F. All uses permitted within this zone shall also comply with the applicable
general provisions contained in Article III of this chapter.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to permit the conversion and/or
adaptive reuse of residences that are largely impacted by adjoining
Main Street. Because of the traffic impacts associated with Main Street,
these areas have not been demanded for single-family detached
dwellings; however, the presence of such structures offers an
opportunity for conversions. Based upon local goals to preserve the
Borough's character, incentives are provided to encourage the
conversion of existing buildings instead of demolition and their
replacement with newer ones.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Duplexes.
(3) Townhouses.
§ 220-16 MANHEIM CODE § 220-17
1:440
(4) Public and nonprofit parks and playgrounds.
(5) Public uses and/or public utilities structures.
(6) Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses,
provided that no detached accessory building shall contain more
than 680 square feet, unless a special exception is granted as
provided by Subsection C(1); further provided that no more than
one accessory building, by use type (i.e., shed, garage, pool, etc.),
per principal building shall be permitted.
(7) No-impact home-based business. [Added 7-12-2011 by Ord. No.
622]
C. Special exception uses. Any of the following uses that are principal
uses, as defined herein, shall only be permitted within a building that
existed on the effective date of this chapter. (Subject to the
requirements of § 220-111C of this chapter.)
(1) Accessory detached structures exceeding 680 square feet of floor
area. (See § 220-46.)
(2) Barber and beauty salons. (See § 220-53.)
(3) Bed-and-breakfasts. (See § 220-54.)
(4) Churches and related uses. (See § 220-57.)
(5) Conversion apartments. (See § 220-60.)
(6) Family day-care facilities. (See § 220-63.)
(7) Funeral homes. (See § 220-64.)
(8) Home occupations. (See § 220-68.)
(9) Office conversions. (See § 220-73.)
(10) Private clubhouses. (See § 220-75.)
(11) Public and private schools. (See § 220-76.)
(12) Boardinghouses. (See § 220-55.)
D. Number of uses permitted. Any number of the uses allowed in this zone
are permitted within each existing building, provided the building size
and floor area remain the same as it was on the effective date of this
chapter. For new buildings, only one principal use is permitted. For
existing buildings that are enlarged, the number of uses permitted per
building shall be the same number (at least one) that occupied the
building on the effective date of this chapter.
E. Design standards. See table below:
§ 220-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-17
1:441
§ 220-18. Central Business District (CBD).
Minimum Yard Setbacks
Use
Minimum
Lot
Area
(square
feet)
Maximum
Density
(units/
net
acres)
Minimum
Lot
Width1
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
(percent) Front
One
Side
(feet)
Both
Sides
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Singlefamily
7,250 5.80 50 45% See
§ 220-26
10 20 25
Duplexes 4,500 7.26 40 50% See
§ 220-26
10 N/A 25
Townhouses22,000 10.00 20 60% See
§ 220-26
15 End units 25
Other
uses
7,250 N/A 50 50% See
§ 220-26
20 40 25
Accessory
uses
N/A N/A N/A N/A Not
permitted
5 10 5
NOTES:
1 Minimum lot width shall be measured at the building setback line; in no case shall a lot's
width, as measured along its frontage, be less than 70% of that required at the building
setback line. Lot widths required at the frontage shall be measured along a line paralleling the
street line even if it is curvilinear.
2 No townhouse grouping shall contain more than eight units.
F. Maximum permitted height.
(1) Principal buildings and structures: 35 feet.
(2) Accessory buildings and structures: 15 feet for structures with a
flat roof and 20 feet for structures with a peaked roof. [Amended
7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622]
G. All uses permitted within this zone shall also comply with the applicable
general provisions contained in Article III of this chapter.
H. Conditional uses. (Subject to the requirements of § 220-122 of this
chapter.)
(1) Transitional cottages. (See § 220-82.)
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to provide basic convenience
commercial goods and services to local residents who live in the
Borough. Uses have been limited to those that residents are likely to
need on a daily or regular basis. Overall, retail size has been restricted
to prevent the establishment of intensive commercial uses that exceed
the local pedestrian orientation of this zone and to encourage the
§ 220-17 MANHEIM CODE § 220-18
1:442
adaptive reuse of converted historic dwellings rather than the
construction of new commercial buildings. Requirements have been
imposed to preserve the "small-town" character of this area and reflect
the tightly knit land use pattern that exists within the Borough. Limited
exterior activities have been allowed to contribute to the vitality and
diversity of this area.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings and duplexes, subject to the
requirements listed in § 220-17 of this chapter.
(2) Public and nonprofit parks and playgrounds.
(3) Public uses and public utilities structures.
(4) Banks and similar financial institutions, excluding drive-through
lanes.
(5) Medical or dental clinics.
(6) Offices.
(7) Private and commercial schools.
(8) Restaurants (but not including outdoor cafes, drive-through or fastfood
restaurants, taverns nor nightclubs).
(9) Retail sale, service and/or rental of goods (except adult-related
uses, as defined herein), provided the total sales and/or display
area is less than 2,000 square feet per use, including:
(a) Card, stationery, magazine, book or newspaper shops.
(b) Prerecorded music, video or spoken word products.
(c) Beverage, wine and liquor stores.
(d) Sporting goods stores.
(e) Musical instrument shops, studios and schools.
(f) Tobacco and smoking accessories supplies.
(g) Domestic hardware and five-cent and ten-cent items.
(h) Photographic, video, audio and electronic components and
accessories.
(i) Clothing and shoe boutiques.
(j) Flower, balloon and gift shops.
(k) Pet stores and supplies.
(l) Jewelry, watches, clocks.
§ 220-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-18
1:443
(m) Art and drafting supplies and studios.
(n) Computers, software and training facilities and other office
supplies.
(o) Craft supplies, baskets, fabrics and other notions.
(p) Toy and hobby stores.
(q) Telephone, vacuum cleaner and other small domestic appliance
centers.
(r) Prosthetic devices.
(s) Drugstore, perfumes, soaps, lotions, powders and similar
items.
(t) Draperies, wallpaper and rug showrooms.
(u) Bed and bath supplies.
(v) Kitchenware, cookware and dinnerware.
(w) Eyeglass and hearing aid showrooms and offices.
(x) Specialty food stores and grocerettes, excluding automobile
filling facilities.
(y) Religious articles and artifacts.
(z) Thrift and pawn shops.
(10) Retail services, including barber/beauty salons; tailors and shoe
repair; tanning salons and fitness, dance or karate centers.
(11) Art or antique shops, museums and libraries.
(12) Delicatessens, bakers and caterers.
(13) Nursing, rest or retirement homes.
(14) No-impact home-based business. [Added 7-12-2011 by Ord. No.
622]58
C. Special exception uses. (See § 220-111C.)
(1) Bed-and-breakfasts. (See § 220-54.)
(2) Dry cleaners and laundry stations (drop off and pick up only). (See
§ 220-62.)
(3) Funeral homes. (See § 220-64.)
(4) Taverns. (See § 220-79.)
58.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original Subsection N, automobile parking
compounds.
§ 220-18 MANHEIM CODE § 220-18
1:444
(5) Private clubhouses. (See § 220-75.)
(6) Home occupations. (See § 220-68.)59
(7) Conversion apartments. (See § 220-60.)
(8) Outdoor cafes. (See § 220-74.)
(9) Banks and similar financial institutions with drive-through lanes.
(See § 220-52.)
D. Conditional uses. (Subject to the procedures presented in § 220-122 of
this chapter.) [Added 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622]
(1) Retail sales, services and/or rental of goods in excess of 2,000
square feet. (See § 220-96.)
E. Minimum lot area. Unless otherwise specified, there shall be no
minimum lot area requirements in this zone.
F. Number of uses permitted. Any number of the uses allowed in this zone
is permitted within a building. [Amended 7-12-2011 by Ord. No.
622]
G. Minimum lot width: 45 feet.
H. Minimum setback requirements. No required front, side or rear yard
setbacks apply, except where the use adjoins a residential zone. In such
instances, all buildings and structures shall be set back at least 10 feet
from the residentially zoned parcel. Similarly, off-street parking and/or
loading facilities shall be set back at least five feet from any adjoining
residentially zoned property and shall include screening, as defined
herein.
I. Maximum permitted height: 35 feet.
J. Maximum lot coverage: 90%.
K. Outdoor storage and display. No outdoor storage is permitted; however,
outdoor displays for retail merchandise shall be permitted per use in
the front or side yards or sidewalk area. Outdoor displays may include
tables, clothing or other display racks, bins, and sandwich signboards
that meet the regulations of § 220-36 of this chapter. Outdoor displays
shall be located such that there is clear sidewalk area of at least four
feet in width for pedestrians to pass by. Outdoor displays shall not
exceed an overall length of 15 feet nor an overall height of six feet.
Outdoor displays shall only be exhibited during the use's business
hours. [Amended 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622]
L. Off-street parking and loading.
59.Editor's Note: Original Subsection G, Boardinghouses, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622.
§ 220-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-18
1:445
(1) No off-street parking spaces are required for nonresidential uses
within the CBD Zone. Where off-street parking is provided,
however, it shall meet all applicable provisions of this subsection.
Required off-street loading spaces shall be determined by
§ 220-34K of this chapter. Such off-street parking and loading areas
shall be located behind any commercial building in the rear yard.
Off-street parking and loading space areas may be provided on an
integrated basis so that adjoining uses are physically
interconnected and share available parking and loading spaces.
Vehicular access to such areas shall be via common access drives.
Cross-access easements to ensure such integration shall be
required in language acceptable to the Borough's Solicitor. For the
purposes of this section, the schedule of required parking spaces
listed in § 220-33S and the reduction of required parking spaces
provided for by § 220-33Q shall not apply. However, all other design
standards shall be enforceable. [Amended 11-12-2019 by Ord.
No. 667]
(2) In addition to the above-described off-street parking, on-street
parking shall be provided where permitted as parallel or angled
parking along any side of the street upon which commercial uses
front.
M. Outdoor signs. Regardless of the provisions listed in § 220-36 of this
chapter, signs for commercial uses within the CBD Zone shall only
include flat wall signs, wall projecting signs or roof projecting signs.
Overall sign size shall be limited to six square feet per business. Each
business will be permitted only one such sign. Another two-square-foot
wall sign is permitted facing the building's off-street parking area.
N. Driveway and access drive requirements. All driveways serving singlefamily
dwellings and access drives serving other uses shall be in
accordance with § 220-32 of this chapter.
O. Landscaping. Any portion of the site not used for buildings, structures,
parking lots, loading areas, outdoor storage areas and sidewalks shall
be maintained with a vegetative ground cover and other ornamental
plantings. (See § 220-35.)
P. Waste products. Dumpsters may be permitted within the side or rear
yard, provided such dumpsters are screened from any adjoining roads
and/or properties. All dumpsters shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet
from any adjoining residentially zoned properties. All waste receptacles
shall be completely enclosed within a masonry or fenced enclosure
equipped with a self-latching door or gate.
Q. All uses permitted within this zone shall also comply with the applicable
general provisions in Article III of this chapter.
R. Commercial operations standards. All commercial operations shall be in
compliance with any Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or federal
§ 220-18 MANHEIM CODE § 220-18
1:446
§ 220-19. Highway Commercial Zone (C-1). [Amended 3-28-2000 by
Ord. No. 567]
government regulations, as required by the most recent regulations
made available from these governmental bodies.
A. Purpose. This zone provides suitable locations for larger-scale and/or
highway-oriented retail, service and entertainment businesses. The
uses typically involve outdoor activities and/or storage areas like
automobile, boat and trailer sales and service establishments. The uses
provided in this zone are meant to serve local residents as well as those
motorists passing through the Borough. Access to these areas is
provided by adjoining major roads. Specific setbacks are imposed upon
outdoor storage areas to protect adjoining properties.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Offices.
(2) Banks and similar financial institutions.
(3) Restaurants and taverns (but not including drive-through or fastfood
restaurants and nightclubs).
(4) Retail sale of goods and services (including auto parts stores,
without installation, but excluding adult-related uses).
(5) Hotels, motels and similar lodging facilities.
(6) Automobile, boat, farm machinery and trailer sales (including
service or repair facilities as an accessory use if conducted within a
wholly enclosed building).
(7) Theaters and auditoriums.
(8) Shops for contractors of plumbing, heating, air conditioning,
electrical, roofing, flooring, glass and windows, insulation,
carpentry and cabinetmaking and other structural components of
buildings.
(9) Public uses and utilities.
(10) Public, private and commercial schools (excluding vocational and
mechanical trade schools).
(11) Dry cleaners, laundries and laundromats.
(12) Churches and related uses.
(13) Medical, dental or veterinary clinics.
(14) Indoor movie theaters or bowling alleys.
(15) Private clubhouses.
§ 220-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-19
1:447
(16) Tattoo parlor. [Added 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622]
(17) Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
C. Special exception uses. (Subject to the requirements presented in
§ 220-111C of this chapter.)
(1) Amusement arcades. (See § 220-48.)
(2) Automobile filling stations, including minor incidental repair. (See
§ 220-49.)
(3) Automobile reconditioning, service and repair facilities, including,
but not limited to, auto mechanics, drive-through lubrication
services, and tire, auto paint, brake, muffler, transmission,
windshield, auto body, car radio and upholstery shops. (See
§ 220-50.)
(4) Car washes. (See § 220-56.)
(5) Home improvement stores. (See § 220-67.)
(6) Mini warehouses. (See § 220-70.)
(7) Kennels. (See § 220-69.)
(8) Wireless and cellular communications antennas and towers and
cellular sites. (See § 220-83B.)
(9) Outdoor cafe as an accessory use to a restaurant. (See § 220-74.)
[Added 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622]
D. Conditional uses. (Subject to the procedures presented in § 220-122 of
this chapter.)
(1) Adult-related uses. (See § 220-47.)
(2) Commercial recreation facilities. (See § 220-59.)
(3) Drive-through and/or fast food restaurants. (See § 220-61.)
(4) Nightclubs. (See § 220-72.)
(5) Shopping centers involving any use permitted in this zone. (See
§ 220-78.)
E. Lot area, lot width, and lot coverage requirements. See the following
table:
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum Lot
Coverage
(percent)
15,000 100 60%
§ 220-19 MANHEIM CODE § 220-19
1:448
F. Minimum setback requirements (principal and accessory uses).
(1) Front yard setback. All buildings, structures (except permitted
signs), and outdoor loading areas shall be set back at least 35 feet
from the street right-of-way; off-street parking lots and outdoor
storage areas shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the
street right-of-way.
(2) Side yard setback. All buildings and structures (except permitted
signs) shall be set back at least 25 feet from the side lot lines. Offstreet
parking lots, loading areas and outdoor storage areas shall
be set back at 15 feet from the side lot lines, unless joint parking
facilities are shared by adjoining uses. In such instances, one of the
side yard setbacks can be waived solely for parking and/or loading
facilities.
(3) Rear yard setback. All buildings, structures, off-street parking lots,
loading areas and outdoor storage areas shall be set back at least
20 feet from the rear lot line.
(4) Residential buffer strip. Any lot adjoining land within a residential
zone shall maintain a fifty-foot setback for nonresidential buildings,
structures, off-street parking lots, loading areas and outdoor
storage areas from the residentially zoned parcels. Such areas shall
be used for a landscape strip and screen, as regulated in § 220-35
of this chapter.
G. Maximum permitted height: 35 feet.
H. Outdoor storage. Within the C-1 Zone, outdoor storage is permitted
(except as prohibited in Article IV), provided all outdoor storage areas
are screened from adjoining roads and properties and they comply with
all of those setbacks specifically imposed thereon, listed in this section.
Outdoor sales areas need not be screened from adjoining roads.
I. Off-street loading. Off-street loading shall be provided as specified in
§ 220-34 of this chapter. In addition, no off-street loading area shall be
permitted on any side of a building facing adjoining lands within a
residential zone, nor any side of a building facing an adjoining street.
J. Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in
§ 220-33 of this chapter.
K. Signs. Signs shall be permitted as specified in § 220-36 of this chapter.
L. Access drive requirements. All access drives shall be in accordance
with § 220-32 of this chapter.
M. Screening. A visual screen must be provided along any adjoining lands
within a residential zone, regardless of whether or not the residentially
zoned parcel is developed (see § 220-35 of this chapter).
N. Landscaping.
§ 220-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-19
1:449
§ 220-20. Industrial Zone (I). [Amended 3-28-2000 by Ord. No. 567]
(1) Any portion of the site not used for buildings, structures, parking
lots, loading areas, outdoor storage areas and sidewalks shall be
maintained with a vegetative ground cover and other ornamental
plantings. (See § 220-35 of this chapter.)
(2) A minimum fifteen-foot-wide landscape strip shall be provided
along all property lines. Such landscape strip can be waived for
that portion of the site occupied by a joint parking lot and/or
loading area shared by adjoining uses.
O. Waste products. Dumpsters may be permitted within the side or rear
yard, provided such dumpsters are screened from any adjoining roads
or properties. All dumpsters shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet
from any adjoining residentially zoned properties. All waste receptacles
shall be completely enclosed.
P. All uses permitted within this zone shall also comply with the general
provisions in Article III of this chapter.
Q. Commercial operations standards. All commercial operations shall be in
compliance with any Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or federal
government regulations, as required by the most recent regulations
made available from these governmental bodies.
A. Purpose. This zone provides for a wide range of industrial activities that
contribute to the well-being of the Borough by diversifying its economy
and providing valuable employment opportunities. The required lot
sizes have been kept small to accommodate the start-up industries;
however, larger and heavier industries have also been permitted.
Essentially, this zone provides for smaller light industrial uses as
permitted by right but requires obtainment of a conditional use for
heavier and potentially more objectionable types of industrial uses.
Design standards have been imposed to create attractive site designs
and moderate the objectionable impacts associated with industrial
uses. Substantial setbacks are used to protect adjoining residences.
B. Permitted uses. Uses permitted within this zone include the following,
provided the total lot area devoted to such use does not exceed two
acres. Any of the following uses that require more than two acres of lot
area shall be regulated as conditional uses according to § 220-20D of
this chapter:
(1) Laboratories for medical, scientific or industrial research and
development.
(2) Manufacturing, packaging, storage and/or wholesaling of the
following:
(a) Furniture, cabinets, fixtures, office supplies and other
household appointments.
§ 220-19 MANHEIM CODE § 220-20
1:450
(b) Scientific, specialized, and technical instruments and
equipment.
(c) Audiovisual components, computers, vending machines,
electronic equipment and video games.
(d) Finished textile products.
(e) Brushes, brooms, combs.
(f) Hot tubs, spas, saunas and swimming pools.
(g) Jewelry and other precious metals.
(h) Photographic, lighting and timekeeping equipment.
(i) Small household appliances, excluding major appliances.
(j) Musical instruments and sporting equipment.
(k) Cosmetics, toiletries and pharmaceuticals.
(l) Optical, dental and medical supplies and equipment.
(m) Small or novelty products from prepared materials (excluding
the use of sheet metals).
(3) Processing, packaging, storage and/or wholesaling of food
products, excluding:
(a) Breweries and distilleries.
(b) Pickling processes.
(c) Rendering or slaughtering operations.
(d) Sugar refineries.
(4) Sales, storage and/or wholesaling of the following:
(a) Home and auto-related fuels.
(b) Nursery and garden materials and stock.
(c) Contractor supplies.
(d) Plumbing, heating, air conditioning, electrical and structural
components of buildings.
(5) Bookbinding, printing and publishing.
(6) Machine shop.
(7) Repair shops for products permitted to be manufactured in this
zone.
(8) Small engine repair shops.
§ 220-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-20
1:451
(9) Welding shops.
(10) Sign makers.
(11) Offices.
(12) Public buildings and public utilities.
(13) Agricultural support businesses, including:
(a) Facilities for the commercial processing and warehousing of
agricultural products.
(b) Facilities for the warehousing, sales, and service of
agricultural equipment, vehicles, feed or supplies.
(c) Veterinary offices, animal hospitals or kennels.
(14) Vocational and mechanical trade schools.
(15) Home improvement stores.
(16) Automobile repair, service and reconditioning operations, provided
all such activities are conducted within a completely enclosed
building.
(17) Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
C. Special exceptions. (See § 220-111C.)
(1) Mini warehouses. (See § 220-70.)
(2) Kennels. (See § 220-69.)
D. Conditional uses. (See § 220-122.)
(1) Any of the uses permitted in the preceding § 220-20B that contain
more than two acres in total lot area. (See § 220-66.)
(2) Heavy industrial uses involving processing, packaging, production,
repair or testing of materials, goods and products, including those
industries performing conversion, assembly or nontoxic chemical
operations. (See § 220-66.)
(3) Warehousing and wholesale trade establishments. (See § 220-81.)
(4) Heavy equipment sales, service and repair, such as excavation
machinery, commercial trucks, buses, farm equipment, mobile
homes, trailers and other similar machinery. (See § 220-65.)
(5) Recycling facilities for paper, glass and metal products. (See
§ 220-77.)
(6) Automobile storage compounds. (See § 220-51.)
§ 220-20 MANHEIM CODE § 220-20
1:452
(7) Wireless and cellular communications antennas and towers and
cellular sites. (See § 220-83A.)
E. Lot area requirements. Unless otherwise specified, each use within this
zone shall have a minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet.
F. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
G. Minimum setback requirements (principal and accessory uses).
(1) Front yard setback. All buildings, structures (except permitted
signs), off-street loading areas, dumpsters and outdoor storage
areas shall be set back at least 35 feet from the adjoining right-ofway.
All parking lots shall be set back at least 20 feet from any
adjoining right-of-way.
(2) Side yard setbacks. All buildings, structures (except permitted
signs), dumpsters, off-street loading areas, outdoor storage areas
and off-street parking lots shall be set back at least 20 feet from any
side lot lines unless joint parking lots and/or loading areas are
shared by adjoining uses. In such instances, one of the side yard
setbacks can be waived solely for parking and/or loading facilities.
(3) Rear yard setback. All buildings, structures, dumpsters and offstreet
loading areas shall be set back at least 35 feet from any rear
property lines. All outdoor storage areas and off-street parking lots
shall be set back at least 25 feet from any rear lot lines.
(4) Residential buffer strip.
(a) Any use involving up to one acre of lot coverage and adjoining
land within a residential zone, or across a road from land
within a residential zone, shall maintain a fifty-foot setback for
buildings, structures, dumpsters, outdoor storage areas, and
off-street loading and parking areas from the residential zone.
All of these setback areas shall be devoted to landscaping. (See
§ 220-35.)
(b) Any use with lot coverage exceeding one acre, adjoining land
within a residential zone or across a road from land within a
residential zone, shall maintain a one-hundred-foot setback for
buildings, structures, dumpsters, outdoor storage areas, and
off-street loading and parking areas from the residential zone.
All of these setback areas shall be devoted to landscaping. (See
§ 220-35.)
(5) Accessory recreation uses. These facilities can be developed in any
side or rear yard to within 50 feet of any property line.
H. Maximum permitted structural height. The height of any principal or
accessory structure shall not exceed 35 feet. All structures (except
permitted signs) shall be set back a distance at least equal to their
height from all property lines.
§ 220-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-20
1:453
§ 220-21. Planned Industrial/Corporate Center Zone (PC-1). [Added
8-29-2000 by Ord. No. 569]
I. Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
J. Outdoor storage. Within the I Zone, outdoor storage is permitted,
provided all outdoor storage areas are screened from adjoining roads
and properties and they comply with all of those setbacks specifically
imposed thereon, listed in this section.
K. Off-street loading. Off-street loading shall be provided as specified in
§ 220-34 of this chapter. In addition, no off-street loading area shall be
permitted on any side of a building facing adjoining lands within a
residential zone nor any side of a building facing an adjoining street.
L. Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in
§ 220-33 of this chapter.
M. Signs. Signs shall be permitted as specified in § 220-36 of this chapter.
N. Access drive requirements. All access drives shall be in accordance
with § 220-32 of this chapter.
O. Screening. A visual screen must be provided along any adjoining lands
within a residential zone, regardless of whether or not the residentially
zoned parcel is developed. (See § 220-35 of this chapter.)
P. Landscaping.
(1) Any portion of the site not used for buildings, structures, parking
lots, loading areas, outdoor storage areas, and sidewalks shall be
maintained with a vegetative ground cover and other ornamental
plantings. (See § 220-35 of this chapter.)
(2) A minimum twenty-foot-wide landscape strip shall be provided
along all property lines. Such landscape strip can be waived for
that portion of the site occupied by a joint parking lot and/or
loading area shared by adjoining uses.
Q. Waste products. Dumpsters may be permitted within the side or rear
yard, provided such dumpsters are screened from any adjoining roads
or properties. All dumpsters shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet
from any adjoining residentially zoned properties. All waste receptacles
shall be completely enclosed.
R. All uses permitted within this zone shall also comply with the general
provisions in Article III of this chapter.
S. Industrial operations standards. All industrial operations shall be in
compliance with any Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or federal
government regulations, as required by the most recent regulations
made available from these governmental bodies.
§ 220-20 MANHEIM CODE § 220-21
1:454
A. Purpose. This zone is intended to provide for industrial redevelopment
or reuse of vacant structures or underutilized industrial properties
within the Borough. The goal of the PC-1 Zone is to seek redevelopment
by way of the creation of low-impact industrial and/or corporate
initiatives which would best complement a built community while
seeking those uses which would provide employment opportunities to
the citizens within the Manheim Central Region. These initiatives
should include conversion of larger underutilized structures into
incubator facilities designed to support small start-up industries and
businesses as well as demolition of existing structures in order to make
way for new industry. The zone shall permit retail operations only as
accessory uses to on-site manufacturing operation(s). Warehouse
operations shall be limited to those which support on-site operations or
which are designed as warehouse and distribution centers for related
uses, such as construction trade services. Businesses that provide
support for the employees will also need to be provided for on a limited
basis (i.e., restaurants, newsstand, coffee shop, etc.).
(1) Additionally, the zone has been designed to incorporate a bulk of
the properties formerly associated with Raybestos Manhattan,
Inc./Raymark, Inc., including properties which were previously
zoned R-1 and supported agricultural uses. Zoning regulations will
continue to protect and provide expansion potential for existing
established uses which will no longer be recognized as permitted
uses. Under these regulations and laws, a nonconforming use may
be permitted to expand by as much as 50% of its current area.
(2) The minimum and maximum lot area requirements are not stated
since it is the intent to permit a variety of industry sizes to
cohabitate the zone. The controlling factors related to the creation
of any subdivision or land development plan shall be the following:
(a) Building size.
(b) Setback requirements.
(c) Off-street parking.
(d) Off-street loading/unloading.
(e) Maximum lot coverage criteria.
(f) Screening.
(g) Support facilities.
(h) Floodplain and floodway limits.
(i) Other factors generally controlled through the zoning and
planning process.
(3) Adaptive reuse of existing industrial uses noted to be Class I or
Class II historic resources shall be permitted in accordance with
§ 220-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-21
1:455
the provisions of § 220-22M, Adaptive use regulations, of the
Historic Preservation Overlay Zone. In addition, other conversion
opportunities shall be permitted, under the special exception
process, in order to take advantage of the unique challenges that
the existing structures present.
(4) Due to the proximity of the PC-1 Zone to the one-hundred-year
floodplain, construction of new structures will require that the
buildings be elevated or floodproofed to minimize damage. It would
also be desirable to create parks and/or walking paths throughout
the zone to take advantage of the wetland areas and to provide a
positive feature or use of areas where development may be limited
or restricted by floodplain regulations. Otherwise, the properties
should be developed to their maximum permitted potential,
keeping in mind the Manheim Central Region's goal to provide a
diversification of employment opportunities to offset job losses
effected by the closing of Raymark, Inc., Universal Friction
Composites, Inc., and Agway. Redevelopment designs will also need
to address retrofitting of existing buildings to address flooding and
ways to protect materials, equipment, furnishings, buildings and
occupants as well as methods to reduce flooding and other
stormwater problems through the reduction of existing impervious
surfaces, the creation of flood buffers or relief channels, the
planting of riparian buffers, etc. Specifically, park and recreational
facilities shall be designed to inhabit those less desirable portions
of the property where flooding, wetlands and stormwater issues
exist.
B. Permitted uses. (*Indicates term is defined in § 220-12 of this chapter.)
(1) Bakery.
(2) Commercial office incubator.
(3) Computer industries.
(4) Industrial incubator.
(5) Machine shops.
(6) Manufacturing.* (Restricted to those operations which do not
generally create a nuisance, i.e., noise, dust, odor, smoke, fire,
glare, etc.)
(7) Medical and dental laboratories serving the medical and dental
industries.
(8) Offices.*
(9) Public and nonprofit parks and playgrounds.*
(10) Public uses and public utility structures.
§ 220-21 MANHEIM CODE § 220-21
1:456
(11) Research and development laboratories.
(12) Retail* (Restricted to sales outlets which serve as an accessory use
to an on-site principal manufacturing facility.)
(13) Shops for contractors of plumbing, heating, air conditioning,
electrical, roofing, siding, flooring, glass and windows, insulation,
carpentry, cabinetmaking and other similar construction trade
services.
(14) Sign makers.
(15) Telecommunications facilities except for wireless and cellular
communications antennas and antenna support structures/towers
and cellular sites, which are permitted by conditional use (see
Subsection D).
(16)Warehousing as an accessory use to an on-site permitted use.
(17)Wetland mitigation facilities and other similar or related
conservation uses.
(18) Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses,
provided that no detached accessory buildings or structures shall
be permitted except as may be required to enclose HVAC,
mechanical, telephone, electrical or other similar equipment.
C. Special exception uses. (*Indicates term is defined in § 220-12 of this
chapter.) In addition to the uses noted in Subsection B, the following
uses shall be permitted within structures which exist on the effective
date of this article, provided the application complies with specific
criteria provided herein:
(1) Architectural warehouse. [See § 220-22M(4)(b) for definition and
criteria.]
(2) Caterers. (See § 220-84.)
(3) Computer training facilities. (See § 220-85.)
(4) Conversion apartments (see § 220-60), provided the first/ground
floor is occupied by or reserved for a nonresidential use permitted
by the provisions of Subsections B and/or C.
(5) Dance, performing arts and/or music studios. [See
§ 220-22M(4)(d).]
(6) Health and fitness club* or karate studio. (See § 220-86.)
(7) Industrial museum. [See § 220-22M(4)(g).]
(8) Medical or dental clinic*. (See § 220-87.)
(9) Microbrewery. (See § 220-88.)
§ 220-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-21
1:457
(10) Mini warehouses*. (See § 220-70.)
(11) Parking garage on the lower level with a permitted use above. (See
§ 220-89.)
(12) Schools, public, private, commercial and vocational-mechanical
trade*. (See § 220-90.)
(13) Trail support facilities, including, but not limited to, bike rental or
repair shop, public restrooms, snack/ice cream shop, etc. (See
§ 220-91.)
(14) Veterinary offices* or animal hospitals. (See § 220-92.)
(15)Warehousing. (See § 220-93.)
(16) Restaurants without a drive-through facility; however, restaurants
may include an outdoor cafe as an accessory use. (See § 220-74.)
[Added 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622]
D. Conditional uses.
(1) Wireless and cellular communications antenna and antenna
support structures/towers and cellular sites (as defined by
Ordinance No. 567, see § 220-83A).
(2) Agribusinesses. (See § 220-94.)
(3) Community rehabilitation facilities. (See § 220-95.) [Added
7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622]60
(4) Group care and treatment center. (See § 220-95.) [Added
7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622]
E. Number of uses permitted. Any number of permitted uses listed under
Subsection C may be established within any building which existed on
the effective date of this chapter, provided the building size and floor
area shall not be increased in any fashion, and provided the application
meets the following design criteria, as noted herein, for off-street
parking, off-street loading and unloading, outdoor storage and display,
dumpster and recycling facilities, driveway and access drive
requirements, landscaping and commercial operation standards. Any
number of permitted uses listed under Subsection B may be established
within a new structure, provided the application meets all applicable
design criteria as are provided within this chapter or the general
provisions of Article III. For existing buildings that are enlarged, only
one principal use shall be permitted. It shall be further understood that
the application shall meet all provisions and conditions as they are
found in the Manheim Borough Floodplain Ordinance, Ordinance No.
486, Chapter 124, as if they were incorporated herein.61
60.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original Subsection C, Restaurants.
61.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 486 was superseded 6-28-2005 by Ord. No. 591, as amended.
§ 220-21 MANHEIM CODE § 220-21
1:458
F. Lot area. Unless otherwise specified, there shall be no minimum lot
area requirements in this zone. Each lot or lease area shall be of ample
area to adequately provide for off-street parking, off-street loading and
unloading facilities, driveway and access drives, dumpster and
recycling facilities, landscape/buffer areas, minimum building setbacks
and maximum lot coverage criteria and other related criteria as may be
required by the provisions of this section.
G. Minimum lot width. Unless otherwise specified, there shall be no
minimum lot width requirement in this zone. However, each lot or lease
area shall be of adequate width to provide for the infrastructure
required by the provisions of this section.
H. Minimum setback requirements.
(1) The following design criteria shall apply to the development of
previously undeveloped land within the PC-1 Zone:
(a) The minimum building setback for principal structures shall be
80 feet from any front property line or public right-of-way.
(b) The minimum building setback for principal structures shall be
70 feet from any side property or lease line.
(c) The minimum building setback for principal structures shall be
100 feet from any rear property or lease line.
(d) Macadam associated with off-street parking, loading and/or
unloading areas shall be set back 15 feet from any front, side
or rear property or lease line, except in those cases where the
property or lease line is designed to be part of a joint parking
lot, loading/unloading zone as described in Subsection P.
(2) The following design criteria shall apply to redevelopment of
existing developed tracts wherein buildings are to be demolished:
(a) No structure shall be rebuilt or expanded to a point closer than
50 feet to a public right-of-way or front property line.
(b) No structure shall be expanded or placed between existing
structures which would reduce the clear area between
buildings to less than 120 feet.
(c) Macadam associated with off-street parking, loading/unloading
areas shall be set back 10 feet from any front, side or rear
property line, lease line or right-of-way, except in those cases
where the property or lease line is designed to be part of a joint
parking lot, loading/unloading zone as described in Subsection
P.
(d) All areas not required for off-street parking, drives, loading/
unloading areas, dumpster and recycling facilities shall be
converted into landscaping. For this purpose, the maximum lot
§ 220-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-21
1:459
coverage criteria shall be waived, provided that the postdevelopment
plan creates more pervious surface area than
exists at the predevelopment stage.
(3) Multiple principal structures on the same property shall be
permitted, provided the following distances are maintained
between the structures:
(a) One hundred forty feet between the side walls of adjacent
structures.
(b) Two hundred feet between the rear walls of adjacent
structures.
(c) One hundred sixty feet between any side building wall and an
adjacent rear building wall.
I. Maximum permitted height. New structures shall not be constructed
higher than three stories in height or a maximum of 42 feet above the
average exterior grade elevation. (The average exterior grade elevation
should be within four feet of the first-floor elevation, especially in onehundred-
year floodplain areas.)
J. Minimum first-floor elevation. The minimum first-floor elevation for any
new building proposed to be constructed within the one-hundred-year
floodplain, or on property which is found to be flood-prone, shall be two
feet above the base one-hundred-year floodplain elevation.
K. Maximum lot coverage: 70%, for the development of previously
undeveloped land. [See Subsection G(2)(d) with reference to
redevelopment of existing developed tracts.]
L. Outdoor storage and display. Exterior storage of materials or display of
products shall be restricted to rear and side yard areas, provided the
materials being stored or displayed are not visible from the property
line; and further provided that the area is screened from all adjoining
properties, roads, public walkways, bike paths and open space/park
areas. Screening methods may be utilized to assure that materials will
not be visible from the front property line. No outdoor storage or
display area shall be placed within a floodway, within 50 feet of a road
or residentially zoned property, or within 30 feet of a public walkway,
bike path, open space/park area. Otherwise, the outdoor storage or
display area shall not be less than 20 feet from any side or rear property
line. Outdoor storage and/or display areas which are proposed to be
located within the one-hundred-year floodplain or on property which is
found to be flood-prone shall be elevated so that the grade is no less
than two feet higher than the base one-hundred-year floodplain
elevation.
M. Dumpster and recycling facilities. Dumpster and/or recycling facilities
shall be permitted to be created within the side or rear yard area,
provided that the receptacles are screened from all adjoining
§ 220-21 MANHEIM CODE § 220-21
1:460
properties, roads, public walkways, bike paths and open space/park
areas. No dumpster or recycling facility shall be placed within a
floodway or within 50 feet of a road, public walkway, bike path, open
space/park area or any residentially zoned property. Otherwise the
dumpster and/or recycling facility shall not be less than 25 feet from
any side or rear property line. All receptacles provided for the
collection and storage of waste and/or recyclables shall be provided
with a weather-tight lid and operating door panels. Dumpster and
recycling facilities which are proposed to be placed within the onehundred-
year floodplain or on property which is found to be flood-prone
shall be elevated so that grade is no less than two feet higher than the
base one-hundred-year floodplain elevation.
N. Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in
§ 220-33 of this chapter. Section 220-33T shall not apply to uses in the
PC-1 Zone.
O. Off-street loading and unloading. Off-street loading and unloading shall
be provided as specified in § 220-34 of this chapter. In addition, no offstreet
loading or unloading facility shall be created on the side of the
building which faces an adjoining residentially zoned property or an
adjoining street.
P. Joint parking lots, loading and unloading zones. In the PC-1 Zone, the
creation of joint off-street parking lots and loading and unloading zones
(access drives, etc.) may be permitted. However, the location and
configuration of the parking lots shall not require pedestrians to cross
loading/unloading zones, driveways utilized by vehicles accessing
loading/unloading zones or public rights-of-way which are between the
parking lot and the building/structure which it is serving.
Q. Driveway and access drives. In addition to the provisions of § 220-33N
of this chapter, access drives and driveways providing access for trucks
shall meet the design controls as found in Chapter 11 of the AASHTO
publication, "Geometric Design of Highways and Streets," as last
revised. In addition, internal travel lanes to be used by trucks and/or
trucks and cars shall be a minimum width of 14 feet per lane of travel.
The general provisions of § 220-32 shall also apply.
R. Landscape buffers. Any and all portions of a site or leased area which is
not developed for buildings, concrete walkways, dumpsters and
recycling facilities, driveways or access drives, or which is not required
for off-street parking, off-street loading or unloading areas, shall be
planted with all-season ground cover which shall be approved by the
Borough Planning Commission, following submission of a detailed
landscape plan, which shall list all materials incorporated in the design
layout. Where they are consistent with the pervious statement, the
general provisions of § 220-35 shall also apply.
S. Operation standards. All commercial and industrial operations shall be
created, maintained and operated in compliance with applicable
§ 220-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-21
1:461
§ 220-22. Historic Preservation Overlay Zone. [Added 4-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 561; amended 8-29-2000 by Ord. No. 569]
federal, state, county and local regulations which may govern these
types of operations.
A. Purpose. The Official Comprehensive Plan for the Manheim Central
Region, adopted by the Borough in March 1993, references a desire by
local officials and citizens to protect the historic and cultural resources
within the Borough. Goals enumerated in Chapter II, Community
Planning Goals, Section A, "Land Use," speak directly to this issue, as
follows: "Prevent the demolition, clearing and redevelopment of older
buildings and neighborhoods," "promote commercial offices through
the adaptive use and conversion of older structures" and "encourage a
revitalized streetscape with tree plantings, storefront canopies, facade
restorations, pedestrian benches and underground power lines." Within
Chapter III, Section F, "Cultural Features," the following statement is
found: "The Manheim Central Region, like much of southeastern
Pennsylvania, is fortunate to possess a rich cultural heritage. Today, this
heritage is apparent from the many older individual buildings,
structures and related settlements that are scattered throughout the
region. Local officials and residents recognize the value in conservation
and rehabilitation, plus restoration or adaptive reuse of these historic
features as a means of providing a glimpse into the region's important
past. Additionally, historic preservation can provide educational
opportunities regarding historic lifestyles and architectural styles. Wellmaintained
historic sites and areas can create a sense of unique identity
that stimulates civic pride and economic vitality and can become a basis
of tourism." Chapter XI, "Implementation," provides specific
recommendations which the Borough deemed to be necessary as an
action plan to guide future growth and development. Item 6 within said
chapter provides that Manheim Borough should "create a historical
district and an architectural review board." It is the intent that the
Historic Preservation Overlay Zone be established in accordance with
the direction provided within the Comprehensive Plan, as authorized by
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. (See Subsection B,
Establishment.) It is further intended that the Historic Preservation
Overlay Zone shall be structured to implement the following goals and
objectives:
(1) Promote retention of the character of the Borough through
preservation of the local heritage by recognition and protection of
its historical, architectural and cultural resources.
(2) Awaken an interest in the Borough's unique historic past.
(3) Establish a clear process by which proposed changes affecting
historic resources are reviewed.
(4) Mitigate negative impacts that proposed changes may have on
historic resources.
§ 220-21 MANHEIM CODE § 220-22
1:462
(5) Encourage preservation of historic settings and landscapes.
(6) Encourage continued use and facilitate approvals for appropriate
adaptive uses of historic resources.
(7) Discourage demolition of historic resources.
(8) Utilize benefits of historic preservation as a tool for economic
revitalization and tourism to promote the general welfare,
education and culture of the Borough.
B. Establishment. This Historic Preservation Overlay Zone is established
in accordance with provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (MPC), Act 247, as amended and reenacted and, in
particular, the following sections of the MPC: Section 603(a)62 which
states that zoning ordinances should reflect the policy goals of the
statement of community development objectives and give consideration
to the character of the municipality, the needs of the citizens and the
suitability and special nature of particular parts of the municipality.
Section 603(b)(2)63 which states that zoning ordinances may permit,
prohibit, regulate, restrict and determine the size, height, bulk,
location, erection, construction, repair, maintenance, alteration, razing,
removal and use of structures and Section 603(b)(3)64 which states that
zoning ordinances may permit, prohibit, regulate, restrict and
determine areas and dimensions of land to be occupied by uses and
structures as well as areas, courts, yards and other open spaces and
distances to be left unoccupied by uses and structures. Additionally,
establishment of this overlay zone shall serve to implement specific
provisions of the MPC, such as Section 604(1)65 which states that
zoning ordinances shall be designed to promote, protect and facilitate
any or all of the following: the public health, safety, morals and the
general welfare, coordinated and practical community development
and proper density of population, access to vehicle parking and loading
space, recreational facilities, as well as preservation of the natural
scenic and historical values in the environment, and Section
605(2)(vi)66 which permits additional classifications within zoning
districts for the regulation, restriction or prohibition of uses and
structures at, along or near "places having unique historical,
architectural or patriotic interest or value."
C. Boundaries. The Historic Preservation Overlay Zone shall conform with
the boundaries of Manheim Borough and the provisions of this article.
Criteria provided within this article shall be imposed in addition to the
requirements of the underlying zoning district(s) and shall supersede
the applicable requirements of the underlying zoning district to the
62.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10603(a).
63.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10603(b)(2).
64.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10603(b)(3).
65.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10604(1).
66.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10605(2)(vi).
§ 220-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-22
1:463
extent that those provisions are inconsistent with the provisions of this
article.
D. General provisions.
(1) Identification. All historic resource in Manheim Borough shall be
identified and categorized by the Manheim Borough Historic
Commission (Historic Commission). Historic resources include any
structure, building, architectural ruin, archeological site, cemetery
or object 50 or more years old. An official inventory and map of all
historic resources shall be prepared and maintained in accordance
with the provisions of Subsection F of this section.
(2) Compliance. Property owners desiring to change any historic
resource listed or designated on the official inventory and map
shall do so only in compliance with the terms of this section and
other applicable regulations.
(3) Covenants and restrictions. It is not the intent of this section to
repeal, impair or abrogate any existing easements, covenants or
deed restrictions. However, where this section imposes greater
restriction, these provisions shall prevail.
E. Definitions. Words, terms and phrases are presumed to be used in their
ordinary context unless otherwise defined in § 220-12 or this section:
ADAPTIVE USE — The process of converting a conforming use of a
building to a use which is not presently permitted within the respective
zoning district (i.e., conversion of a dwelling in a residential zone to
a commercial use), subject to approval by the Zoning Hearing Board.
Such conversions would be accomplished with varying alterations to
the interior of the building with the intention of providing an income
source for funding exterior preservation, rehabilitation or restoration
efforts.
AMENITY — A building, structure, area or landscape feature that
contributes to the aesthetic fiber of the neighborhood, rather than one
that is purely utilitarian.
ARCHITECT — A professional registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to practice architecture, who is retained for the purpose
of developing building plans (site plan, foundation plan, floor plans,
elevations, section, details, etc.) and specifications to be used in
building construction. Services may include supervision of the
construction of the building designed.
ARCHITECTURE — In addition to the profession of designing buildings,
this term also refers to particular periods, styles and construction
methods (i.e., victorian, gothic, provincial, etc.).
BACKGROUND OR CONTRIBUTING BUILDING — Buildings or
structures that may lack exemplary character or significance but are
nonetheless essential to the character of the neighborhood, district or
community and contribute to maintaining a sense of place.
§ 220-22 MANHEIM CODE § 220-22
1:464
CULTURAL RESOURCE — A building, structure, district, site, object or
document that is of significance to American, Pennsylvanian, Lancaster
County or Manheim Borough history, architecture, archeology or
culture.
EASEMENTS — A less-than-fee interest in real property which runs
with the land and is carried as a deed restriction or covenant to protect
important open space, utilities, access, buildings, facades or interiors.
HUMAN SCALE — A combination of qualities in architecture,
streetscape or the landscape that provide an appropriate relationship
to human size, enhancing rather than diminishing the importance of
people.
LANDSCAPE — The totality of built or human-influenced habitat
experienced at any place. Dominant features are topography, plant
cover, buildings or other structures and their patterns.
LETTER OF APPROPRIATENESS — A document provided by the
Historic Commission, stating support of an applicant's specific project,
following a determination of the proposal's suitability in accordance
with applicable criteria.
MAINTENANCE PROGRAM — Specific methods, procedures and
schedules to maintain and repair a building or structure.
MASSING — Composition of a building's volumes and surfaces that
contribute to its appearance (e.g., many classical-style buildings have a
central mass or pavilion flanked by subordinate masses or wings).
MIXED USE — A variety of authorized activities in a building or
neighborhood, as distinguished from the isolated uses and planned
separatism prescribed by many zoning ordinances.
MUSEUMS — The following specific types shall be considered in
addition to those normally associated with the term "museum":
NEIGHBORHOOD — An area generally associated with the block in
which a historic resource is located. For the purpose of this section, the
HOUSE — A dwelling whose structure itself is of historic,
architectural or cultural significance and whose interpretation
relates primarily to the building's architecture, furnishings and
history.
(1)
INDUSTRIAL — A former industrial or commercial structure of
historic, architectural or cultural significance and whose
interpretation relates primarily to the building's architecture,
furnishings and history as well as similar information related to
other industrial or commercial uses significant to the Borough.
(2)
OUTDOOR — A restored or re-created site on which several
buildings or structures have been restored, rebuilt or otherwise
established for the purpose of interpreting a historical or cultural
setting, period or activity.
(3)
§ 220-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-22
1:465
neighborhood shall include all structures located on properties which
are within 300 feet of the subject property (measured from property
line to property line), regardless of the distance between the historic
resource and the other structure. Furthermore, it shall be understood
that the neighborhood includes those structures which are oriented to
the same street, including those structures on the opposite side of the
street.
PRESERVATION — The act or process of saving old and/or historic
buildings, structures, sites and objects from destruction or
deterioration and providing for their continued use by means of
restoration, rehabilitation or adaptive use. The process may include
stabilization, where necessary, as well as ongoing maintenance of
historic building materials.
PROPORTIONS — The relative size of two or more dimensions of a
building.
RECONSTRUCTION — The act or process of reproducing, through new
construction, the exact form or detail of a vanished building, structure,
object, feature or a part thereof as it appeared at a specific period of
time.
REHABILITATION — The act or process of returning a property,
building or structure to a state of utility through repair or alteration
which makes possible establishment of an efficient contemporary
permitted use while preserving those portions of the property, building
or structure which are significant to its historic, architectural or
cultural value.
RENOVATION — Modernization of an old or historic building, structure
or object that may produce inappropriate alterations or eliminate
important features and details.
RESTORATION — The act or process of accurately recovering the
form and details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a
particular period of time by means of the replacement of missing earlier
architectural features and details.
SENSE OF PLACE — A collection of attributes found within a
neighborhood, property, district or community that gives it unique and
distinctive character.
STABILIZATION — The act or process of implementing construction
measures designed to reestablish a weather-resistant enclosure or to
structurally stabilize an unsafe or deteriorated premises while
maintaining the essential form of the building or structural.
STREETSCAPE — The distinguished character of a particular street
created by its width, degree of curvature, paving material, design
and placement of landscape features and street furniture (i.e., planter
boxes, street lamps, waste bins, benches, etc.), and the human scale,
massing, proportions and style of the surrounding buildings and
structures.
§ 220-22 MANHEIM CODE § 220-22
1:466
STYLE — A type of architecture distinguished by special characteristics
of the structure and ornamentation, often related to a particular time in
history.
TOWNSCAPE — The relationship of buildings, structures, shapes,
spaces and textures that give a borough its distinctive visual character
or image.
VERNACULAR BUILDINGS — Buildings designed and built without the
aid of an architect or trained designer, wherein the design is based
on ethnic, social or cultural traditions rather than on an architectural
philosophy.
F. Historic Resource Inventory and Map.
(1) The Historic Resource Inventory shall identify every historic
resource by:
(a) Tax parcel number (map, block, lot).
(b) Street address.
(c) Owner's name.
(d) Type of resource.
(e) Classification, integrity and condition.
(f) Cross-reference numbers to the Borough's Reconnaissance
Level Inventory of Historic Sites, June 1996, as amended.
(g) Cross-references to historic district designations as may be
enacted under provisions of Pennsylvania Act 167.67
(2) The Official Historic Resource Map shall provide a clear
designation of the location and classification of all historic
resources in accordance with the provisions of Subsection G and
the Official Historic Resource Inventory.
G. Historic resource classifications. For the purpose of this section, all
properties within the boundaries of the Historic Preservation Overlay
Zone shall receive a historic resource classification in accordance with
the following:
(1) Class I.
(a) Historical resources individually listed in or determined
eligible for the National Register of Historic Places.
(b) Historic resource determined to be of local significance.
(2) Class II.
67.Editor's Note: The Historic District Act of 1961, 53 P.S. § 8001 et seq.
§ 220-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-22
1:467
(a) Historic resources listed as a contributing resource and
included in an eligible National Register Historic District.
(b) Historic resources determined to contribute to the character of
the Borough, district or neighborhood, including "altered"
structures (Historic Sites Windshield Survey of 1994, prepared
by the Historic Preservation Trust of Lancaster County) where
the potential for historic rehabilitation/restoration exists.
(3) Class III. Other resources (i.e., modern, post-1960,
noncontributing, intrusive, vacant, etc.).
H. Administration and enforcement. (See § 220-116, which is incorporated
by reference.)
I. Permits for rehabilitation, alterations and additions. The following shall
apply to Class I and Class II resources, as listed on the official inventory
and map of historic resources, in addition to the provisions of
§ 220-117:
(1) General requirements. In addition to provisions of § 220-117A, no
historic resource (structure, building or sign) shall be rehabilitated,
enlarged, extended, converted or structurally altered, nor shall the
land, buildings and structures related to a historic resource be put
to any use or have the use for which they are used changed without
securing a preservation permit from the Codes Compliance Officer.
No such permit shall be issued except in conformity with the
provisions of this section or upon written order from:
(a) The Zoning Hearing Board, in the form of a special exception
or variance.
(b) Borough Council, in the form of a conditional use or as
otherwise provided by this section, any applicable laws or any
court of competent jurisdiction.
(2) Application procedures. In addition to procedures noted in
§ 220-117B, the preservation permit application shall include the
following:
(a) Drawings (floor plans, all related elevations, details, etc.) of the
proposed construction, restoration or alteration. Drawings
may be submitted in sketch form, provided they are sufficiently
detailed to indicate the entire scope of work.
(b) Material list and disposition of existing historic architectural
features. (Example, this listing shall indicate if existing
materials are being replaced in-kind or with new materials
which replicate the original.)
(3) Approval or disapproval. In addition to the provisions of
§ 220-117C, plans for rehabilitation, alteration, additions or other
activity requiring a preservation permit shall be reviewed by the
§ 220-22 MANHEIM CODE § 220-22
1:468
Codes Compliance Officer for substantial compliance with the
Manheim Borough Standards for Historic Preservation as they are
developed and adopted or, in lieu thereof, in accordance with the
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, as codified
in 36 CFR 67, last revised 1990, which provide as follows:
(a) A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in
a new use that requires minimal change to the defining
characteristics of the building and its site and environment.
(b) The historic character of a property shall be retained and
preserved. The removal of historic materials or alterations of
features and spaces that characterize a property shall be
avoided.
(c) Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its
time, place and use. Changes that create a false sense of
historical development, such as adding conjectural features or
architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be
undertaken.
(d) Most properties change over time; those changes that have
acquired historical significance in their own right shall be
retained and preserved.
(e) Distinctive features, finishes and construction techniques or
examples of craftsmanship that characterize a historic
property shall be preserved.
(f) Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires
replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall
match the old in design, color, texture and other visual
qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of
missing features shall be substantiated by documentation,
physical or pictorial evidence.
(g) Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that
cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The
surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be
undertaken using the gentlest means possible.
(h) Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall
be protected and preserved. If such resource must be
disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken.
(i) New additions, exterior alterations or related new construction
shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the
property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and
shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale and
architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the
property and its environment.
§ 220-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-22
1:469
(j) New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall
be undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future,
the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its
environment would be unimpaired.
(4) Exceptions. Certain practices are hereby deemed to be acceptable
and shall be approved as follows:
(a) Replacement of failed/deteriorated slate roofs where no
stylistic pattern currently exists with tri-tab asphalt or
fiberglass shingles shall be permitted, provided written
verification is submitted by a roofer who specializes in slate
which shall indicate that the slate is deteriorated to a degree
that repair is either unreasonable or not economically feasible.
Verification may include statements related to structural
damage to roof members (i.e., rafters, crickets, valleys, ridges,
etc.). The color selected should be one that most closely
matches the existing slate. Typical slate colors are gray, bluegray
and green.
(b) Replacement of slate roofs with a slate look-alike product shall
be permitted, without roofer verification. These products have
a ceramic, concrete, fiber-cement or mineral-polymer base.
The color selected should be one that most closely matches the
existing slate.
(c) Replacement of cedar shake roofs with asphalt or fiberglass
roofing designed to replicate the appearance of wood shingles
shall be permitted.
(d) Installation of storm windows wherein the horizontal rail of the
storm window system is designed to complement the
horizontal rail of the primary window sash. Additionally, the
color of the aluminum frame shall match the trim color of the
frame which it is attached to, and the vertical and horizontal
members of the storm sash shall match the profile of the
windows which they are protecting. The ultimate goal is to
make the storm window disappear from view.
(e) Replacement windows where the sash will replicate the style
and configuration of the existing windows (i.e., 6/6, 6/1, 6/9,
etc.) and only if the new window is designed to match the
existing size of the windows being replaced. Use of modern
materials may be permitted.
(f) In-kind replacement (same materials, same architectural
detailing, etc.).
J. Permits for demolition, removal or relocation. The following shall apply
to Class I, Class II and Class III resources, as listed on the official
inventory and map of historic resources, in addition to provisions of
§ 220-117 and Subsection I:
§ 220-22 MANHEIM CODE § 220-22
1:470
(1) General requirements. No historic resource (principal or accessory
building or structure) shall be demolished, removed or otherwise
relocated without a demolition permit. No such permit shall be
issued except in conformity with the provisions of this section.
(2) Application procedures. In addition to the procedures noted in
§ 220-117B and Subsection I(2), the demolition permit application
shall include the following:
(a) Cross-reference to all historic inventory information which the
Borough has in its possession related to the historic resources
and associated structure(s) on the subject property.
(b) Detailed exterior elevations, showing all vertical elements to
scale, including floor-to-floor dimensions, as well as the width
and height of all exterior openings. Additional clarification may
be included in the written narrative/physical description.
(c) Detailed floor plans showing the overall size of the structure
and all interior rooms, closets, hallways, etc. Additional
clarification may be included in the written narrative/physical
description.
(d) A complete set of interior and exterior photographs of the
resource proposed for demolition, removal or relocation, along
with a written narrative which shall include a physical
description of the structure. (Black-and-white photos four
inches by six inches are required. However, larger color
photographs may also be helpful in making a better
presentation. Polaroid photos will not be accepted for record
purposes. Photographs, floor plans and elevations shall be
sufficient in detail that a true, full- or reduced-scale replica of
the structure could be constructed.)
(e) Site plan, showing the specific location of the structure and its
relationship to adjacent property lines and all other buildings,
structures and improvements (i.e., sheds, garages, sidewalks,
driveways, parking areas, landscape beds, trees, etc.). In
addition, the site plan shall indicate the general topography of
the property.
(f) An explanation of the reasons why the resource is being
considered for demolition, removal or relocation.
(g) Proposed use for the property or portion thereof from which
the resource will be removed and a timeline for the
implementation of the proposed use (including other local,
county, state and federal approvals).
(h) Proposed disposition of historic materials. (This information
shall be sufficient to show that material is being disposed of in
a legal manner.)
§ 220-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-22
1:471
(i) For Class I and Class II historic resources, a financial analysis
of the property, which shall include the following:
[1] Date of purchase, purchase price and ownership history.
[2] Assessed value of the land and improvements thereon.
(County.)
[3] Certified property appraisal.
[4] For depreciable properties, a pro forma financial
statement prepared by an accountant or broker of record.
[5] Applicant's financial estimates as to the profitability of
adaptive use of the property compared to the proposal for
which demolition, removal or relocation approval is being
sought.
(j) For Class I and Class II historic resources, a completed
conditional use application, signed by the applicant and/or
property owner(s) and other parties having vested interest in
the subject property, authorizing the review process as
described herein, which shall be accompanied by the
appropriate fee as shall be established by Borough Council.
(3) Approval or disapproval of a demolition permit. Demolition permits
for the removal of a Class III structure may be issued by the Codes
Compliance Officer following a nonbinding review by the Historic
Commission. The applicant may be asked to provide additional
documentation or records related to the structure. Demolition
permits for Class I and Class II historic resources shall only be
permitted through the conditional use process, based on credible
evidence to be provided by the applicant in response to each of the
following criteria, in addition to the general provisions of
§ 220-122:
(a) That demolition, removal or relocation of the resource in
question will not adversely effect the historic significance or
architectural integrity of neighboring historic resources or the
historic character of the neighborhood or community.
(b) That there is no feasibility to continue the current use.
(c) That other uses permitted within the underlying zoning
district, either as permitted uses, special exception uses or
conditional uses, have been denied or are not feasible due to
constraints on the building or structure.
(d) That adaptive use opportunities do not exist due to constraints
related to the building, structure or property.
(e) That the proposed new building, structure or use of the
property will not adversely affect the historic significance or
§ 220-22 MANHEIM CODE § 220-22
1:472
architectural integrity of neighboring historic resources or the
historic character of the neighborhood or community.
(f) That the historic resource, its permitted uses and adaptive use
potential does not provide a reasonable rate of return based on
a reasonable initial investment.
(g) That the applicant has not contributed to the existing
conditions, either through neglect or prior renovation,
conversion, alteration or similar physical action.
(h) In addition, the applicant may be required to submit, at the
applicant's expense, written documentation from an
independent registered professional(s) (i.e., structural
engineer, architect, appraiser, etc.), who shall provide opinions
as to the merits of the application.
(4) Hearing procedures. The following provisions shall apply in
addition to those stated in § 220-122E(1):
(a) Borough Council shall forward each application for demolition,
removal or relocation to the Historic Commission.
(b) The recommendation of the Historic Commission, along with
all other related information, shall be forwarded to the
Borough Planning Commission for its review and comment.
(c) The applicant or agent shall be provided an opportunity to
present the proposal to the Historic Commission and Borough
Planning Commission at their regular monthly meetings.
(d) Borough Council shall not take action to approve a conditional
use request for demolition, removal or relocation of a historic
resource without first having received written
recommendation from the Historic Commission along with
written acknowledgment that the Borough Planning
Commission has similarly reviewed the application and the
Historic Commission's recommendation(s).
(5) Enforcement. In addition to provisions of § 220-116B, C, D and E,
Borough Council may authorize action to withhold issuance of any
and all zoning and building permits for a period of one year for any
property which at the time of the enactment of this section was
occupied by a historic resource, which was subsequently
demolished, removed or relocated without approval of a demolition
permit as provided herein. Except that, a permit may be issued for
the abatement of any cited condition governed by the Borough.
K. Demolition by neglect. The act of leaving a Class I, Class II or Class III
historic resource open to the elements (i.e., rain, snow, etc.) or
vandalism and/or failure to properly maintain a historic resource so as
to make it vulnerable to decay or ruin, as determined by the Codes
§ 220-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-22
1:473
Compliance Officer, shall be considered demolition by neglect and the
following shall apply:
(1) Unoccupied principal or accessory buildings or structures. The
owner shall develop a written maintenance program for the
protection of any and all unoccupied principal or accessory
buildings or structures. The maintenance program shall be
established in accordance with the provisions of the Manheim
Borough Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 100, Article I, of the
Code) and/or the guidelines provided within Preservation Brief No.
31, published by the U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park
Service. A copy of the maintenance program shall be filed with the
Codes Compliance Officer and, upon approval, the owner shall take
the necessary steps to implement the plan.
(2) Structural integrity of unoccupied buildings or structures. In
addition to the provisions of Subsection K(1), the maintenance
program shall address measures which the owner shall implement
to assure that structural components are protected and reinforced
to stabilize and maintain the essential form of the building or
structure. Structural features requiring stabilization include, but
are not limited to, roof, chimney(s), cornice, soffit, fascia, spouting,
columns, beams, posts, as well as window and door sills, lintels and
jambs.
(3) Annual inspection. The interior and exterior of the building or
structure shall be inspected no less than annually by the Codes
Compliance Officer, the owner or its agent to determine compliance
with the established maintenance program.
(4) Enforcement. In addition to provisions of § 220-116B, C, D and E,
Borough Council may authorize action to withhold issuance of any
and all zoning or building permits for a period of one year for any
property which at the time of the enactment of this section was
occupied by a historic resource, which was subsequently
demolished as a result of demolition by neglect. Except that,
permits may be issued for the abatement of any cited condition
governed by the Borough.
L. Sign permits. In addition to the general provisions of §§ 220-36 and
220-18M, signs associated with any historic resource or which are on
an adjoining property shall be designed to complement said historic
resource. As such, the applicant shall submit the design, which shall
include a clear description of the size, shape, materials and colors,
along with the proposed wording to the Historic Commission for its
review and comments.
M. Adaptive use regulations. The Pennsylvania Historical and Museum
Commission assisted the Borough in the determination of an eligible
National Register Historic District encompassing more than 900
properties, many of which are categorized as either Class I or II historic
§ 220-22 MANHEIM CODE § 220-22
1:474
resources, as defined herein. Historic resources may be used in
accordance with the permitted use provisions of the underlying zoning
district in which they are located. Additionally, the following adaptive
use provisions have been developed as an incentive for property owners
who have or may wish to initiate preservation, restoration and/or
rehabilitation of a Class I or II historic resource:
(1) Adaptive use. Establishment of adaptive uses shall only be granted
by the Zoning Hearing Board following special exception review.
(2) General criteria. The specific criteria found in Article IV of this
chapter shall govern adaptive use applications, except as may be
noted herein:
(a) The adaptive uses listed in Subsection M(4) shall take
precedence over any restriction of uses provided within the
underlying zoning district, except wherein it is shown that a
specific proposal would cause a threat to the public health,
safety or welfare of the neighborhood, district or community. In
such case, special exception may be denied.
(b) Variances to the number of off-street parking spaces or design
requirements may be granted, by the Zoning Hearing Board to
accommodate special conditions related to the adaptive use,
provided the Zoning Hearing Board determines that adequate
parking is available to support the specific adaptive use.
(c) Variances to the number of off-street parking spaces or design
requirements may also be granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board when it has been determined that the creation of
additional surface area will have an adverse impact to the
historic resource, an adjacent permitted use or historic
resource.
(d) Generally, only one use is permitted on a property. For the
purpose of creating adaptive uses, the Zoning Hearing Board
may grant mixed-use approval for a historic resource wherein
the applicant has documented that sufficient area and
improvements exist to support the uses simultaneously.
(e) Expansion of the historic resource shall only be permitted in
compliance with the provisions of this section and only so far
as the enlargement does not exceed what is minimally
necessary to accommodate the adaptive use.
(f) The applicant must show that preservation, restoration and/or
rehabilitation will be undertaken in accordance with provisions
of this section.
(3) Application process. The following shall be provided in addition to
provisions of Subsection I(2) and § 220-111C and D:
§ 220-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-22
1:475
(a) Responses to the specific criteria provided herein or within the
underlying zoning ordinance, as well as additional documents,
drawings, photographs, etc., which may assist in the review.
(b) The applicant shall meet with the Codes Compliance Officer
and Historic Commission for the purpose of reviewing the
proposal. The Commission shall provide a formal record in the
form of a letter of appropriateness to the applicant and Codes
Compliance Officer. The letter shall include an outline of the
proposal along with any Historic Commission
recommendations and shall further note all points where the
applicant and Historic Commission agreed on implementation
of either the proposal and/or modifications to the proposal.
(4) Adaptive use chart and special exception criteria. This chart
provides a guideline for adaptive uses which may be established in
Class I or Class II historic resources following Zoning Hearing
Board approval of a special exception: [Amended 7-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 622]
Districts
Adaptive Use R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 COA CBD C-1 I PC-1
Antique shop,
Subsection
M(4)(a)
X X X X
Architectural
warehouse,
Subsection
M(4)(b)
X X X X X X
Art shops or
studios,
Subsection
M(4)(c)
X X X X
Bed-andbreakfast,
§ 220-54
X X
Conversion
apartments
§ 220-60
X
Dance/
performing
art/music
studio,
Subsection
M(4)(d)
X X
§ 220-22 MANHEIM CODE § 220-22
1:476
Districts
Adaptive Use R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 COA CBD C-1 I PC-1
Emporium
(county store
or shop),
Subsection
M(4)(e)
X X X
Library
(research or
public),
Subsection
M(4)(f)
X X
Museum,
industrial,
Subsection
M(4)(g)
X X X
Museum,
outdoor,
Subsection
M(4)(h)
X X X X X X X X
Museum,
house,
Subsection
M(4)(i)
X X X X
Professional
offices,
Subsection
M(4)(j)
X X X
(a) Antique shop. This adaptive use may be established in singlefamily
detached dwellings within the R-1, R-2, R-3 and COA
Zones as a special exception, subject to the following:
[1] The principal use of the structure shall remain residential
and shall be occupied by the owner.
[2] Establishment of the use shall not negatively impact onstreet
parking. The applicant shall show that off-street
parking exists to support two spaces for the dwelling, plus
one space for every 400 square feet of gross floor area
associated with the shop.
[3] If adequate off-street parking does not exist, the applicant
shall provide evidence that off-street parking can be
developed on site without negative impact on the property
in question or any adjacent property. The site plan shall
include landscaping and/or buffering in accordance with
Subsection Q(1).
§ 220-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-22
1:477
[4] Nonresident employees shall be prohibited.
[5] No external storage of materials shall be permitted.
However, the neat and orderly exterior display of antiques,
appropriate for exterior ornamentation or use, may take
place (i.e., butter churn, feed trough, water pumps, etc.).
[6] The floor area associated with the shop shall not extend
beyond the first floor of the dwelling and shall not interfere
with the principal residential use. Existing accessory
structures (other than garages), which are deemed to be a
historic resource, may be used in addition to the principal
structure.
[7] One nonilluminated sign, not to exceed two square feet in
display area, shall be permitted.
(b) Architectural warehouse. Dealing in the wholesale, retail and
trading of architectural trim, doors, shutters, windows,
handrails, mouldings, newels, sinks, tubs, radiators, hardware,
fences, fireplace mantels, etc., may be established as an
adaptive use in the COA, CBD, C-1, R-3, I and PC-1 Zones as a
special exception, subject to the following:
[1] The structure shall have a loading dock or other loading/
unloading area which shall not interfere with pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
[2] The premises shall be one which has a previous industrial
or heavy commercial use and which has sufficient ceiling
height and floor area to adequately serve as a warehouse
(i.e., former warehouse, lumber mill, foundry, car
dealership, etc.).
[3] The facility shall provide a warehouse and resource for
historic architectural millwork, plumbing, heating and
electrical components which would be needed in the
restoration of historic resources.
[4] The use shall not be associated with any restoration of the
items being warehoused, except as can be accomplished
without creating a nuisance (i.e., noise, vibration, odor,
glare, smoke, dust, etc.).
(c) Art shops or studios. This adaptive use may be established in
any single-family detached dwelling located in the R-1, R-2, R-3
and COA Zones as a special exception, subject to the following:
[1] The principal use of the structure shall remain residential
and shall be occupied by the owner.
[2] Nonresident employees shall be prohibited.
§ 220-22 MANHEIM CODE § 220-22
1:478
[3] Establishment of the use shall not negatively impact onstreet
parking conditions. The applicant shall show that
off-street parking area exists to support two spaces for the
dwelling plus one space for every 400 square feet of gross
floor area associated with the shop or studio.
[4] If adequate off-street parking does not exist, the applicant
shall provide evidence that off-street parking can be
developed on site without negative impact on the property
in question or any adjacent property. The site plan shall
include landscaping and/or buffering in accordance with
provisions of Subsection Q(1).
[5] The floor area associated with an art shop shall not extend
beyond the first floor of the dwelling. Existing accessory
structures (other than garages) which are deemed to be a
historic resource may be used in addition to the principal
structure.
[6] An art studio may be established on either floor of the
principal structure. Existing accessory structures (other
than garages) which are deemed to be a historic resource
may be occupied or used as an art studio regardless of the
use of the principal structure.
[7] One nonilluminated sign, not to exceed two square feet in
display area, shall be permitted.
(d) Dance/performing arts/music studio. This adaptive use may be
established within the I and PC-1 Zones as a special exception,
subject to the following:
[1] The applicant shall provide documentation, drawings,
photographs, etc., to show what preventative steps are
being taken to address nuisance factors (noise, glare,
odors, vibration, smoke, dust, etc.).
[2] Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space
for every two students enrolled in a class plus one space
for each instructor. The total number of spaces shall be
derived by adding the two largest classes which are
scheduled back to back plus the number of instructors
associated with each class.
[3] Adequate dropoff and pickup area shall be provided in
close proximity to the studio entry.
(e) Emporium (country store). This adaptive use may be
established in the COA, R-3 and R-2 Zones as a special
exception, subject to the following:
§ 220-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-22
1:479
[1] The premises shall be one which has a historic connection
to a former neighborhood or corner store.
[2] The applicant shall show that adequate off-street parking
exists to support the operator of the store, plus one space
for every 400 square feet of gross floor area.
[3] The store shall be limited to those floor areas which were
historically associated with the previous shop.
(f) Library (research or public). This adaptive use may be
established in the COA and R-3 Zones as a special exception,
subject to the following:
[1] The establishment of this use shall require submission of a
structural engineer analysis of the building and its
capacity to support the anticipated weight.
[2] Off-street parking shall be provided for library staff, plus
one space for every 400 square feet of gross floor area.
(g) Industrial museum. This adaptive use may be established in the
I, C-1 and PC-1 Zones as a special exception use, subject to the
following:
[1] Industrial or commercial structure(s) which have historic,
architectural or cultural significance may be established
as an industrial museum.
[2] Displays shall relate primarily to the building's
architecture, furnishings and historic use, as well as
similar displays related to other industrial or commercial
uses which are significant to industry or commerce.
[3] The premises shall be accessible to the public and shall
have off-street parking at a ratio of one space for every 600
square feet of gross building floor area which will be
accessible to the public (i.e., a three-story building,
wherein only the first floor will be accessed, need only
provide parking based on the first-floor areas).
[4] Landscaping and buffering shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection Q(1).
(h) Museums, outdoor. This adaptive use may be established in the
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, COA, CBD, C-1 and I Zones as a special
exception, subject to the following:
[1] The applicant shall submit a land development plan, which
shall also show the intended development and placement
of all buildings, structures and related improvements.
§ 220-22 MANHEIM CODE § 220-22
1:480
[2] The applicant shall provide a schedule of times when the
facility will be open to the public, along with a timeline for
the development of the property.
[3] The plan shall be created in accordance with the
provisions of Subsections N, Development provisions;
Subsection O, Infill; Subsection P, Impact study; and
Subsection Q, Landscaping and buffering.
[4] The proposed demolition, removal or relocation of any
historic resource shall only be done in accordance with the
provisions of Subsection J.
(i) Museums, house. This adaptive use may be established in
single-family detached dwellings within the R-1, R-2, R-3 and
COA Zones as a special exception, subject to the following:
[1] The use of the primary structure may include a house
museum in conjunction with a single-family residence,
provided that the premises shall be occupied by the owner.
[2] A house museum may also be the only use of the premises.
[3] Nonresident employees shall be permitted.
[4] Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space
for every 600 square feet of gross floor area related to the
museum, plus one space for each employee or two spaces
for an associated single-family dwelling.
[5] If adequate off-street parking does not exist, the applicant
shall provide evidence that off-street parking can be added
without impact on the property in question or any adjacent
property. The site plan shall include landscaping and
buffering in accordance with Subsection Q(1).
(j) Professional offices. This adaptive use may be established in a
single-family detached dwelling within the R-1, R-2 and R-3
Zones as a special exception, subject to the following:
[1] The principal use of the structure shall remain residential
and shall be occupied by the owner.
[2] One nonresident employee shall be permitted as either an
assistant or secretary.
[3] Approved professional uses shall include but not be limited
to the following: attorneys, accountants, architects,
dentists, doctors and engineers. Veterinarian offices shall
be prohibited, unless they are otherwise permitted within
the underlying zone provisions.
§ 220-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-22
1:481
[4] Appointments shall be scheduled far enough apart that
there is limited, if any, need for clients to wait for another
to complete meetings or appointments.
[5] The applicant shall provide evidence that off-street
parking exists to support a minimum of five vehicles (two
for the dwelling, one for an employee and two for clients).
Additional off-street parking spaces shall be provided for
any additional family members who drive, if such activity
will overlap with business/appointment hours.
[6] If adequate off-street parking does not exist, the applicant
shall provide evidence that off-street parking can be
developed on site without negative impact on the property
in question or any adjacent property. The site plan shall
include landscaping and/or buffering in accordance with
the provisions of Subsection Q(1).
[7] One nonilluminated sign, not to exceed two square feet in
display area, shall be permitted.68
N. Development provisions. Numerous lots within the Borough do not
conform to area and bulk provisions of this chapter. The reason for the
nonconformities are directly related to the Borough's development. The
nonconformities (i.e., narrow and/or deep lots, limited side yard
setbacks, unusually large properties, buildings placed at the public
right-of-way line instead of placement at required front setback lines,
etc.) add to the character and uniqueness of the Borough. In an effort to
maintain the character of a historic resource, neighborhood, district or
the community, it may be appropriate for the Zoning Hearing Board to
grant variances to certain design criteria (i.e., lot coverage, minimum
setback or other area and bulk requirements). Similarly, these issues
need to be considered when development of a vacant lot is proposed
within an established neighborhood and/or adjacent to a historic
resource(s). Efforts to protect historic resources located on large
parcels proposed for subdivision must be undertaken. The lot
dimensions and/or setback requirements for a historic resource and the
lots adjacent to a historic resource may need to be adjusted and/or
other alternatives may need to be considered in order to preserve the
historic resource on its own lot. In addition to the provisions of
§ 220-111, the following statements are provided to assist the Zoning
Hearing Board.
(1) Residential subdivision. The following shall apply where Class I or
Class II historic resources exist on a site that is to be subdivided in
a residential zone (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, COA):
(a) The lot which will support the historic resource shall be
sufficiently sized to preserve those portions and features of the
68.Editor's Note: Original Subsection (11), Owner-occupied boardinghouse, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622.
§ 220-22 MANHEIM CODE § 220-22
1:482
resource which are significant to its historic, architectural and
cultural values.
[1] The property area shall be sufficient to support other
required improvements such as off-street parking,
landscaping and/or open spaces even though the property
may not comply with stated minimum lot area or maximum
lot coverage provisions.
[2] A lot may be deemed to be sufficiently sized even though a
nonconforming side yard setback exists, if the subdivision
plan compensates for the deficiency by providing an
enlarged setback area on the opposite side and/or rear
yard of the proposed parcel. This modification may result
in the creation of a lot which does not comply with stated
minimum lot area or maximum coverage provision.
[3] The major factor in granting a variance to design
standards shall be the impact that the proposal will have
on the character of the neighborhood, district or
community as well as any direct impact that the proposal
will have on adjacent Class I or Class II historic resources.
(b) The residual lot area left for development may only be divided
in a fashion which replicates the character of the
neighborhood.
[1] Variances granted to design standards (i.e., lot width,
building setback, yard area, maximum lot coverage,
minimum lot area, etc.) shall not be less than the average
of those found within the neighborhood and shall include
an analysis of any historic resource which faces the subject
property.
[2] Development of any newly created lot where a variance
has been granted to design standards shall be restricted to
those uses which do not exceed the current residential
density within the neighborhood (i.e., if the predominance
of structures in the neighborhood are single-family or
single-family semidetached, then only single-family
semidetached or single-family detached dwellings will be
permitted), regardless of the permitted uses listed within
the provisions of the underlying zoning district. Uses
which exceed the established standard shall be prohibited
(i.e., in the above example, multiple-family dwelling and
townhouses would not be allowed).
[3] In addition, the provisions of Subsection O, Infill
development, shall apply to construction of new buildings
or structures placed on newly created lots.
§ 220-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-22
1:483
(2) Residential expansion of a historic resource. The following shall
apply when expansion of a Class I or Class II historic resource is
proposed on a site within a residential zone (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4,
COA):
(a) Expansion of a historic resource shall be planned in a manner
which preserves the historic, architectural and cultural values
of the resource as well as the character of all historic resources
on adjoining properties.
(b) In addition, the provisions of Subsection O, Infill development,
shall apply to any expansion proposed within a side yard area.
Except that, the criteria noted within Subsection O(1)(g),
Orientation and location, shall not apply.
(3) Nonresidential expansion of a historic resource. The following shall
apply when a Class I or Class II historic resource exists within a
nonresidential zone (CBD, C-1 and I) when expansion or subdivision
is proposed:
(a) Consideration shall be given to the proposed (permitted or
adaptive) use of the historic resource to such degree that the
lot which will support the resource is sufficiently sized and
protected from any infill development which may be proposed
on the adjoining newly created parcels or other adjoining
vacant property.
[1] The property area shall be sufficient to support the stated
off-street parking requirements, while providing sufficient
landscaping and/or open space area as may be reasonably
required.
[2] The lot may be deemed to be of sufficient size even though
minimum building setbacks are presently lacking on one
or more sides of the resource if compensation is provided
on the remaining sides, even though the modification does
not result in the creation of a parcel which meets the
minimum lot area or maximum lot coverage provisions.
[3] The maximum lot coverage provision, by district, shall not
exceed the following:
[a] CBD, 90%.
[b] C-1, 65%.
[c] I, 75%.
(b) In addition, provisions of Subsection O, Infill development,
shall apply to any expansion proposed within a side yard area.
Except that, the criteria noted within Subsection O(1)(g),
Orientation and location, shall not apply.
§ 220-22 MANHEIM CODE § 220-22
1:484
O. Infill development. The process of placing new principal and/or related
accessory buildings or structures on an undeveloped property is
considered to be infill development. Construction and placement of
such new buildings, structures, objects and related improvements shall
be designed to assure that they do not negatively impact any Class I or
Class II historic resource located within the neighborhood.
(1) Application procedures. In addition to the provisions of § 220-117,
applicants seeking approval for infill development(s) shall submit
sufficient documentation, including site plan, floor plans, elevations
and architectural details for all proposed structures, buildings,
driveways, parking areas, walkways, planters or ornamental yard
treatments. The goal of the submission shall be to show that the
proposed infill has been designed in line with the following criteria
in relation to any Class I or Class II historic resource:
(a) Size, scale and proportion. New construction shall relate to
dominant proportions, size and human scale of adjacent
buildings and shall not be more than 10% taller or shorter than
those structures.
(b) Massing and shape. New construction shall incorporate
massing, building and roof shapes that are present in
surrounding buildings.
(c) Materials. Building materials used in new construction shall be
compatible with those found in surrounding buildings.
Traditional materials, common within the neighborhood (i.e.,
wood, brick, stucco, stone, etc.) are preferred.
(d) Cornice and floor-to-floor heights. New construction shall
continue the floor-to-floor and cornice heights of surrounding
buildings or should incorporate detailing that suggests those
heights.
(e) Patterns and rhythm. The rhythm of facades along the street
and components thereof shall be maintained.
(f) Windows and doors. New construction shall use window and
door openings which replicate the design, type, style and size
typical to those found on historic resources in the
neighborhood.
(g) Orientation and location. Principal facades of new construction
shall face the same direction as the rest of the buildings on the
street. The prevailing setback line at the street shall also be
preserved.
(h) Color and contrast. The exterior appearance of structures can
be complemented by the proper selection of colors. Therefore,
color designations shall be incorporated into the elevations
and color charts shall be provided for review.
§ 220-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-22
1:485
(2) Approval/review process. The Historic Commission shall meet with
the applicant and the Codes Compliance Officer for the purpose of
reviewing infill proposals. A formal record of the review shall be
provided to the applicant and the Codes Compliance Officer in the
form of a letter of appropriateness. The letter shall include an
outline of all modifications suggested by the Commission and shall
further note all points where the applicant and Commission agreed
on the implementation of either the plan(s) as presented or
modifications to said plan(s). The goal of this process shall be to
create an infill development which is adequately designed to
eliminate negative impacts on adjacent Class I and/or Class II
historic resources.
P. Impact study. Certain types of development may have a direct or
indirect impact on Class I or Class II historic resource(s). In those
cases, additional information shall be supplied by the applicant so that
the Historic Commission, Planning Commission and Borough Council
can assure that adequate protective measures have been considered
and that potentially negative impacts to Class I and/or Class II historic
resource(s) have been mitigated.
(1) General provisions. In addition to provisions found within this
section, applicants seeking the following approvals shall submit an
impact study:
(a) Subdivision of any property located within 100 feet of a
property which supports a Class I or Class II historic resource.
(b) Land development plans for development or expansion of
commercial, industrial or planned industrial uses when the
subject property is within 100 feet of a property which
supports a Class I or Class II historic resource.
(c) Bridge or highway construction projects wherein the highway
or bridge will be widened or otherwise enlarged, when the
expansion or project scope is within 50 feet of a Class I or Class
II historic resource.
(2) Application procedures. The impact study shall include the
following information for each Class I or Class II historic resource
located within the distances provided in Subsection P(1) in addition
to any general requirements for approval:
(a) A listing and physical description of all historic resources
identified.
(b) A map which shall clearly show all structures within the design
criteria area as well as the location of the historic resource(s).
(c) The proposed distances which will be established between the
historic resource(s) and the proposed structure(s).
§ 220-22 MANHEIM CODE § 220-22
1:486
(d) General site information in relation to the existing and
proposed changes to the topography between any proposed
structure(s) and the historic structure(s). This information
shall include all impervious surfaces, any stormwater facilities,
swales, landscape areas, etc., which may, either directly or
indirectly, impact the historic resource(s).
(e) A sufficient number of photographs showing existing features
between the proposed development area and all historic
resources. (Color photos no less than four inches by six
inches.)
(f) Photographs of each historic resource identified in sufficient
number to illustrate architectural as well as site-related
features.
(g) Specific mitigation steps which have been developed to
address potential impacts on adjacent historic resource(s) and
which may include any or all of the following:
[1] A description of the investigation process which the
applicant has undertaken to determine potential impacts.
[2] Narrative and visual exhibits which describe the impacts
which were determined in relation to each historic
resource (i.e., stormwater, historic setting, architectural
integrity, noise, vibration, glare, future use, etc.).
[3] Plans, policies and design factors which have been created
to deal with the impacts in an effort to mitigate the effects
that the proposed development will have on each historic
resource (i.e., incorporation of architectural details,
landscape buffers, screening, building placements, etc.).
(3) Approval/review process. The Historic Commission shall review the
impact study and all related information and make a
recommendation to the Manheim Borough Planning Commission,
the Lancaster County Planning Commission and Manheim Borough
Council. Final authorization will be in the form of the recorded
subdivision and/or land development plan and the resolution for
plan adoption. The applicant will be required to post an
improvement guarantee for the implementation of required public
improvements.
Q. Landscaping and buffering. The following provisions shall apply in
addition to the general provisions of § 220-35 of this chapter for Class I
and Class II historic resources wherein subdivision is proposed in
accordance with Subsection N, and may in turn be applied to
subdivision and land development plans governed by Subsection P:
(1) Requirements. A landscape and buffering plan shall be required as
follows:
§ 220-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-22
1:487
(a) The landscape and buffering plan shall be prepared by a
landscape architect, nurseryman or other individual whom the
Historical Commission shall deem to be qualified.
(b) The landscape and buffering plan shall show all pertinent
information, including the location, size and species of all
individual trees, shrubs, bushes and flowering beds to be
either planted or relocated. The plan shall also address any
mature trees, bushes or shrubs which will be removed,
whether or not they will be reused.
(c) The plan shall utilize screening, buffering and the selection
and placement of trees, shrubs, bushes and other plants and
flowers to minimize the impact of the proposed development,
construction or alteration on historic resources and shall be
designed to provide an enhancement to the streetscape while
protecting the integrity of the setting of the historic
resource(s), and shall further be designed to minimize the
impact on any adjacent historic resource(s) and/or significant
vegetation.
(2) Review and approval. The plan shall be presented to the Historic
Commission and shall be submitted by it, along with written
recommendations, to the Borough Planning Commission prior to
any official action by Borough Council to approve the subdivision or
land development plan.
§ 220-22 MANHEIM CODE § 220-22
1:488
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 220-23. Applicability.
The regulations contained within this Article III shall apply to all uses within
the Borough.
§ 220-24. Accessory uses and structures. [Amended 1-30-1996 by
Ord. No. 537; 1-30-1996 by Ord. No. 538; 3-28-2000 by Ord. No.
567]
A. Fences and walls.
(1) No fence or wall (except livestock, required junkyard or tennis
court walls or fences or a retainer wall of a building permitted
under the terms of this chapter) shall be erected to a height of more
than three feet in a front yard and more than six feet in any other
yard within the Residential (R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4), Conversion
Office and Apartment (COA) or Central Business District (CBD)
Zones. No fences made in whole or in part of wire with barbs,
electrified wire and/or razor wire shall be constructed, erected or
maintained within the Residential (R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4),
Conversion Office and Apartment (COA), Central Business District
(CBD) Zones or on any property currently used for residential
purposes or along any shared property line adjacent to a property
which is used for residential purposes.
(2) Within the Highway Commercial (C-1) or Industrial (I) Zones, no
fence nor wall shall be erected to a height of more than 10 feet in
any yard. Fences within the Highway Commercial (C-1) and
Industrial (I) Zones may utilize wires with barbs as a security fence
as long as the barbed wire is installed in a horizontal fashion at a
height which is no less than eight feet above the highest adjacent
grade; the use of razor wire shall be prohibited.
(3) Agricultural properties shall be permitted to use fencing which is
made in whole or in part of electrified wire or wire with barbs;
provided, however, that no such fence shall be placed along any
public right-of-way or adjacent to a residentially zoned property or
a property which has a residential use unless the wire fence is set
back from the property line and is furthermore protected from the
residence by the installation of a second fence designed and
installed to keep the public away from the potentially dangerous
wire fence.
(4) No fence shall block motorist's view of vehicles entering or exiting
the property or any other private or public street, alley or right-ofway.
§ 220-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-24
1:489
B. Swimming pools. No permanent structure shall be permitted without an
operable filtration system utilizing chlorine, bromine or some other
antibacterial agent. All swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by
a minimum four-foot-high fence or wall with a self-closing and lockable
gate; however, this does not apply to aboveground pools having a wall
measuring four feet in height and having a retractable ladder. Such
fence or wall shall be erected before any pool is filled with water. All
pools must be set back at least 10 feet from all lot lines. No water from
a pool shall be discharged onto any public street or alley. These
requirements shall not apply to man-made ponds, lakes or other
impoundments unless the primary purpose for their construction is
swimming.
C. Tennis courts. All tennis courts shall include an open-mesh permanent
fence 10 feet in height behind each baseline. Such fence shall extend
parallel to said baseline at least 10 feet beyond the court's playing
surface unless the entire court is enclosed. Any lighting fixtures shall be
arranged to prevent objectionable glare on adjoining property.
D. Portable on-demand storage units. [Added 11-14-2006 by Ord. No.
597]
(1) A portable on-demand storage structure may be utilized as a
temporary structure within the Borough when in compliance with
the standards of this subsection. Any use of such structure within
the Borough not in compliance with this subsection shall be
unlawful.
(a) The term "portable on-demand storage structure" (PODS®)
shall be defined to be: any container, storage unit, shed-like
container or other portable structure that can be or is used for
the storage of personal property in a residential zone or
approved temporary storage in a commercial zone and which is
located for such purposes outside an enclosed building other
than an accessory building or shed complying with all building
codes and land use requirements.
(b) Before placing a PODS® unit on his or her property, a person
must submit an application and receive approval from the
Borough Code Office. An insurance certificate providing
liability insurance in the amount of $100,000, provided by the
company supplying the PODS®, and a review fee to be
established from time to time by Borough resolution must
accompany the application. The registration application can be
obtained at the Borough office at 15 East High Street,
Manheim, or you may call (717) 665-2461, Extension 14, and
one will be mailed out to you.
(c) A portable on-demand storage structure may be located as a
temporary structure within the Borough for a period not
exceeding 10 days in duration from time of delivery to time of
§ 220-24 MANHEIM CODE § 220-24
1:490
removal. Only one PODS® unit may be placed at any
residential or commercial property at one time and no more
than two times in any given thirty-day calendar-day period.
Each time a unit is placed constitutes the payment of permit/
review fee. In the event of a fire or natural disaster, a review
will be conducted and extensions will be considered.
(d) Such temporary structures located on private property,
whenever possible, shall not be located in the front yard and/or
placed closer than 10 feet to the property line unless placed on
an existing impervious driveway.
(e) The placement of PODS® on the public street, sidewalk or
other public right-of-way within the Borough limits is
prohibited unless, due to the topography or other physical
condition of the land, it is impractical to place it on private
property. Containers located in public areas must be placed so
as to create no traffic hazard from neighboring driveways,
alleys and/or streets. Placement on any public property must
be approved by Council.
(f) No temporary storage unit shall be used to store solid waste,
construction debris, demolition debris, illegal or hazardous
material, or goods for a property other than the residential or
commercial property where the unit is located.
(g) Such temporary structures may not exceed eight feet six
inches in height, eight feet in width or 20 feet in length and be
maintained in good condition. The applicant as well as the
supplier shall be responsible for ensuring that the unit shall
have a presentable appearance and be free from graffiti and
unnecessary signage at all times. It shall be the obligation of
the owner or user of such temporary structure to secure it in a
manner that does not endanger the safety of persons or
property in the vicinity of the PODS®.
(h) PODS® shall be prohibited in the flood zone.
(2) Enforcement and penalties.
(a) Failure to obtain permission for placement of such temporary
structures shall result in the issuance of an after-the-fact
registration fee set at two times the amount of the then current
permit/review fee generally associated with the placement of a
portable on-demand storage unit.
(b) Any person who shall place a PODS® unit in violation of this
subsection shall, upon conviction before a Magisterial District
Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine not less than $100 and not
more than $1,000 together with the costs of prosecution and,
upon default in the payment thereof, be sentenced to undergo
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 220-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-24
1:491
E. Satellite dish antennas.
(1) In any R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, COA and CBD Zones, one ground-mounted
satellite dish antenna up to three feet in diameter may be permitted
by right, subject to the following criteria. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to wireless or cellular communications
antennas and towers and cellular sites. [Amended 7-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 622]
(a) All installations must comply with all accessory use, yard,
height, bulk and setback requirements specified within the
zone.
(b) All installations shall be located (where possible) to prevent
obstruction of the antenna's reception window from potential
permitted development on adjoining properties.
(c) All installations must include screening treatments located
along the antenna's nonreception window axis and low-level
ornamental landscape treatments along the reception window
axis of the antenna's base. Such treatments should completely
enclose the antenna. Required screening shall consist of
evergreen plantings that provide eighty-percent visual
blockage of the area between ground level and a height of
three feet along the antenna's nonreception window axis.
Required low-level ornamental landscaping shall consist of
vegetative materials that are planted with sufficient density to
form an enclosure with the required screening around the base
of the antenna. Ornamental landscaping height will be
determined by the installation's required elevation alignments.
[1] The following diagrams present illustrative examples of a
required screening and landscaping treatment.
§ 220-24 MANHEIM CODE § 220-24
1:492
Side View Top View
[2] All screening and landscaping requirements can be waived
if the satellite dish antenna is at least 100 feet from any
property line.
(d) All installations shall be securely anchored to the ground to
prevent detachment during foul weather conditions. The
applicant shall furnish evidence (statements and/or drawings)
indicating the foundation method to be employed.
(e) No transmission of video format data shall be permitted.
(f) The allowance of a satellite dish antenna shall in no way place
any liability upon the Borough or its Zoning Hearing Board for
the obstruction of the antenna's reception window due to
permitted construction on adjoining or nearby properties. Any
arrangements made to protect the antenna's reception window
shall be between private parties and not the Borough.
(2) In an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, COA or CBD Zone, one roof-mounted (to a
principal building) satellite dish antenna up to three feet in
diameter may be permitted by special exception, subject to the
following criteria. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
wireless or cellular communications antennas and towers and
cellular sites. [Amended 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622]
(a) Demonstration by the applicant that compliance with the
applicable accessory yard, setback and height requirements
would cause obstruction of a ground-mounted satellite dish
antenna's reception window; furthermore, such obstruction
involves factors beyond the applicant's control.
§ 220-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-24
1:493
(b) All applications must include certification by a commonwealth
registered engineer that the proposed installation complies
with the requirements listed in Section 622.0 of the BOCA
National Building Code/1990, and any subsequent
amendments. Furthermore, written documentation of such
compliance, including load distributions within the building's
support structure, shall be furnished.
(c) No transmission of video format data shall be permitted.
(d) The satellite dish antenna must be set back at least the
horizontal distance equal to its maximum height from all
property lines.
(e) Any granting of a special exception for a satellite dish antenna
shall in no way place any liability upon the Borough or its
Zoning Hearing Board for the obstruction of the antenna's
reception window due to permitted construction on adjoining
or nearby properties. Any arrangements made to protect the
antenna's reception window shall be between private parties
and not the Borough.
(3) In any C-1 or I Zone, ground-mounted satellite dish antennas up to
12 feet in diameter may be permitted by right, subject to the
following criteria: [Amended 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622]
(a) All principal use installation shall comply with the area, height,
bulk and setback standards imposed upon principal uses.
(b) All accessory use installations shall be located within those
yards specified for other accessory uses within the zone and
comply with other accessory use requirements.
(c) All installations shall be securely anchored to the ground to
prevent detachment during foul weather conditions. The
applicant shall furnish evidence (statements and/or drawings)
indicating the foundation method to be employed.
(d) An installation exceeding three feet in diameter shall be
screened from any adjoining residentially zoned land. Such
screening can be waived if the antenna is set back a distance at
least five times its diameter from the residentially zoned
parcel.
(e) Those installations used to transmit video format data shall be
completely enclosed by an eight-foot-high fence. Such fence
shall include signs warning of dangerous radiation levels, must
be screened from adjoining residentially zoned properties, and
must be locked at all times. This screening requirement can be
waived if the fence is set back a distance at least five times the
diameter of the satellite dish antenna from the residentially
zoned parcel.
§ 220-24 MANHEIM CODE § 220-24
1:494
(f) The allowance of a satellite dish antenna(s) shall in no way
place any liability upon the Borough for the obstruction of the
antenna's reception window due to permitted construction on
adjoining or nearby properties. Any arrangements made to
protect the antenna's reception window shall be between
private parties and not the Borough.
(4) In any C-1 or I Zone, roof-mounted satellite dish antennas may be
permitted by right, subject to the following criteria:
(a) Demonstration by the applicant that compliance with the
applicable yard, setback and height restrictions would result in
the obstruction of the antenna's reception window if it were
ground-mounted; furthermore, such obstruction involves
factors beyond the applicant's control.
(b) The satellite dish antenna must be set back at least the
horizontal distance equal to its maximum height from all
property lines.
(c) All applications must include certification by a commonwealth
registered engineer that the proposed installation complies
with those standards listed in Section 622.0 of the BOCA
National Building Code/1990, and any subsequent
amendments. Furthermore, written documentation of such
compliance, including load distributions within the building's
support structure, shall be furnished.
(d) Those installations used to transmit video format data shall be
completely enclosed by an eight-foot-high nonclimbable fence.
Such fence shall include signs warning of dangerous radiation
levels and must be locked when unattended.
(e) The allowance of a satellite dish antenna(s) shall in no way
place liability upon the Borough for the obstruction of the
antenna's reception window due to permitted construction on
adjoining or nearby properties. Any arrangements made to
protect the antenna's reception window shall be between
private parties and not the Borough.
F. Alternative energy sources. Except for those contained on farms, wind
energy conversion systems (WECS) shall not be permitted in the front
yard area of any property. Height regulations do not apply to WECS
units, provided that the height of the WECS unit shall not be greater
than the shortest distance measured along a horizontal plane from the
unit to any lot line. WECS units may be placed on the roof of any
structure, provided that the perimeter of the unit does not cover 25% of
the roof area of the structure on which the WECS unit is placed. The
additional height extension shall be so positioned that the height of the
WECS unit above the roof is less than the distance measured along a
horizontal plane from such unit to any lot line. All transmission lines to
and from any freestanding WECS unit or any supporting building or
§ 220-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-24
1:495
structure shall be buried underground. Solar energy units shall be
permitted in any zone and subject to the requirements of that zone.
G. Ornamental ponds and wading pools.
(1) Such structures shall comply with all accessory use setbacks.
(2) No such impoundment shall contain more than 26.6 cubic feet of
water (200 gallons). All ponds, pools or other impoundments
exceeding the requirements of this section shall be considered as
"man-made lakes, dams and impoundments" and are subject to the
criteria listed in § 220-24H of this chapter.
(3) No such impoundment shall have a length or diameter exceeding
15 feet nor a maximum depth exceeding two feet.
(4) All such ponds or pools shall be maintained so as to not pose a
nuisance by reason of odor or the harboring of insects.
(5) No such pond(s) shall be used for the commercial hatching of fish
or other species.
H. Man-made lakes, dams and impoundments.
(1) All lakes, dams, ponds and impoundments may be permitted in any
zone, subject to the following:
(2) All dams, ponds, lakes and impoundments located along and
connected to a stream, that involve any of the following, shall
require the obtainment of a permit from the PA DEP Bureau of
Dams and Waterways, Division of Dam Safety, or a letter indicating
that the proposed use does not require a PA DEP permit:
(a) The dam, pond or impoundment contains a volume of at least
50 acre-feet.
(b) The dam reaches a height of 15 feet.
(c) The dam, pond or impoundment impounds the water from a
watershed of at least 100 acres.
(3) All dams, ponds and impoundments not contiguous to a stream that
have an intake, outlet, or both, and/or have an embankment within
50 feet of a stream shall require the obtainment of a permit from
the PA DEP Bureau of Dams and Waterways, Division of Waterways
and Stormwater Management.
(4) All dams, ponds and impoundments shall be located at least 75 feet
from adjoining lot lines and any subsurface sewage disposal system
or well.
(5) All other dams, ponds and impoundments require the submission of
a statement by a qualified engineer that the proposed use is
properly constructed and will not pose a threat to the public safety
§ 220-24 MANHEIM CODE § 220-24
1:496
nor the environment during normal flow conditions and those
associated with the base flood. All dams shall be constructed to
a height of one foot above the water surface elevation occurring
during the base flood.
(6) Requirements for fencing. All ponds constructed within areas
subject to livestock shall be enclosed by fencing that prevents
livestock from trampling the pond's shores and polluting the
waters.
(7) Maintenance. All ponds shall be regularly maintained, and floating
debris shall be removed from all pipes and spillways. All ground
cover shall be trimmed. Weeds, brush and trees shall not be
permitted to grow on the dam or spillway.
I. Garage/yard sales. Within any zone, an owner and/or occupant may
conduct up to two garage/yard sales per year. No garage or yard sale
shall be conducted for a period longer than three consecutive days.
Such sales may offer for sale personal possessions; no import or
stocking of inventory shall be permitted. Only one four-square-foot sign
shall be permitted, advertising the garage/yard sale, located upon the
premises where the sale occurs, and shall be removed promptly upon
the completion of the sale. In no case shall any aspect of the garage/
yard sale be conducted in a street right-of-way. The conduct of garage
sales beyond the extent described herein represents a commercial
business and requires appropriate zoning authorization.
J. Accessory repair of personal motor vehicles. The Borough understands
the need to provide residents the flexibility to perform routine
maintenance, repair and servicing of personal motor vehicles, owned
and/or leased by the person performing such services. Each individual
performing such work has an obligation to other residents to assure
that the work is done in a safe manner and in such a way that it does not
become a visual or audible nuisance. Routine maintenance, repair and
servicing of personal motor vehicles is permitted, subject to the
following:
(1) All vehicles shall be maintained with proper licensure.
(2) All work shall be performed on the vehicle owner's (lessee's)
property of residence.
(3) Work shall be limited to minor repairs that, due to their general
scope, are felt to have minimum, if any, impact on neighboring
residents. The following listing is provided as a guideline of the
types of activities which are permitted:
(a) Servicing and replacement of spark plugs, batteries,
distributors and distributor parts.
(b) Repair and replacement of tires and wheels, excluding
recapping and regrooving.
§ 220-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-24
1:497
(c) Replacement of water hoses, fan belts, brake fluid,
transmission fluid, oil filters, air filters, oil, grease, light bulbs,
fuses, floor mats and carpeting, seat covers, seat belts,
windshield wipers, mirrors and engine coolant.
(d) Repair and replacement of car radios, tape players, amplifiers
and speakers.
(e) Cleaning and flushing of radiators, only when flushed into
watertight catch basin.
(f) Repair and replacement of fuel pump, oil pump and line
repairs.
(g) Minor servicing and adjustment of carburetors.
(h) Minor motor adjustment not involving the removal of the motor
head or crankcase nor the revving of the motor.
(i) Minor body repairs, excluding the replacement of body parts,
the complete repainting of the body, and the application of
undercoating.
(j) Cleaning of all exterior and interior surfaces, including
washing, shampooing, vacuuming, rubbing, polishing, waxing
and the application of paint sealants.
(4) All by-products or waste fuels, lubricants, chemicals and other
products shall be properly disposed of.
(5) All activities provided in § 220-24J(3) shall be conducted during
daylight hours or within an enclosed garage so as not to disturb
neighboring residents.
(6) Use of compressed-air-driven tools shall be limited so as not to
disturb neighboring residents owing to noise.
(7) The practice of jacking up or raising a vehicle off the ground shall
be permitted for limited periods, subject to the following:
(a) The area on which the vehicle is located shall be relatively level
and shall be somewhat remote to passersby.
(b) The method of raising the vehicle shall be safe and shall
provide a structurally stable base which can resist lateral
forces.
(c) The vehicle shall not be left unattended for prolonged periods.
(d) The work area shall not be readily accessible to or create an
attractive nuisance for children.
(e) Vehicles which are located in an enclosed garage are exempt
from the provisions of § 220-24J(7)(a) through (d).
§ 220-24 MANHEIM CODE § 220-24
1:498
K. Pet project. The Borough understands the desire by families to educate
their children with reference to the raising of animals not typically
found within a borough. Furthermore, the Borough realizes that, due to
its close proximity to farms, opportunities may present themselves for
families to get involved in programs through organizations such as 4-H,
FFA and FHA which promote such educational programs. The following
criteria shall apply for those instances where a family desires to
undertake such a project:
(1) In any R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and COA Zone, the establishment of a pet
project (designed to provide for the raising of a limited number of a
single specific species of animal) shall be permitted as an accessory
use to any single-family property.
(2) The applicant's son, daughter or other resident of the premises
shall be affiliated with a recognized organization such as the 4-H,
FFA or FHA, and the desired pet project shall be one recognized by
the said organization.
(3) The applicant shall provide a letter, as provided herein, from the
Pennsylvania Game Commission or other appropriate state or
federal agency for any proposed pet project which is designed to be
a wildlife restocking project.
(a) The letter shall state that the proposed project is one which is
legal and for which there is a need and purpose.
(b) The letter shall provide copies of any specific criteria which the
agency requires the applicant to comply with in the raising and
release of the specific animal(s).
(4) Animals which may be associated with the pet project shall be
those which are herein defined as being small animals (no more
than four adult animals are to be associated with the pet project)
and the following specific large farm animals:
(a) One sheep; or
(b) One goat.
(5) The animal(s) associated with a pet project shall be housed in a
proper pen, the design for which shall be submitted for review and
approval and shall provide as follows:
(a) The structure shall incorporate no less than three walls and a
sufficient roof area to provide a weatherproof shelter.
Materials used in the construction of the pen shall be those
rated for exterior use and exposure, with a sufficient system of
anchoring designed to resist local wind loads.
(b) The keeper of such animal(s) shall show that adequate facilities
for the feeding and watering of the subject animal(s) will be
provided.
§ 220-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-24
1:499
(c) The keeper of such animal(s) shall show that adequate
provisions are being implemented to collect, store and dispose
of the droppings and other litter associated with the keeping of
the subject animal(s). The containers to be used in the process
shall be kept covered and shall be cleaned on a regular basis to
avoid the potential for detectable odors.
(d) The keeper of such animal(s) shall show that the feed and
bedding shall be stored and kept in ratproof, weatherproof and
fly-tight containers, and that every such container shall be kept
closed.
(e) The applicant shall show that a sufficient fenced in area will be
provided which is conducive to the type of animal(s) to be
associated with the pet project, with the restriction that the
area shall not exceed 100 square feet including any pen.
(f) The height of the fencing shall be sufficient to keep the
animal(s) within the pen and shall be adequately constructed
to prevent the animal(s) from being able to escape from its
confines.
(g) The land on which the pen is located shall be graded so that
drainage shall not be directed at or onto adjacent properties
and so that ponding of stormwater cannot occur in any manner
which could create a public nuisance or health hazard.
(6) The pen structure and/or all fencing associated with the pet project
shall not be located in any front yard area and shall be located no
less than 10 feet from all side and rear lot lines, but in no case
closer than 15 feet from the public right-of-way of any street or
alley.
(7) The owner/applicant shall exercise proper care and control of the
animals associated with any approved pet project. Such animals
shall not be permitted to run at large upon the property, other than
within the confines of the approved and established pen.
(8) Applicants shall receive approval for the establishment of a pet
project and shall construct the necessary pen which shall receive
Borough approval prior to having the intended animal on the
premises.
(9) The pet project shall not be related to the raising of any animal(s)
for commercial use or for profit.
(10) In addition to the provisions found herein, the applicant's activities
shall be required to be in accordance with any and all state and
federal guidelines.
§ 220-24 MANHEIM CODE § 220-24
1:500
§ 220-25. Unenclosed storage.
(11) The applicant for a pet project shall provide credible evidence that
the subject premises is in compliance with the provisions of
household pet with reference to the limit of four adult animals.
(12) Permits for pet projects shall be revoked and the animal(s) shall be
removed if the animal or the maintenance of the pen or associated
improvements are determined to be a public nuisance, as defined
herein. In addition, failure of the applicant to keep the animal(s)
within the pen area shall also constitute a public nuisance and may
be grounds for revoking the pet project permit and for the removal
of the animal(s).
(13) Animal(s) which are not specifically listed herein are intended to be
excluded and will be handled on a case-by-case basis by the
Manheim Borough Zoning Hearing Board as a variance.
(14)No portion of these provisions shall be interpreted to replace or
modify the provisions of kennels as provided herein.
(15)No portion of these provisions shall be interpreted to replace or
modify any of the provisions of Chapter 84, Animals, of the Code of
the Borough of Manheim, also known as Ordinance No. 524.
A. Recreational vehicles, boats, campers, trailers, motor homes and
trucks. Within any residential zone or upon any property used
principally for residential purposes, the storage of recreational
vehicles, travel trailers, boats (including trailers), campers, motor
homes, fifth-wheels, and trailers used solely for the transport of the
residents' recreational vehicle(s) is permitted only according to the
following requirements.
(1) For the purposes of this section, recreational vehicles shall be
divided into two separate categories:
(a) Class I vehicles. Those vehicles which are either self-contained
(such as motor homes) or which are dependent upon an
external connection to a motorized vehicle (such as a boat-andtrailer
combination), that possess no more than 200 square
feet, as measured to the vehicle's outermost edges (excluding
hitching mechanism), nor exceed a height of 10 feet, as
measured from the ground to the highest point of the main
body of the vehicle. Vehicle height shall not be measured on
vehicle accessories (e.g., air conditioners, vents, hatches,
masts, antennas, outrigging fishing poles, etc.), but will be
measured to the highest point of any flybridge or other boat
console.
(b) Class II vehicles. Those vehicles which are either selfcontained
(such as motor homes) or which are dependent upon
an external connection to a motorized vehicle (such as a boat-
§ 220-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-25
1:501
and-trailer combination), that possess more than 200 square
feet, as measured to the vehicle's outermost edges (excluding
hitching mechanism) and/or exceed a height of 10 feet, as
measured from the ground to the highest point of the main
body of the vehicle. Vehicle height shall not be measured on
vehicle accessories (e.g., air conditioners, vents, hatches,
masts, antennas, outrigging fishing poles, etc.), but will be
measured to the highest point of any flybridge or other boat
console.
(2) The temporary parking of one Class I or Class II vehicle for periods
not exceeding one week during any thirty-day period is permitted
on or adjacent to a paved or gravel driveway in any front yard, so
long as the vehicle is set back no less than 10 feet from any street
right-of-way and five feet from adjoining property lines, provided
that the provisions of § 220-28 shall apply on corner lots.
(3) The storage of Class I or Class II vehicle(s) shall be permitted
behind the building setback line, so long as the unit is set back no
less than five feet from an adjoining lot line or rear alley right-ofway.
All areas used for storage of Class I or Class II vehicles shall
be maintained so as to keep vegetation properly trimmed. All
vehicles shall display proper licensure and shall be maintained in
such a manner as to prevent the leakage of fuels and/or lubricants
into the ground.
(4) The storage of Class I or Class II vehicles shall not occur between
the street and the front building setback line, except as provided in
§ 220-25A(2) of this chapter. On vacant lots, the Class I and Class II
vehicles must be stored behind the required front yard setback
line, as specified for principal uses.
(5) Vehicles which possess more than 320 square feet, as measured to
the vehicle outermost edges, and/or which exceed a height of 13
feet, as measured from the ground to the highest point of the main
body of the vehicle. Vehicle height shall not be measured on vehicle
accessories (e.g., air conditioners, vents, hatches, antennas, masts,
outrigging fishing poles, etc.), but will be measured to the highest
point of any flybridge or other boat console; shall not be permitted
on any residentially zoned property or upon any property used
principally for residential purposes.
(6) The storage or parking of any commercial truck upon any
residentially zoned lot or lot used principally for residential
purposes is prohibited. For purposes of this section, commercial
trucks shall include those that exceed a gross vehicle weight (truck
plus rated payload) of 10,000 pounds. In addition, the parking or
storage of any trailer other than those accessory to a principal
residential use is expressly prohibited on any residentially zoned
lot or a lot used principally for residential purposes.
§ 220-25 MANHEIM CODE § 220-25
1:502
§ 220-26. Front yard setbacks and setback modifications.
B. Outdoor stockpiling. In all zones, no outdoor stockpiling of any material
or outdoor storage of trash is permitted in the front yard. In any
residential zone, the outdoor stockpiling of materials (except firewood)
for more than one year is prohibited.
C. Trash, garbage, refuse or junk. Except as provided in §§ 220-75 and
220-90 of this chapter, the outdoor accumulation of trash, garbage,
refuse or junk for a period exceeding 15 days is prohibited.
D. Dumpsters. All trash dumpsters shall be located within a side or rear
yard, screened from adjoining roads and properties, and completely
enclosed within a masonry or fenced enclosure equipped with a selflatching
door or gate.
E. Domestic composts. The placement of framed enclosure composts as an
accessory residential use is permitted, subject to all accessory use
setbacks. Only waste materials from the residential site shall be
deposited within the compost, and in no case shall meat or meat byproducts
be composted. All composts shall be properly maintained so as
not to become a nuisance to nearby properties.
A. New developments. The following table shall be utilized wherein a
subdivision or land development plan will create two or more lots:
Street or Extension
Thereof
Required Setback as Measured
from the Center Line of Existing or
Proposed Street
North Main Street
South Main Street
90 feet, except that all buildings
located along Main Street between
Colebrook and Stiegel Streets shall be
located along a ten-foot front build-toline,
as measured from the edge of the
right-of-way
East High Street
West High Street
New Charlotte Street (east of
Main Street)
80 feet
§ 220-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-26
1:503
§ 220-27. Height limit exceptions.
Street or Extension
Thereof
Required Setback as Measured
from the Center Line of Existing or
Proposed Street
North Penn Street
South Penn Street
North Linden Street
South Linden Street
Hamaker Road
West Colebrook Street (west
of Main Street)
Adele Avenue (east of North
Laurel Street)
60 feet
All other existing and
proposed streets
50 feet or the width of a proposed
right-of-way, whichever is greater
B. Front setback of buildings on built-up streets. Where a single building
lot exists in an area which is predominantly built-up, the front setback
shall be determined by computing the average front setback of all
primary structures of the same type use on any property which is within
100 feet of the vacant parcel, to be measured along the extension of the
front property line. In all such cases, this established setback line shall
be considered the required build-to line, providing that the new
structure must be built at this limit or within a maximum limit which
shall be established as a parallel line 10 feet to the rear of the
established setback line.
C. Accessory or appurtenant structures. The setback regulations do not
apply to:
(1) Bus shelters, telephone booths and cornices, eaves, chimneys,
steps, canopies and similar extensions but do apply to porches and
patios, whether covered or not.
(2) Open fire escapes.
(3) Minor public utility structures, articles of ornamentation or
decoration.
(4) Fences, hedges and retaining walls.
A. The height regulations do not apply to the following structures or
projections, provided such structures or projections are set back a
horizontal distance at least equal to their height from any property line:
§ 220-26 MANHEIM CODE § 220-27
1:504
§ 220-28. Corner lots.
§ 220-29. Minimum habitable floor area.
All dwelling units must conform to the minimum habitable floor area
following:
§ 220-30. Erection of more than one principal use on lot.
More than one principal use may be erected on a single lot, provided that
all lot and yard requirements, standards, and other requirements of this
chapter shall be met for each structure as though it were on an individual
lot. In addition, such proposals shall gain approval for a land development
plan and provide individually approved methods of sewage disposal.
§ 220-31. Required vehicular access.
Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a
public street or with access to an approved private street. The erection of
buildings without approved access shall not be permitted. Approved access
shall be defined in terms of the Lancaster County Subdivision and Land
(1) Water towers, antennas, steeples, utility poles, smokestacks,
chimneys, farm silos, windmills, flagpoles or other similar
structures.
(2) Rooftop structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, water
storage tanks, ventilating fans and other mechanical
appurtenances.
(3) Parapet walls or cornices used solely for ornamental purposes if not
in excess of five feet above the roofline.
B. In no case shall any freestanding or rooftop structure above the
maximum permitted height be used for the purpose of providing
additional floor space for residential, commercial or industrial
purposes.
A. A front yard, as provided for in the area and lot requirements for the
various zones, shall be required along each street on which a corner lot
abuts.
B. On corner lots, no such structure or growth shall be permitted within an
area which is formed by a triangle where the two legs of the triangle
extend 100 feet from the center-line intersection of the two intersecting
streets.
A. Single-family, duplex and townhouse dwelling units: 700 square feet per
dwelling unit.
B. Multifamily dwellings: 500 square feet per dwelling unit.
§ 220-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-31
1:505
Development Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time, for street
design or as subsequently provided for by the Borough.
§ 220-32. Driveway and access drive requirements.
A. Number per lot. No more than one driveway/access drive connection
per lot shall be permitted.
B. Setbacks. Driveways and access drives shall not connect with a public
street within 40 feet of the right-of-way lines of any intersecting streets,
within five feet of a fire hydrant, nor within three feet of adjoining lot
lines.
C. Clear-sight triangle. Driveways and access drives shall be located and
constructed so that a clear-sight triangle as depicted below is provided.
Two apexes of the triangle shall be located in both directions along the
street center line 75 feet from a point where the center line of a
driveway/access drive and street intersect. The vertex of the triangle
shall be located along the center line of the driveway/access drive, on
the site and five feet from the property/street right-of-way line. No
permanent obstructions and/or plant materials over three feet high
shall be placed within the clear-sight triangle.
D. Slope. A driveway/access drive shall not exceed a slope of 8% within 25
feet of the street right-of-way lines.
E. Road classification. Access shall be provided to the street of lesser
classification when there is more than one street classification involved.
F. Width. No curb cut shall exceed 24 feet in width, unless required by
PennDOT. Unless otherwise specified, the maximum cartway width of
the access drive, located between the street cartway and the street line,
§ 220-31 MANHEIM CODE § 220-32
1:506
§ 220-33. Off-street parking requirements.
shall not exceed the area necessary to accommodate the minimum
required cartway width and the minimum required tangential arc of the
intersecting cartways.
G. PennDOT permit. Any driveway/access drive intersecting with a stateowned
road shall require the obtainment of a permit from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
H. Drainage. Driveways/access drives shall not be constructed in a manner
to be inconsistent with the design, maintenance and drainage of the
street.
A. Off-street parking shall be required in accordance with the provisions of
this section prior to the occupancy of any building or use so as to
alleviate traffic congestion on streets, except that no off-street parking
spaces shall be required for nonresidential uses within the CBD, in
accordance with § 220-18L(1) of this chapter. [Amended 11-12-2019
by Ord. No. 667]
B. Parking for single-family dwellings. Every single-family dwelling shall
be required to provide at least two off-street parking spaces. Such
spaces must be provided behind the street right-of-way line and may
take the form of garages, carports or driveways. Additional regulations
pertaining to driveways are contained in § 220-32 of this chapter. The
remaining regulations contained in this section do not apply to offstreet
parking facilities serving one single-family dwelling.
C. Site plan approval.
(1) Each application for a zoning permit (for a use for which parking
spaces are required) shall include a drawing (site plan) showing the
proposed layout of the lot. The drawing shall clearly indicate all of
the design elements required below.
(2) No zoning permit shall be issued for any use for which parking
spaces are required unless the site plan has been approved or
necessary variances have been obtained.
D. Surfacing. All parking lots shall be constructed and maintained with a
paved surface of concrete or bituminous materials or another dust-free
surface approved by the Borough Council.
E. Separation from streets and sidewalks. Parking spaces shall be guarded
by curbs or other protective devices which are arranged so that parked
cars cannot project into the streets, yards or walkways.
F. Drainage. Parking lots shall be graded to a minimum slope of 1% to
provide for drainage. Adequately sized inlets and storm sewers shall be
provided to discharge stormwater in accordance with a plan to be
approved by the Borough.
§ 220-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-33
1:507
G. Parking space sizes. Minimum space required for standard car spaces:
(1) Parallel: 23 feet by eight feet.
(2) Nonparallel: 19 feet by nine feet.
H. Design standards for handicapped parking spaces. Parking spaces for
handicapped persons shall be provided in accordance with those laws
and regulations listed in § 220-41 of this chapter.
I. Interior drive widths.
(1) Interior drives between rows of parking spaces shall have the
minimum widths indicated in the following table:
Angle of Parking
(degrees)
Width of Driveway,
One-Way Traffic
(feet)
Width of Driveway,
Two-Way Traffic
(feet)
90° 25 25
60° 20 22
45° 18 22
30° 11 22
Parallel 11 22
(2) Interior drives in areas where there is no parking permitted shall
be at least 11 feet wide for each lane of traffic.
J. Marking of parking spaces and interior drives. All parking lots shall be
adequately marked and maintained for the purpose of defining parking
spaces and interior drives. As a minimum, the lines of all parking spaces
and interior drives (including directional arrows, etc.) shall be solid
white and four inches in width. Painted lines, arrows and dividers shall
be provided and maintained to control parking when necessary to direct
vehicular circulation. Parking areas for over 30 vehicles shall be divided
by permanent raised curbing that clearly defines parking spaces from
designated access lanes.
K. Not less than a four-foot radius of curvature shall be permitted for
horizontal curves in parking areas.
L. All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient backup
area for all end spaces.
M. Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided in accordance with
§ 603.08 of the Lancaster County Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance. The lighting shall be arranged so that it is not directed at
land used for residential purposes or adjoining lots or streets.
N. Access drive requirements. Every parking lot shall be connected to a
street by means of an access drive. This access drive shall be at least 12
§ 220-33 MANHEIM CODE § 220-33
1:508
feet wide for each lane, exclusive of curb return and gutters. Section
220-32 specifies other requirements for access drives.
O. Landscaping and screening requirements. The following landscaping
and screening requirements shall apply to all parking lots:
(1) Landscaped strip.
(a) When a parking lot is located in a yard which abuts a street, a
landscaped strip shall be provided on the property along the
entire street line. If there is no building or other structure on
the property, the parking lot shall still be separated from the
street by the landscaped strip. This strip shall be measured
from the street right-of-way line. The strip may be located
within any other landscaped strip required to be located along
a street. The following lists required width of landscape strips:
Number of Spaces in
Parking Lot, Including
Joint Facilities
Landscape Strip Width
Measured from Street
Right-of-Way Line
(feet)
Less than 100 15
100 to 250 20
Over 250 25
(b) Unless otherwise indicated, all parking lots constructed in side
or rear yards (as defined herein) shall be set back a minimum
of 10 feet from all property lines. Such setbacks shall be used
for landscape strips.
(2) Interior landscaping.
(a) In any parking lot containing 20 or more parking spaces
(except a parking garage), 5% of the total area of the lot shall
be devoted to interior landscaping. Such interior landscaping
may be used, for example, at the end of parking space rows to
break up rows of parking spaces at least every 10 parking
spaces and to help visually define travel lanes through or next
to the parking lot. Landscaped areas situated outside the
parking lot, such as peripheral areas and areas surrounding
buildings, shall not constitute interior landscaping. For the
purpose of computing the total area of any parking lot, all
areas within the perimeter of the parking lot shall be counted,
including all parking spaces and access drives, aisles, islands
and curbed areas. Ground cover alone is not sufficient to meet
this requirement. Trees, shrubs or other approved material
shall be provided. At least one shade tree shall be provided for
each 300 square feet (or fraction) of required interior
landscaping area. These trees shall have a clear trunk at least
five feet above finished grade level.
§ 220-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-33
1:509
(b) Parked vehicles may not overhang interior landscaped areas
more than 2 1/2 feet. Where necessary, wheel stops or curbing
shall be provided to ensure no greater overhang.
(c) If a parking lot of under 20 spaces is built without interior
landscaping, and later additional spaces are added so that the
total is 20 or more, interior landscaping shall be provided for
the entire parking lot.
(3) Screening. When a parking lot is located on property which adjoins
land in a residential zone, the parking lot shall be screened from
the adjoining residential property.
P. Speed bumps.
(1) Speed bumps, constructed as part of access drives or parking lots,
shall be marked with permanent, yellow diagonal stripes.
(2) The speed bumps shall be in the form of mounds or depressions in
the pavement and shall be designed to restrain motor vehicle
speed.
(3) There shall be a warning sign posted at each entrance to a parking
area having speed bumps.
(4) In no case shall the overall height (or depth) of speed bumps
exceed three inches.
Q. Joint parking lots. In commercial shopping centers over three acres in
size, joint parking lots may be permitted. These joint facilities can
reduce the total number of parking spaces required by a maximum of
20%. Therefore, the resulting joint parking lot will be required to
provide at least 80% of the total number of spaces required by the sum
of all of the shopping center's tenants. Such reduced parking spaces
must be appropriately distributed upon the lot to provide convenient
walking distance between every vehicle and each of the shopping
center's stores.
R. Prohibited uses of a parking lot. Automobile parking lots are for the sole
purposes of accommodating the passenger vehicles of persons
associated with the use which requires them. Parking lots shall not be
used for the following:
(1) The sale, display or storage of automobiles or other merchandise.
(2) Parking/storage of vehicles accessory to the use.
(3) Performing services (including services to vehicles).
(4) Required off-street parking space shall not be used for loading and
unloading purposes, except during hours when business operations
are suspended.
§ 220-33 MANHEIM CODE § 220-33
1:510
S. Schedule of required parking spaces. Except as noted in § 220-18L, the
following lists required numbers of parking spaces by use type. Any use
involving a combination of several uses shall provide the total number
of spaces required for each individual use:
Type of Use
Minimum of One Parking Space for
Each
Commercial Uses
Automobile repair, filling and
washing facilities
400 square feet of gross floor and
ground area devoted to repair and
service facilities in addition to areas
normally devoted to automobile
storage, and 1 per employee on major
shift
Automobile, boat and trailer
wales
1,000 square feet of gross indoor and
outdoor display areas
Carpeting, drapery, floor
covering and wall covering
sales
500 square feet of gross floor area
Convenience stores 75 square feet of gross floor area
Drive-through and/or fast-food
restaurants
2 seats, and 1 for each 2 employees
Food markets and grocery
stores
150 square feet of gross floor area for
public use, and 1 per each employee
on 2 largest shifts
Funeral homes 100 square feet of gross floor area, 1
per each employee and 1 per each
piece mobile equipment, such as
hearses and ambulances
Furniture sales 500 square feet gross floor area
Hotels, motels, tourist homes guest sleeping room, and 1 per each
employee on 2 largest shifts.
(Restaurants and other accessory uses
shall add to this requirement.)
Mini warehouses 25 units, plus 1 per 250 square feet of
office space, plus 2 per any resident
manager
Office buildings 300 square feet of gross floor area
Professional offices of
veterinarians, physicians,
dentists, etc.
4 spaces per each physician or dentist,
etc., plus 1 space per each support
staff employee
Retail stores or shops (except
those listed above)
200 square feet of gross floor area of
display area or sales area, and 1 per
each employee on 2 largest shifts
§ 220-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-33
1:511
Type of Use
Minimum of One Parking Space for
Each
Restaurants 4 seats, plus 1 per each employee on
largest shift
Shopping centers or malls 182 square feet of gross leasable floor
area
Other commercial buildings 400 square feet of gross floor area
Industrial Uses
Industrial and heavy
manufacturing establishments
2 employees on the 2 largest shifts or
at least 1 space per each 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area, whichever is
the greatest number
Warehousing employee on the 2 largest shifts
Recreation Uses
Amusement arcades 80 square feet of gross floor area
Athletic fields 4 seats of spectator seating; however,
if no spectator seating is provided, a
temporary parking area shall be
provided on the site. Such area must
provide sufficient numbers of spaces
to serve all users of the site and
include a fence delineating such
parking area
Bowling alleys, billiards
rooms
1/4 lane/table, and 1 per each 2
employees
Campgrounds campsite, plus 1 per employee, plus
50% of the spaces normally required
for accessory uses
Golf courses 1/8 hole, plus 1 per employee, plus
50% of the spaces normally required
for accessory uses
Golf driving ranges Tee, and 1 per employee
Miniature golf courses 1/2 hole, and 1 per employee
Riding schools or horse
stables
2 stalls, plus 1 per every 4 seats of
spectator seating
Picnic areas table
Skating rinks 4 persons of legal occupancy
Swimming pools (other than
one accessory to a residential
development)
4 persons of legal occupancy
§ 220-33 MANHEIM CODE § 220-33
1:512
Type of Use
Minimum of One Parking Space for
Each
Tennis or racquetball clubs 1/4 court, plus 1 per employee, plus
50% of the spaces normally required
for accessory uses
Residential Uses
Residential dwellings 1/2 dwelling unit (i.e., 2 spaces per
dwelling unit)
Boardinghouses, group homes
and bed-and-breakfasts
bedroom
Social and Institutional
Uses
Auditorium, banquet,
conference and meeting
facilities; church, theater and
other such places of public
assembly
200 square feet, but not less than 1
space per each 2 seats
Clubs, lodges and other
similar places
200 square feet of gross floor area,
and 1 per each employee on 2 largest
shifts
Nursing, rest or retirement
homes
3 accommodations (beds), in addition
to those needed for doctors and
support staff
Hospitals, sanitariums Spaces shall be provided for visitors at
the rate of at least 1 space per each
1.5 accommodations (beds). Such
spaces shall be in addition to those
necessary for doctors and other
personnel
Museums, art galleries,
cultural centers, libraries
400 square feet of gross floor area
Rehabilitation centers
(without overnight
accommodations)
employee, and 1 per each 3 people
anticipated to be handled through the
facility
Schools below grade 10,
including commercial day
care and kindergarten
6 students enrolled
Schools, 10th grade and
above, including colleges
3 students enrolled
Vocational training and adult
education facilities
1.5 students enrolled
§ 220-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-33
1:513
§ 220-34. Off-street loading facilities.
T. Off-site parking. Of the required off-street parking spaces required by
this section, up to 20% of such spaces can be located off the subject
property, subject to the following limitations:
(1) The parking lot shall contain no more than 20 total parking spaces.
(2) Adequate area does not exist on the subject property to provide the
number of parking spaces needed for the use and that such lack of
area is not due to new building or use expansion.
(3) The parking lot shall be visually screened from adjoining
residentially zoned properties. Such screening can consist of a
wooden sight-tight fence, earthen berm, vegetative materials, or
any combination of these.
(4) The location and configuration of driveways or access points shall
not endanger pedestrians nor create traffic hazards.
(5) Light, if necessary, shall be arranged so as to not cast glare on
adjoining residentially zoned properties.
A. Off-street loading shall be required in accordance with this section
prior to the occupancy of any building or use so as to alleviate traffic
congestion on streets. These facilities shall be provided whenever:
(1) A new use is established.
(2) The use of a property or building is changed, thereby requiring
more loading space.
(3) An existing use is enlarged, thereby requiring an increase in
loading space.
B. Site plan approval.
(1) Each application for a zoning permit (or use for which off-street
loading spaces are required) shall include a drawing (site plan)
showing the proposed layout of the loading area. The drawing shall
clearly indicate the design elements required below.
(2) No zoning permit shall be issued for any use for which a loading
area is required unless the site plan has been approved or
necessary variances have been approved.
C. Surfacing. All off-street loading facilities, including access drives, shall
be constructed and maintained with a paved surface of concrete or
bituminous materials.
D. Location. Except as provided elsewhere, a ground-level loading area
may be located in any side or rear yard. No exterior portion of an offstreet
loading facility (including access drives) shall be located within
50 feet of any land within a residential zone. Where possible, off-street
§ 220-33 MANHEIM CODE § 220-34
1:514
loading facilities shall be located on the face of a building not facing
any adjoining land in a residential zone.
E. Connection to street. Every loading space shall be connected to a street
by means of an access drive. The access drive shall be at least 24 feet
wide for two-way travel or 18 feet wide for one-way travel, exclusive of
any parts of the curb and gutters. Section 220-32 specifies other
requirements for access drives.
F. Separation from streets, sidewalks, and parking lots. Off-street loading
spaces shall be designed so that there will be no need for service
vehicles to back over streets or sidewalks. Furthermore, off-street
loading spaces shall not interfere with off-street parking lots.
G. Drainage. Off-street loading facilities (including access drives) shall be
drained to prevent damage to other properties or public streets.
Furthermore, all off-street loading facilities shall be designed to
prevent the collection of standing water on any portion of the loading
facility surface, particularly next to access drives.
H. Required off-street loading facilities' sizes. The following lists required
minimum loading space sizes, in feet (excluding access drives,
entrances and exits):
Facility
Length
(feet)
Width
(feet)
Height (If Covered
or Obstructed)
(feet)
Industrial, wholesale
and storage uses
63 12 15
All other uses 33 12 14
I. Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided if the loading facility is to
be used at night. The lighting shall be arranged so as not to be directed,
reflected or cause glare off the site.
J. Landscaping and screening requirements. Unless otherwise indicated,
all off-street loading facilities shall be surrounded by a fifteen-foot-wide
landscape strip. All off-street loading facilities shall also be screened
from adjoining residentially zoned properties and/or adjoining public
streets.
K. Schedule of off-street loading spaces required.
§ 220-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-34
1:515
Type of Use
Number of
Spaces
Per Gross Floor Area or
Dwelling Unit
Hospital or other
institution
0
1.0
+1.0
First 10,000 square feet
10,000 to 100,000 square feet
Each additional 100,000
square feet (or fraction)
Hotel, motel and
similar lodging
facilities
0
1.0
+1.0
First 10,000 square feet
10,000 to 100,000 square feet
Each additional 100,000
square feet (or fraction)
Industry or
manufacturing
0
1.0
+1.0
First 2,000 square feet
2,000 to 25,000 square feet
Each additional 40,000 square
feet (or fraction)
Multifamily dwelling None
1.0
+1.0
Less than 100 dwelling units
100 to 300 dwelling units
Each additional 200 dwelling
units (or fraction)
Office building,
including banks
0
1.0
+1.0
First 10,000 square feet
10,000 to 100,000 square feet
Each additional 100,000
square feet (or fraction)
Retail sales and
services, per store,
restaurants
0
1.0
2.0
+.1.0
First 2,000 square feet
2,000 to 10,000 square feet
10,000 to 40,000 square feet
Each additional 100,000
square feet (or fraction)
Shopping centers
(integrated shopping
centers, malls and
plazas) having at least
25,000 square feet
1.0
+1.0
25,000 square feet up to
100,000 square feet
Each additional 100,000
square feet
Theater, auditorium,
bowling alley or other
recreational
establishment
0
1.0
+1.0
First 10,000 square feet
10,000 to 100,000 square feet
Each additional 100,000
square feet (or fraction)
§ 220-34 MANHEIM CODE § 220-34
1:516
§ 220-35. Screening and landscaping requirements.
Type of Use
Number of
Spaces
Per Gross Floor Area or
Dwelling Unit
Undertaking
establishment or
funeral parlor
0
1.0
+1.0
First 3,000 square feet
3,000 to 5,000 square feet
Each additional 10,000 square
feet (or fraction)
Wholesale or
warehousing (except
mini-warehousing)
0
1.0
+1.0
First 1,500 square feet
1,500 to 10,000 square feet
Each additional 40,000 square
feet (or fraction)
A. Yard ground cover. Any part of the site which is not used for buildings,
other structures, loading or parking spaces and aisles, sidewalks and
designated storage areas shall be planted with an all-season ground
cover approved by the Borough Council (e.g., grass, ivy, vetch,
pachysandra, etc.). In addition, gravel can be substituted if done in a
manner to complement other vegetative materials. It shall be
maintained to provide an attractive appearance, and all nonsurviving
plants shall be replaced promptly.
B. Landscaping requirements.
(1) Any required landscaping (landscape strips and interior
landscaping) shall include a combination of the following elements:
deciduous trees, ground covers, evergreens, shrubs, vines, flowers,
rocks, gravel, earth mounds, berms, walls, fences, screens,
sculptures, fountains, sidewalk furniture or other approved
materials. Artificial plants, trees and shrubs may not be used to
satisfy any requirement for landscaping or screening. No less than
80% of the required landscape area shall be vegetative in
composition, and no outdoor storage shall be permitted within
required landscape areas.
(2) For each 750 square feet of required area for landscape strips, one
shade/ornamental tree shall be provided. For every 300 square feet
of interior landscaping required (parking lots), one shade tree shall
be provided. If deciduous, these trees shall have a clear trunk at
least five feet above finished grade; if evergreen, these trees shall
have a minimum height of six feet. All required landscape strips
shall have landscaping materials distributed along the entire length
of the lot line abutting the yard.
C. Screening. The following materials may be used: evergreens (trees,
hedges or shrubs), walls, fences, earth berms or other approved similar
materials. Any wall or fence shall not be constructed of corrugated
§ 220-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-35
1:517
metal, corrugated fiberglass or sheet metal. Screening shall be
arranged so as to block the ground-level views between grade and a
height of six feet. Landscape screens must achieve this visual blockage
within two years of installation. [Amended 11-14-2006 by Ord. No.
596]
(1) Screen plantings required as a buffer planting between residential
and commercial/industrial uses shall have a minimum depth of 10
feet. The depth shall be established by use of a staggered row of
plantings. Where evergreens are utilized, the design and placement
shall be such that each plant has adequate growth area without
commingling into adjacent plants. No plant shall be placed closer
than five feet to any property line.
(2) At least 50% of the screen planting specimens shall be evergreens,
distributed evenly along the length of the screen barrier.
(3) Screen planting may incorporate earthen berms not exceeding 30
inches in height.
D. Selection of plant materials.
(1) Trees and shrubs shall be typical of their species and variety; have
normal growth habits, well-developed branches, densely foliated,
vigorous, fibrous root systems. They shall have been grown under
climatic conditions similar to those in the locality of the project or
properly acclimated to conditions of the locality of the project.
(2) Any tree or shrub which dies shall be replaced. All landscaping and
screening treatments shall be properly maintained.
E. Suitable species. [Added 11-14-2006 by Ord. No. 596]
(1) Landscape screens, barriers and buffer strips. The following
species have been deemed suitable for use in landscaped screens,
barriers and buffer strips. They have been selected for their
suitability to the local climate, size, ease of care, and the density of
their brachiation and foliage. Note that this list is a guide only;
some of these species may be inappropriate under certain
circumstances. For screens, barriers and buffers, the use of a
variety of species is encouraged in order to minimize the effects of
plant diseases; excessive planting of a single species raises the
possibility that the screen, barrier or buffer would need to be
replaced if a disease peculiar to that species is introduced. If a
species other than one of those listed here is proposed as a barrier,
buffering or screening plant, the applicant should be prepared to
provide supporting evidence of its suitability for the intended use,
specifically related to climate, size, ease of care, growth pattern
and foliage.
§ 220-35 MANHEIM CODE § 220-35
1:518
Botanical Name Common Name
Aesculus parviflora Bottlebrush buckeye
Chaenomele speciosa Common flowering quince
Cornus kousa Kousa dogwood**
Cornus florida Flowering dogwood (white or
pink)
Crataegus crusgalli inermis Thornless cockspur hawthorn
Deutzia scabra Fuzzy deutzia
Euonymous alatus Winged euonymous
Genus chamaecyparis False cypress varieties
Hamamelis vernalis Vernal witchhazel
Ilex pedunculosa Longstalk holly
Juniperus scopulorum Rocky mountain juniper
Juniperus virginiana Eastern redcedar
Lonicera fragrantissima Winter honeysuckle
Myrica pennsylvanica Northern bayberry
Picea abies Norway spruce
Picea aengelmanni Engelmann spruce
Picea glauca White spruce
Picea omorika Serbian spruce
Pinus nigra Austrian pine
Pinus strobus Eastern white pine
Tauga canadensis Canadian hemlock
Tauga caroliniana Carolina hemlock
Taxus cuspidata Japanese yew
Viburnum lantana Wayfaringtree viburnum
Viburnum opulus European cranberrybush
viburnum
Viburnum x rhytidophylloides Lantanaphyllum viburnum
Vilbournum plicatum
tomentosum
Doublefile viburnum
** Beginning this species may be difficult depending on planting
season factors. It is an acceptable species, once established.
(2) Street trees. The following species have been deemed suitable for
use as street trees. They have been selected for their suitability to
the local climate, size, shape, hardiness and cleanliness. Note that
this list is a guide only; some of these species may be inappropriate
under certain circumstances, and there are others not listed here
§ 220-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-35
1:519
which, under certain conditions, could be successfully used as
street trees. While some variety is appropriate in the interest of
avoiding the effects of disease, too much variety will result in an
unattractive streetscape. If a species other than one of those listed
here is proposed as a street tree, the applicant should be prepared
to explain its suitability for the intended use, specifically related to
climate, size, ease of care, growth pattern and foliage.
Botanical Name Common Name
Acer campestre Hedge maple*
Acer ginnala Amur maple*
Acer rubrum Red maple
Acer saccharum Sugar maple
Acer tataricum Tatarian maple
Cercidiphyllum japonicum Katsura
Cladrastis lutea American yellowwood
Corylus colurna Turkish filbert
Elaeagnus angustifolia Russian olive
Eucommia ulmoides Hardy rubber tree
Fraxinus pennsylvanica Green ash/red ash (nonfruiting)
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis Thornless common honeylocust
Koelreutaria paniculata Paniclad goldenraintree
Prunus sargentil Sargent cherry
Pyrus calleryana cv.
chanticleer
Chanticleer pear
Pyrus calleryana cv. cleveland
select
Cleveland select pear*
Pyrus calleryana cv. red spire Red spire pear*
Pyrus calleryana cv. stonehill Stonehill pear
Quercus imbricaria Shingle oak
Syringa reticulata Japanese tree lilac*
Taxodium distichum Common bald cypress
Tilia cordata Littleleaf linden
Tilia tomentosa Silver linden
Ulmus parvifolia Chinese elm
Zelkova serrata cv. village
green
Japanese zelkova
§ 220-35 MANHEIM CODE § 220-35
1:520
§ 220-36. Outdoor signs. [Amended 2-27-2007 by Ord. No. 599;
11-12-2019 by Ord. No. 667]
* Listed by PPL as recommended small tree, suited for planting
under electric wires.
** Not suggested for north/south roadway alignment as wind
damage can be extensive.
(3) Parking lots. Many of the street trees are also suitable for
landscaping in parking lots. The following species are particularly
well suited for parking areas due to their smaller size (which makes
them generally inappropriate as street trees), salt tolerance, and
their overall hardiness. As in the other subsections, this list is a
guide, and some of these species may be inappropriate under some
circumstances. If a species other than one of those listed here or
under street trees is proposed for parking lot landscaping, the
applicant should be prepared to explain its suitability for the
intended use, specifically related to climate, size, ease of care,
growth pattern and foliage.
Botanical Name Common Name
Hippophae rhamnoides Common sea-buckthorn
Kerria japonica Japanese kerria
Viburnum dentatum Arrowwood viburnum
(4) Sizes of species to be planted. Trees and shrubs utilized in
conjunction with the provisions of this section shall be of a
reasonable size to match the scale and appearance of the built
environment. For that purpose, trees shall be two-inch to two-andone-
half-inch caliper measured six inches above the ball, and
bushes shall be no smaller than 18 inches in height (or diameter,
for spreading species).
A. Purposes. The purposes of these sign regulations are to regulate the
nature and use of signage in order to maintain and enhance the
traditional aesthetic environment of the Borough; to promote
pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the adverse effects of signage
on nearby properties; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement
of these sign regulations
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
SIGN — Any device or medium used for the purpose of naming,
identifying, illustrating or displaying information to the general public,
which is affixed to, painted upon or incorporated into a structure or
building, or is freestanding upon a lot, which directs attention to an
object, product, place, name, activity, facility, service, event, attraction,
person, institution, organization or business, and which is visible from
the public right-of-way, or from public property, or is located within
§ 220-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-36
1:521
a building and is obviously intended to be seen and understood from
the public right-of-way. Customary displays of merchandise or other
objects, either behind store windows or outdoors, are not signs.
Specific sign types are defined as follows:
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign that no longer identifies or advertises
a location, current product or current activity conducted on the
premises on which the sign is located.
(1)
ANIMATED SIGN — Any sign that uses movement or change of
lighting to depict action or to create a visual effect or scene.
(2)
BANNER — Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that
is permanently mounted to a pole or building by a permanent frame
at one or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or
official flags of any institution or business shall not be considered
banners.
(3)
BEACON — Any light with one or more beams directed into the
atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone
lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that
rotate or move.
(4)
BUILDING MARKER — Any sign indicating the name of a building
and data and incidental information about its construction, which
sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other
permanent material.
(5)
BUILDING SIGN — Any sign attached to any part of a building, as
contrasted to a freestanding sign.
(6)
BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign which contains
elements which identify the official name of a business and which
may contain the minimal references necessary to products or
services which help to clarify the type of business being conducted
on the premises.
(7)
CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is part of or attached to an awning,
canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over
a door, entrance, window, or outside service area. A marquee is not
a canopy.
(8)
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign or portion thereof with
characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or
rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign,
including either a manual changeable copy sign, or an electronic
message center sign.
(9)
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE — Any sign wording, logo, or other
representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or
calls attention to a business, product, service or other commercial
activity.
(10)
§ 220-36 MANHEIM CODE § 220-36
1:522
COMMERCIAL TENANT — A tenant of commercial property owned
by a landlord; the primary or only use is commercial, business or
industrial oriented.
(11)
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign that is designed and erected
for the sole purpose of providing direction and/or orientation for
pedestrian or vehicle traffic (i.e., location of parking, rest rooms,
building entrances, etc).
(12)
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER SIGN — A sign type
characterized by internally illuminated, changeable copy that
includes electronically changing alphanumeric text typically used
for time and temperature displays, advertising the prices of retail
products, and the like.
(13)
FLAG — Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive
colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government,
political subdivision, or other entity.
(14)
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign supported by structures or
supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that
are independent from any building or other structure. (See
Appendix).69
(15)
GROUND SIGN — A freestanding sign, other than a pole sign, in
which the entire bottom is in contact with the ground.
(16)
INFORMATIONAL SIGNAGE — Window signs of a permanent or
temporary nature which display information about business
activities on the premises, such as business hours, products or
brands carried, services available, credit cards accepted and
commercial and professional affiliations.
(17)
LUMINOUS SIGN — Any sign which contains a light shining from
any source within the body of the sign.
(18)
MANUAL CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign in which the copy
or symbols are changed manually through placement of characters
of symbols on a sign face.
(19)
MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made
part of a marquee.
(20)
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign which does not conform to
the requirements of this section.
(21)
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material with
or without a message, typically existing in series, designed to move
in the wind, and suspended from a rope, wire, or string.
(22)
69.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is on file at the Borough.
§ 220-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-36
1:523
POLE SIGN — A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or
other support so that the bottom edge of the sign face is six feet or
more above grade.
(23)
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the
ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be
transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be
transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A-frames or Tframes;
menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs;
umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to, or painted
on, parked vehicles visible from the public right-of-way, unless said
vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of a business.
(24)
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such
a manner that its leading edge extends more that 12 inches beyond
the surface of such building or wall. (See Appendix).70
(25)
PROMOTIONAL SIGNAGE — Window signs of a temporary nature
which advertise sales events, product or service promotions, or
new product or service introductions related to the business being
conducted on the premises.
(26)
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign relating to the property on which it
is located offering such property for sale, lease or rent, including
open house signs.
(27)
RESIDENTIAL SIGN — Any sign located in a district zoned for
residential uses that contains no commercial message except
advertising for goods or services legally offered on the premises
where the sign is located, if offering such service at such location
conforms with all requirements of this section.
(28)
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and
over the roof of building supported by the roof structure, and
extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. (See
Appendix).71
(29)
ROOF SIGN, INTEGRAL — Any sign erected or constructed as an
integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure or
design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the
highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is
separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six
inches.
(30)
SUSPENDED SIGN — A sign that is suspended from the underside
of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
(31)
SYMBOL SIGN — An image, icon or character used instead of a
word to identify the provided service or use of the occupied space.
(32)
70.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is on file at the Borough.
71.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is on file at the Borough.
§ 220-36 MANHEIM CODE § 220-36
1:524
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign that is not permanently mounted on
or affixed to the ground, a building or display window.
(33)
WALL SIGN — Any sign attached parallel to, but within 12 inches
of, a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined
within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure,
which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays
only one sign surface. (See Appendix.)72
(34)
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination
thereof that is placed inside a window, upon a window pane, and
where visible from a window exterior to communicate information
about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service.
(35)
C. Applicability, effect.
(1) Signs may be erected, placed, established, created, refaced,
altered or maintained only in conformance with the standards,
procedures, exemptions and other requirements of this subsection
and any and all other ordinances and regulations relating to signs.
Zoning permits shall be required for the erection, placement,
establishment, creation or alteration of all signs, unless otherwise
indicated in this subsection.
(2) The effect of this subsection, as more specifically set forth herein, is
as follows:
(a) To establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs
in nonresidential districts, and a limited variety of signs in all
other districts, subject to the standards and the permit
procedures of this subsection;
(b) To allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive and
incidental to the principal use of the respective lots on which
they are located, subject to the substantive requirements of
this subsection, but without a requirement for permits;
(c) To provide for temporary signs without commercial messages
in limited circumstances in the public right-of-way;
(d) To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this subsection;
and
(e) To provide for enforcement of the provisions of this subsection.
D. Computations. The following regulations shall control the computation
of sign area and sign height:
(1) Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face
(which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only
one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square,
72.Editor's Note: Said Appendix is on file at the Borough.
§ 220-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-36
1:525
triangle, rectangle or circle, or combination thereof, that will
encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation,
emblem, or other display, together with any material or color
forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which
it is placed, but not including any supporting bracing, or decorative
fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets regulations
of this section and is clearly incidental to the display itself.
(2) Computation of area of multifaced signs. The sign area for a sign
with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the
area of all sign faces.
(3) Computation of sign height. The height of a sign shall be computed
as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top
of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall
be construed to be the grade after construction, exclusive of any
filling, berming, mounding or excavating solely for the purpose of
locating the sight.
E. Design, construction, and maintenance. All signs shall be designed,
constructed and maintained in accordance with the following
standards:
(1) All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of any building
and electrical codes as adopted by the Borough.
(2) Except for banners, flags, temporary signs and window signs
conforming in all respects with the requirements of this subsection,
all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be
permanently attached to the ground, a building or another
structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame or structure.
(3) All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in no
state of disrepair and securely attached to bracket, pole, wall, etc.
as intended. Existing signs may be removed for maintenance,
repainting and resurfacing as long and the location and size remain
the same. A permit application shall be submitted for review,
however the fee will be waived if all conditions are met.
F. Signs allowable in all districts. Signs listed in this subsection are
allowed in all zoning districts as defined by this section and shall not
require permits and shall not be included in any calculations of total
square footage limitations. However, such signs shall conform with all
other applicable regulations of this subsection.
(1) Name and address of resident. Name and address of resident, but
not to include any commercial advertising, of not more than two
square feet in sign area.
(2) No trespassing signs. No trespassing signs or other such signs
regulating the use of a property, such as "No Hunting" and "No
§ 220-36 MANHEIM CODE § 220-36
1:526
Fishing," of not more than two square feet in sign area in
residential districts, and five square feet in all nonresidential
districts, shall be located no closer than 50 feet apart.
(3) Signs regulating on-premises traffic and parking or other
functional subjects. Signs regulating on-premise vehicular and
pedestrian traffic and parking (Examples: "In-Out", "Enter-Exit",
"One Way", "Do Not Enter", "Handicapped Entrance", "Deliveries in
Rear") of not more than two square feet in residential districts and
five square feet in nonresidential districts. No such signs shall bear
any commercial advertising.
(4) Signs erected by a governmental body. Signs erected by a
governmental body or under the direction of such a body and
bearing no commercial advertising, such as traffic signs, railroad
crossing signs, safety signs, and signs identifying public schools
and playgrounds.
(5) Memorial signs or tablets. Memorial signs or tablets and signs
denoting the date of erection of buildings.
(6) Garage/yard sales and open house signs. All such signs shall be
limited to a maximum size of five square feet in area and shall be
removed within 24 hours after the event or activity advertised
thereby has occurred. One such sign shall be permitted on each
premise's frontage (maximum of two of where the event or activity
is to take place. In addition, two directional freestanding signs shall
be permitted at two separate intersections leading to the garage/
yard sale or open house. Permission from the property owner is
required and it is the responsibility of the sign owner to gain that
approval. Any such sign shall not be erected more than five days
prior to such event and activity. At no time shall any sign block the
sidewalk public right of way or vehicle sight distance.
(7) Temporary contractor, artisans, landscapers and similar services
signs. One temporary sign per premises not to exceed the area
permitted by real estate signs in the zone where the work is being
performed — larger signs may be required by government
agencies. Sign must be located onsite where the work is being
done; signs shall be removed within seven days of completing the
work.
(8) Temporary signs announcing special events of charitable or public
service groups. Such signs may only be permitted in preapproved
public areas, provided that authorization and scheduling is
obtained from the Borough Codes Compliance Official. The
limitations on the size and number of signs shall be developed by
policy of the Borough related to predesignated areas where the
sign(s) may be placed.
(9) Temporary booster club signs. A maximum size sign of 18 inches by
24 inches may be placed no sooner than three days to a specific
§ 220-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-36
1:527
event and removed within 24 hours after the event. They may
not be placed within 25 feet of an intersection or on any official
traffic sign. Signs may only be taped or tied to trees or poles in a
wraparound fashion with permission from the property owner. All
signs shall be legible and easy to read.
(10) Symbol sign. A sign representing the business use shall be
permitted with no lettering, markings or other information
provided. The maximum size shall be four square feet and shall
comply with other regulations for the zone it is located in. One
symbol sign is permitted in front of the named business frontage.
(11) Sandwich board sign. One temporary sandwich board sign is
permitted in front of the named business frontage. The sign shall be
put out from when the business opens and removed when the
business closes. It shall be placed in such a way that shall not block
sight distance or blocking the public sidewalk right of way.
Maximum size shall be two feet wide by three feet in height.
Multiple commercial tenants within one building shall be allowed
one temporary sandwich board sign per commercial tenant.
Frontage shall be a minimum of 15 linear feet per sign.
G. Signs prohibited in all Zoning Districts. The following signs shall not be
permitted, erected or maintained in any zoning district,
notwithstanding anything else to the contrary contained in this
subsection or elsewhere:
(1) Animated signs and signs which incorporate in any manner any
flashing or moving illumination or with illumination which varies in
intensity or which varies in color, and signs which have any visible
moving part, visible revolving parts, or visible mechanical
movement of any description, or other apparent visible movement
achieved by electrical pulsations or by action of normal wind
currents. Clocks, hanging signs or symbols which move with air
currents, time and temperature signs and barber poles are
exempted, provided they otherwise comply with all other
provisions of this part.
(2) Light sources which cast light on signs unless shielded by opaque
material so that bulbs are not visible from off the property on which
the signs are located.
(3) Any sign or sign structure which constitutes a hazard to public
safety or health.
(4) Signs which by reason of size, location, content, coloring, or
manner or intensity of illumination, distract or obstruct the vision
of drivers, either when leaving a roadway or driveway, or obstruct
or detract from the visibility or effectiveness of any traffic sign or
control device or public streets and roads.
§ 220-36 MANHEIM CODE § 220-36
1:528
(5) Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a fire
escape, door, window or other required building exit.
(6) Signs which make use of the words such as "Stop," "Look," "One-
Way," "Danger," "Yield," or any similar words, phrases, symbols,
lights or characters, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead
or confuse traffic.
(7) Any sign which advertises a defunct business or product no longer
sold.
(8) Signs on public property or public rights-of-way, unless erected by
a governmental body, required to be so located by order of a
governmental body or in compliance with subsection E(8).
(9) Signs painted on or inappropriately attached to, or supported by a
street sign or street light or any natural object unless specifically
permitted within this section.
(10) Searchlights, pennants, spinners, banners and streamers,
inflatable balloons and similar devices, except for temporary
occasions not to exceed 15 days' duration, such as grand openings,
and then only with special prior permission of the Zoning Officer,
who shall grant such permission only when the request is
demonstrated to be harmonious with the proposed location.
(11) Manual changeable copy signs not permanently affixed to the
ground or business structure, including those on wheels or in
moveable frames. Manual changeable copy signs shall be reviewed
through the special exception process.
(12) Electric message signs whether illuminated or not. Electric
message signs shall be reviewed through the special exception
process.
H. Limit on height of signs. No sign or any part thereof (including braces,
supports or lights) shall exceed a height of 20 feet if erected at the
right-of-way line of the street, road or highway adjoining the premises
on which the sign is located, plus one foot additional height for each
three lineal feet that said sign is located from such street, road or
highway as measured on a perpendicular line from such right-of-way
line to the nearest part of the sign; provided however, that no sign shall
exceed 35 feet in height regardless of its distance from the right-of-way
line. No freestanding sign shall exceed 15 feet in height.
I. Signs in the public right of way. No sign shall be allowed in the public
right-of-way, except for the following:
(1) Permanent signs. Permanent signs, including:
(a) Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to
post legal notices, identify public property, convey public
§ 220-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-36
1:529
information and direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular
traffic;
(b) Bus stop signs erected by a public transit company;
(c) Identification signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines,
pipes or facilities.
(2) Temporary signs. Temporary signs, including:
(a) Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to
post legal notices, convey public information and direct or
regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
(b) Signs announcing special events of charitable or public service
groups, provided such signs shall be approved by the Borough
and PA state if applicable, and shall:
[1] Be limited to a maximum size of 32 square feet in area; and
[2] Be removed as soon as the event or activity thereby has
occurred and shall not be permitted to exist more than 30
days prior to such event or activity.
(3) Emergency signs. Emergency warning signs erected by a
governmental agency, a public utility company or a contractor
doing authorized or permitted work within the public right-of-way.
(4) Other signs forfeited. Any sign installed or placed on public
property except in conformance with the requirements of this
subsection, shall be forfeited to the public and subject to
confiscation. In addition to other remedies hereunder, the Borough
shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing
such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign.
J. Signs allowable by permit in zoning areas and districts. Signs are
allowable by permit in Manheim Borough as follows:
(1) Historical Overlay Zone. Signs are subject to the applicable district
regulations. In addition, with the exception of informational and
promotional signage, the Historic Commission shall review and
make a recommendation for new signs being proposed to be
erected, altered or modified to any permanent sign in this area. The
Commission may recommend the size and type of sign so as to
protect the appearance and character of the historical area in
which it is located. Proposed signs that do not meet the specific
criteria of the zone in which the sign is to be located shall require a
special exception approval from the Zoning Hearing Board.
(2) Residential R-1 Residential R-2 Residential R-3 and Residential R-4
Districts.
(a) Certain signs allowed in all zones.
§ 220-36 MANHEIM CODE § 220-36
1:530
(b) Residential signs. One identification sign per dwelling unit and
one sign indicating the private nature of a driveway or
premises. If lighted, signs shall be illuminated by incident rays
adequately shielded to avoid glare. Luminous signs are
prohibited.
(c) Signs for uses allowed by special exception and signs for
nonconforming uses. Signs for the identification of those uses
allowed by special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board and
for the identification of nonconforming uses shall be approved,
as a special exception, by the Zoning Hearing Board. The
Board shall approve the size and type of sign so as to protect
the appearance and character of the district in which it will be
located.
(d) Real estate signs shall not exceed 12 square feet (six square
feet if single-sided) and shall be removed within a week after
settlement on the sale or lease of the property. Such signs shall
be limited to one per street frontage, a maximum of two.
(e) All signs are also subject to all other applicable regulations of
this subsection.
(3) Central business District (CBD) and Conversion Office and
Apartment (COA) Zones.
(a) Certain signs allowed in all zones.
(b) Business identification signs, informational signage and
promotional signage.
(c) The total area of all signs and signage shall not exceed 32
square feet for premises of up to 15 lineal feet of public street
frontage. An additional four square feet of signage area is
permitted for every additional five lineal feet or fraction
thereof of frontage. No single sign shall exceed 64 square feet
in area.
(d) Within the total permitted area of signage for any premise, a
maximum of 5% of the first-floor window area or five square
feet, whichever is greater, shall be permitted for informational
signage, and a maximum of 15% of the first-floor window area
or 15 square feet, whichever is greater, shall be permitted for
promotional signage.
(e) If lighted, signs shall be illuminated by incident rays
adequately shielded to avoid glare. Luminous signs are
prohibited.
(f) Real estate signs shall not exceed 12 square feet and shall be
removed within a week after settlement on the sale of the
§ 220-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-36
1:531
property. Such signs are limited to one per street frontage a
maximum of two.
(g) All signs are also subject to all other applicable regulations of
this subsection.
(4) Commercial - Highway Commercial Zone (C1).
(a) Certain signs allowed in all zones.
(b) Business identification signs, informational signage and
promotional signage.
(c) The total area of all signs and signage shall not exceed 100
square feet for the first 100 linear feet, or fraction thereof, of
public street frontage. An additional 50 square feet of sign area
is permitted for each additional 100 linear feet of frontage, or
fraction thereof, not to exceed 300 square feet for the entire
property (including doors and windows). Under no
circumstances shall the size of any one sign exceed 64 square
feet; however, the total surface area of any freestanding sign
shall not exceed 32 square feet.
(d) Within the total permitted area of signage for any premise, a
maximum of 5% of the first-floor window area or five square
feet, whichever is greater, shall be permitted for informational
signage, and a maximum of 15% of the first-floor window area
or 15 square feet, whichever is greater, shall be permitted for
promotional signage.
(e) Projecting signs shall be no higher than the eave line of the
building, and subject to size as stated in subsection L(1).
(f) If lighted, signs shall be illuminated by incident rays
adequately shielded to avoid glare.
(g) Luminous signs shall be reviewed through the special
exception process.
(h) Real estate signs shall not exceed 24 square feet and shall be
removed within a week after settlement on the sale or lease of
the property. Such signs are limited to one per street frontage.
(i) All signs are also subject to all other applicable regulations of
this subsection.
(5) Industrial (C-1) and Planned Industrial/Corporate Center Zones.
(a) Certain signs permitted in all zones.
(b) Business identification signs, informational signage and
promotional signage.
§ 220-36 MANHEIM CODE § 220-36
1:532
(c) The total area of all signs and signage shall not exceed 100
square feet for the first 100 linear feet, or fraction thereof, of
public street frontage. An additional 50 square feet of sign area
is permitted for each additional 100 linear feet of frontage, or
fraction thereof, not to exceed 300 square feet for the entire
property (including doors and windows). Under no
circumstances shall the size of any one sign exceed 64 square
feet, however, the total surface area of any freestanding sign
shall not exceed 48 square feet.
(d) Within the total permitted area of signage for any premise, a
maximum of 5% of the first-floor window area or five square
feet, whichever is greater, shall be permitted for informational
signage, and a maximum of 15% of the first-floor window area
or 15 square feet, whichever is greater, shall be permitted for
promotional signage.
(e) Projecting signs shall be no higher than the eave line of the
building, and subject to size as stated in subsection L(1)
(f) If lighted, signs shall be illuminated by incident rays
adequately shielded to avoid glare.
(g) Luminous signs shall be reviewed through the special
exception process.
(h) Real estate signs shall not exceed 40 square feet and shall be
removed within a week after settlement on the sale or lease of
the property. Such signs are limited to one per street frontage.
(i) All signs are also subject to all other applicable regulations of
this subsection.
K. Nonpermanent signs. Temporary, nonpermanent signs are allowed
without permit, provided that such signs shall not be displayed in
excess of one month. Any sign displayed for longer than one month shall
be considered as permanent and will be subject to all applicable
provisions of this subsection.
L. Murals. An artistic depiction of a time, theme or event that is directly
related to the history of the Borough of Manheim. The contents may
include graphic displays and/or copy in addition to the pictorial
offering. For the purposes of this subsection, a mural designed and
permitted in accordance with the provisions of § 220-44 herein shall not
be considered to be a sign and shall therefore be exempt from the
regulations provided herein.
M. Additional criteria for certain sign types and uses.
(1) Projection signs in addition to the other applicable provisions of
this subsection, the following regulations shall apply to all
projecting signs:
§ 220-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-36
1:533
(a) No projecting sign shall project more than five feet beyond the
building line in the direction of the street, nor shall any portion
of any projecting sign be closer than five feet to the face of the
street curb or curb line, or the edge of an alley.
(b) No portion of any projecting sign shall be less than eight feet
above normal grade as defined in subsection C(3).
(c) No single face of a projecting sign shall exceed 15 square feet
in sign area. No projecting sign shall have a vertical dimension
greater than six feet.
(d) There shall be no more than one projecting sign for any
commercial tenant unless the building is located on a corner
lot or has public entrances on two or more public ways, in
which case one projecting sign maybe erected for and toward
each public way.
(2) Wall signs. In addition to the other applicable provisions of this
subsection, the following regulations shall apply to all wall signs:
(a) No wall sign shall extend above the top of the wall upon which
it is placed.
(b) No wall sign, or any part thereof, shall project more than 12
inches from the wall upon which it is mounted. If external
lighting is used, reflectors must be at least 10 feet above the
surface of the ground level, equipped with wire mesh guards
and no part of the lighting device may project more than two
feet from the wall of the building.
(c) No wall sign shall extend beyond the left and right extremities
of the wall to which it is attached.
(d) There shall be no more than one wall sign per commercial
tenant per building facade, with a maximum of two signs per
commercial tenant per building facade, and the aggregate wall
sign area shall have a total area of not more than 25% of the
wall area.
(3) Freestanding signs. In addition to the other applicable provisions of
this subsection, the following regulations shall apply to all
freestanding signs.
(a) Every freestanding sign and all parts, braces and supports
thereof shall be located entirely within the property lines of the
premises and shall not project over public rights-of-way or
other adjoining lands. Freestanding signs may be permitted
between the property line and the building setback lines,
except where otherwise prohibited by this section. The base of
the sign shall be located behind the street right-of-way. The
sign shall be no less than three feet and not more than 15 feet
§ 220-36 MANHEIM CODE § 220-36
1:534
above the curb line, and shall not project closer than seven feet
from the curb line or two feet from the right-of-way, whichever
is more restrictive of the two.
(b) A freestanding sign shall have no more than two faces or
advertising sides.
(c) No freestanding sign face or advertising side shall have any
dimension (length, width, diameter, etc.) in excess of 10 lineal
feet.
(d) All freestanding signs hereafter erected shall be centrally
located within a planted green area at least equal to the
allowable area of a single face or advertising side for the
subject sign, which area shall also include ornamental
evergreen shrubbery to minimize the visibility of poles,
supports and braces of such sign.
(e) Not more than one pole sign may be erected or maintained on a
single premises.
(4) Pole signs. In addition to the other applicable provisions of this
subsection, the following regulations shall apply to all pole signs.
(a) Pole signs shall be no less than eight feet and not more than 15
feet above the curbline.
(b) A pole sign shall have no more than two faces or advertising
sides, opposite of one another.
(c) No pole sign face or advertising side shall have any dimension
(length, width, diameter, etc.) in excess of nine lineal feet.
(d) Pole signs may be used as wayfinding signs or signs of the state
or Borough.
(e) Not more than one pole sign may be erected or maintained on a
single premises.
(5) Roof signs. In addition to the other applicable provisions of this
subsection, the following regulations shall apply to all roof signs:
(a) The highest point of a roof sign shall not exceed the building
height limitation as provided in this section as applicable to the
pertinent zoning district.
(b) Not more than one roof sign may be erected or maintained on a
single premise.
N. Luminous signs. In Zoning Districts where permitted, luminous signs
must be approved by the Zoning Hearing Board, as a special exception,
to determine that the location, design, type and color of sign will not be
detrimental to the character of the district. Only one sign per premises
is permitted and shall not be lit unless the business is open.
§ 220-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-36
1:535
O. Nonconforming signs. Any sign that was legally existing as of the
effective date of this chapter that does not comply with the provisions
listed in this chapter shall be considered a nonconforming sign. All
nonconforming signs may continue in their present number, size and
location until removed and replaced with a current conforming sign
meeting the current provisions. Current nonconforming signs may be
replaced in-kind, painted, restored, modified, or repaired as long as the
location and size remain the same. A permit application shall be
submitted for review, however the fee will be waived if all conditions
are met. Any modification to the existing nonconforming size, number
or location of a sign will automatically require a fee and all current
regulations shall be met.
P. Applications and permits.
(1) Applications for permits to erect, alter or modify permanent signs
shall be made to the Zoning Officer. With the exception of signs
listed in Subsection E; permits shall be required for all permanent
signs. Certain signs may also require the submission of an
application and an approval of a building permit.
(2) It shall be unlawful to commence the erection of any permanent
sign or to commence the moving or alteration of any permanent
sign until the Zoning Officer has issued a sign permit for such work.
(3) In applying to the Zoning Officer for a sign permit, the applicant
shall submit a dimensional sketch or scale plan indicating the
shape, size, height and location of all signs to be erected, altered or
moved and supply such other information as may be required by
the Zoning Officer for determining whether the provisions of this
subsection are being observed. If the proposed sign as set forth in
the application is in conformity with the provisions of this
subsection and other ordinances of the Borough then in force, the
Zoning Officer shall issue a sign permit for such sign. If the sign
permit is refused, the Zoning Officer shall state such refusal in
writing with the cause and shall immediately thereupon mail notice
of such refusal to the applicant at the address indicated in the
application. The Zoning Officer shall grant or deny the permit
within 15 days from the date the application is submitted. The
issuance of a permit shall in no case be construed as waiving any
provisions of this subsection.
Q. Removal of certain signs. After 90 days, any sign which advertises a
business or service no longer in existence on the premises shall be
considered to be abandoned. Signs that are abandoned shall be
removed by the property owner or the persons responsible for the
erection and/or maintenance thereof within 30 days after notice of the
abandonment to such persons by the Zoning Officer. If such persons fail
or refuse to remove such abandoned signs after the notice aforesaid,
the Zoning Officer may remove the signs at the expense of the property
§ 220-36 MANHEIM CODE § 220-36
1:536
§ 220-37. Roadway classifications.
For the purposes of this chapter, the Borough's roads shall be classified in
the following categories:
§ 220-38. Permanent/temporary occupancy requirements.
No persons or family shall be permitted to permanently reside within any
tent, travel trailer, bus, boat, camper or motor home. However, temporary
occupancy of a tent, travel trailer, camper or motor home shall be permitted
within an approved campground or for periods of up to seven days in any
calendar year on the property of a friend or relative.
§ 220-39. Operations and performance standards.
All uses proposed within Manheim Borough shall operate in compliance
with applicable state, federal and county regulations, as they are
periodically adopted, amended and repealed. The following lists known
government regulations associated with various land use impacts. This list
in no way excludes or limits federal, state or county jurisdiction over uses
owner or the persons responsible for the erection and/or maintenance
thereof.
R. Violations. Any of the following shall be a violation of this section and
shall be subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by
this section and by state law:
(1) To install, create, erect or maintain any sign in a way that is
inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such sign or the
premises on which the sign is located;
(2) To install, create, erect or maintain any sign requiring a permit
without such a permit;
(3) To fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected or
maintained in violation of this section; or
(4) To continue any such violation. Each such day of a continued
violation shall be considered a separate violation when applying the
penalty portions of this section.
A. Arterial roads:
(1) North and South Main Street.
(2) East and West High Street.
(3) New Charlotte Street (east of South Main Street).
B. Collector roads: Colebrook Street.
C. Local roads: All roads not listed as arterials or collectors.
§ 220-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-39
1:537
within the Borough but is merely provided for information to applicants and
landowners of the type of regulations which may be in effect.
§ 220-40. Common open space requirements.
In those instances where open space is required elsewhere in this chapter,
or when an applicant proposes the use of open space, such open space shall
comply with the following:
A. Noise pollution and vibration. Rules and Regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
B. Air pollution, airborne emissions and odor. Rules and Regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
C. Water pollution. The Clean Streams Law, June 22, 1937, P.L. 1987, 35
P.S. § 691.1 et seq., as amended.
D. Mine reclamation and open pit setback. Pennsylvania Act No. 1984-219,
the Noncoal Surface Mining Conservation and Reclamation Act, 52 P.S.
§ 3301 et seq.
E. Glare and heat. Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection.
F. Handicap access. The latest version of the Pennsylvania Universal
Accessibility Standards.
G. Floodplain protection. The Manheim Borough Floodplain Ordinance
(Chapter 124).
A. Required open space shall be designed and arranged to achieve at least
one of the following objectives, and the applicant shall demonstrate
those specific measures employed to achieve these objectives.
(1) Protection of important natural resources (e.g., streams, ponds,
wetlands, steep slopes, woodlands, unique geologic features,
wildlife habitats, aquifer recharge areas, etc.).
(2) Protection of important historical and/or archaeological sites.
(3) Provision of usable play and recreation areas that are conveniently
accessible to residents within the development and the Borough.
(4) Integration of greenbelts throughout the development that link
residences with on-site or adjoining parks, schools or other similar
features.
B. An essential element of the provision of open space is a written
description regarding its ownership and/or disposition. Such ownership
and/or disposition shall be accomplished through one of the following:
(1) An offer of dedication to the Borough. The Borough shall not be
obligated to accept dedication of the common open space.
§ 220-39 MANHEIM CODE § 220-40
1:538
§ 220-41. Required traffic study standards.
All uses requiring a traffic study shall provide a study prepared by a
professional traffic engineer with the following minimum considerations:
(2) With permission of the Borough, and with appropriate deed
restrictions in favor of the Borough and in language acceptable to
the Borough Solicitor, the developer may transfer ownership of the
common open space or a portion thereof to a private, nonprofit
organization among whose purposes is the preservation of open
space land and/or natural resources. The organization shall be a
bona fide conservation organization with a perpetual existence; the
conveyance must contain appropriate provisions for reverter or
retransfer if the organization is unable to maintain the land, and
the organization must enter into a maintenance agreement with the
Borough.
(3) The developer shall provide for and establish an organization for
the ownership and maintenance of the common open space which
shall be generally consistent with the requirements for unit owners'
associations found in the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act,
68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq. If such an organization is created, the
agreements of sale and deeds for all lots shall contain the following
requirements in language acceptable to the Borough Solicitor:
(a) Such organization shall not dispose of the common open space
by sale or otherwise except to the Borough unless the Borough
has given prior written approval. Such transfer shall be made
only to another organization which shall maintain the common
open space in accordance with this chapter.
(b) The organization and all lot owners shall enter into a
maintenance agreement with the Borough and shall agree to
be bound by the provisions of Article VII of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code73 relating to the maintenance of
deteriorating common open space by municipalities.
(c) The Borough may require the establishment of a reserve fund
to provide for maintenance of or capital improvements to the
common open space.
A. A description of the traffic impact area (TIA), including its major roads
and potential traffic-generation rates to be determined by current
references.
B. Existing twenty-four-hour and peak-hour traffic-volume data for all
streets which provide direct access to the proposed development and
for the collectors and arterials which will serve it as well as any major
intersection within the impact area.
73.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10701 et seq.
§ 220-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-41
1:539
§ 220-42. Agricultural, horticultural and/or forestry-related uses.
As permitted in Article II, agricultural, horticultural and/or forestry-related
uses are subject to the following.
C. Estimates of the total number of vehicle trips to be generated by the
development for a typical twenty-four-hour period, and including
typical a.m. and p.m. peak periods.
D. Assignment of future twenty-four-hour and peak-hour volumes to the
collectors and arterials and other streets that will serve the proposed
development based on the projections of increased traffic volumes
within the traffic impact area, to be determined by an extrapolation of
former development trends and the amounts of usable area already
planned and/or zoned within the traffic impact area. Any previously
approved projects within the TIA that have not yet been occupied
should also be factored in these future traffic-volume projections.
E. Projected twenty-four-hour and peak-hour turning-movement data for
all access points proposed for the development.
F. Capacity/level of service analysis on major intersections which will be
impacted by the additional volumes generated by the development.
G. Recent data about existing accident levels at the above intersections,
categorized by accident type for each intersection.
H. Descriptions of the street improvements that will be required in order
to avoid problems of traffic congestion and traffic safety.
I. Cost estimates of any proposed improvements that will be required.
J. Descriptions of existing and planned public transportation services in
the Borough and the potential to serve the proposed development.
K. Descriptions of any actions proposed or offered by the applicant to
alleviate the impact of the proposed development on the transportation
network.
L. The source of standards used in the data as presented.
M. The applicant shall make any improvements necessary to maintain an
adequate level of service on all abutting intersections and streets.
A. Minimum lot area requirements: 10 acres.
B. Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
C. Minimum setback requirements.
(1) Front yard setback: 50 feet.
(2) Side yard setback: 50 feet on each side (100 feet total).
(3) Rear yard setback: 50 feet.
§ 220-41 MANHEIM CODE § 220-42
1:540
(4) Special setback requirements.
(a) Except as provided for in the following subsection, no new
slaughter area, area for the storage or processing of manure,
garbage or spent mushroom compost, structures for the
cultivation of mushrooms or the raising of commercial
livestock or any building housing commercial livestock shall be
permitted within 300 feet of any property line within any
residential zone.
(b) The Zoning Hearing Board may, as a special exception,
however, reduce the above special setback requirements
where it is shown that, because of prevailing winds, unusual
obstructions, topography or other conditions, a lesser distance
would protect adjoining lands from odor, dust or other hazards.
In no case, however, shall the Zoning Hearing Board reduce
the special setback requirement to less than 100 feet. The
burden shall be upon the applicant to prove that a lesser
distance would not be detrimental to the health, safety and
general welfare of the community.
(5) These setbacks shall not apply to agricultural fences that are used
to contain agricultural livestock. Such fences shall be set back a
minimum of six feet from any adjoining street right-of-way lines.
D. Maximum permitted height: 150 feet, provided all structures are set
back a distance at least equal to their height from all property lines.
E. Maximum lot coverage: 10%.
F. All lanes exclusively serving agricultural, horticultural and/or forestryrelated
uses shall be exempt from driveway and access drive
requirements.
G. Permitted accessory uses include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural products, subject to the
following:
(a) Any structure used to display such goods and related parking
shall be no more than 2,000 square feet in size and shall be
located at least 25 feet from any property line.
(b) At least 1/2 of the products displayed for sale must have been
produced on the premises.
(c) Off-street parking shall be provided for all employees and
customers.
(d) Any signs used shall be attached to the roadside stand
structure and shall not exceed 10 square feet in total area nor
exceed a maximum height of 15 feet.
§ 220-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-42
1:541
(2) Family day-care facilities, as defined herein.
(3) Manure storage facilities, subject to the following regulations:
(a) All manure storage facilities shall be designed in compliance
with the guidelines outlined in the publication "Manure
Management for Environmental Protection," Bureau of Water
Quality Management Publication No. 43, and any revisions,
supplements, and replacements thereof, published by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, copies
of which are available from the Office of Water Quality
Management in the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office located at One Ararat Boulevard, Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania 17110, telephone (717) 657-4585.
(b) All waste storage facilities' design shall be reviewed by the
Lancaster County Conservation District. The applicant shall
furnish a letter from the Conservation District attesting to
approval of the design of the proposed facility.
(c) Construction and subsequent operation of the waste storage
facility shall be in accordance with the permit and the
approved design. Any design changes during construction or
subsequent operation will require the obtainment of another
review by the Lancaster County Conservation District.
H. Beekeeping, subject to the following:
(1) It shall be the duty of the applicant to maintain each colony so as to
not create a public nuisance.
(2) Colonies shall be maintained in movable frame hives.
(3) Hives shall be located only within the rear yard and shall be
situated to maximize sunshine exposure and/or natural wind
protection.
(4) In no case shall hives be located within 25 feet of any property line.
(5) All hives shall have access to an on-site water supply. Unless a
natural water supply exists on the subject property, the applicant
shall furnish a water-filled tank with a board or crushed rock for the
bees to land on.
(6) Hives shall not be oriented to children's play areas or neighboring
properties.
(7) Adequate techniques in handling bees, such as requeening, and
adequate hive space shall be maintained to prevent unprovoked
stinging 75 feet or more from the hive.
I. One single-family detached dwelling.
§ 220-42 MANHEIM CODE § 220-43
1:542
§ 220-43. Drive-through requirements.
Except as required elsewhere within this chapter, all uses involving the use
of drive-through lanes shall comply with the following:
§ 220-44. Murals. [Added 11-14-2006 by Ord. No. 598]
A. Each drive-through lane shall have sufficient length between the street
and the service window/teller/bay to accommodate at least five
vehicles.
B. All drive-through lanes shall be separated from the parking lot's interior
driveways by the use of curbs and/or planting islands.
C. Any exterior speaker/microphone system shall be arranged and/or
screened to prevent objectionable noise impact on adjoining properties.
D. All drive-through lanes shall be constructed according to the design
standards listed in § 220-32 of this chapter.
A. Purpose. It is recognized that in certain cases property owners may
desire to create a mural on a particular structure facade. It is further
recognized that certain murals may in fact prove to be beneficial in
making statements relative to the history of the Borough of Manheim.
However, to simply permit murals to be created without any type of
guidelines or control would be in direct conflict with the general
purpose of zoning and the specific language within the sign provisions
wherein billboards and similar signage are prohibited. It is therefore
the purpose of this section of the Zoning Ordinance to establish
procedures and guidelines under which murals may be permitted and
even encouraged within the landscape and streetscape areas along
public thoroughfares. The following provisions have been created to
provide design, preparation, painting, maintenance, eligibility and
permitting standards and guidelines to assist property owners in their
efforts.
B. Design guidelines. The following guidelines are to be utilized by the
design professional and the property owner in the creation of an
acceptable mural design.
(1) The mural shall provide a representation of a historic theme or
event that is indicative of Manheim Borough. Such theme or event
could represent a historic event, business or era.
(2) Use of lettering should be an incidental feature and not the prime
message of the mural; otherwise the mural would be treated as a
sign. Lettering shall be done in such a way that a patina, shading or
other aging treatment is utilized to downplay the physical message.
(3) The mural shall be designed around existing architectural features;
removal or covering of window trim or other architectural features
§ 220-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-44
1:543
shall be avoided at all cost and may only be approved with support
from the Borough's Historic Commission.
(4) Services of a professional artist shall be obtained for the purpose of
creating the design for the intended mural. Applicants and/or their
artist are encouraged to be as creative and artistic as possible in
the preparation of the mural design.
(5) The artist will be required to submit a portfolio of his/her/their
work and shall provide current references for all of the work
contained within the portfolio. Letters of reference are acceptable,
provided that addresses and phone numbers of the individual or
agency that contracted the work shown within the portfolio are also
provided.
(6) A written text describing the matter depicted by the mural shall
also be submitted. One of the goals of the mural program shall be to
provide for the creation of a brochure, a walking tour outline and
map that would be made available to the public, describing each of
the murals that exist within the Borough.
C. Painting regulations. The following regulations are to serve as the
minimum acceptable standards for the actual creation of the mural.
(1) The mural may be painted either directly on the building's surface
or on super-flex material and then stretched over a space on the
building.
(2) Painting directly on the building shall incorporate, but not be
limited to, the following steps:
(a) Power washing and/or an appropriate chemical cleaning of the
wall area and all affected surfaces;
(b) Use of an acrylic latex primer, allowing an appropriate drying
time in accordance with manufacturers' recommendations;
(c) Use of oil-based paint; and
(d) Application of a clear acrylic latex sealer (after an appropriate
curing time).
D. Eligibility standards.
(1) Standards need to be provided, listing structures and themes that
may prove to be appropriate in the creation of murals within the
Borough. The Historic Commission and Planning Commission shall
jointly develop a listing of potential building facades that could be
considered for the placement of a mural. In addition, they shall
jointly develop a listing of historic themes that could be utilized by
property owners for the creation of a mural.
§ 220-44 MANHEIM CODE § 220-44
1:544
(2) A structures and theme listing shall be adopted either as part of
these regulations or by resolution adopted by Borough Council. In
addition, the listing may be added to or otherwise modified from
time to time based upon recommendations of the Historic
Commission and Planning Commission through the resolution
process.
(3) Publication of the eligibility standards does not infer that the
property owner(s) have agreed to have their building embellished
in this manner, nor does the listing of themes indicate that a
specific design has been developed for use in the creation of such a
mural on any of the listed structures. These listings are to be
provided as a guide and do not cover all of the buildings or themes
that may be able to gain approval; property owners may choose to
present a specific theme to the Historic Commission and Planning
Commission that they would like to utilize on a building facade in
the creation of a mural.
E. Maintenance standards.
(1) These standards are provided to assure that the property owner is
aware of his/her/their obligation that the mural will be properly and
fully maintained well into the future.
(2) The property owner and Borough shall enter into and record an
agreement wherein the property owner will provide for the
maintenance of the mural. The agreement shall provide the
Borough with certain rights to assure that the mural is properly
maintained. In addition, failure by the property owner to maintain a
mural shall result in certain defined action by the Borough Codes
Compliance Officer, including but not limited to providing for legal
notice to the property owner of his requirement to take certain
specific action to maintain and/or repair the mural as well as
providing the right for the Borough to take such action and seek
reimbursement from the property owner for such work. In addition,
the agreement shall address the owner's right to remove or
otherwise cover or restore the affected facade.
F. Permitting. The permit application shall contain the following:
(1) Name, address and phone number of the applicant.
(2) Relationship of the applicant to the project (property owner, artist,
etc.).
(3) Address of the property, including a description of the wall that will
be affected.
(4) General description of the mural.
(5) A rendering of the proposed mural.
§ 220-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-44
1:545
(6) Name, address and phone number of the artist, including the
required portfolio and references.
(7) Anticipated project cost.
(8) Outline of painting process.
(9) Projected start and finish dates.
G. Approval. Applications for the approval of a mural will be handled in
one of four ways: approved (as submitted); conditional approval
(approved with additional requirements); rejected (returned to the
applicant for additional information); or denied. The process will
require a three-step review and approval process beginning with the
Historic Commission.
(1) The Historic Commission and Planning Commission will review the
mural design(s) based on the following criteria:
(a) Historic accuracy or depiction of an approved theme.
(b) Appropriate usage and selection of color.
(c) Appropriate use of lettering and overall aesthetics.
(d) Recognition/approval of the artist.
(2) Recommendations from the Historic Commission will be forwarded
to the Planning Commission for its review. (The Codes Compliance
Officer or the Historic Commission shall reject applications that are
deemed to be incomplete. Applications that move past the Historic
Commission review will be considered complete.)
(3) The Planning Commission shall add any comments or
recommendations to the application packet, and the matter shall be
forwarded to Borough Council for its consideration.
(4) Upon receipt of the written Historic and Planning Commission
recommendations, Borough Council shall arrange for the applicant
to make a presentation at a public meeting, following which
Council shall take action to approve; conditionally approve; or deny
the application. (Conditional approval may require the applicant to
submit a revised application, description, drawing, or other design
modifications, prior to permitting the applicant to move forward
with the project.) Any denial shall state the basis for the denial.
H. Potential structures. The following are representative of suitable sites/
building facades wherein the placement of a mural may be appropriate.
(1) South Main Street.
(a) Trolley Transformer Building, 245 South Main, east side of the
street below the railroad tracks. Potential use of north and/or
south building walls.
§ 220-44 MANHEIM CODE § 220-44
1:546
(b) 38 South Main Street, northern wall.
(2) East High Street.
(a) 1 to 3 North Main Street, east wall (second- and third-floor wall
above single-story addition).
(b) 15 East High Street, west facade of the Borough Office/Library
Building (elevated first- and second-floor wall, above the brick
water table).
(c) Grandstand structure at Memorial Drive.
(3) West Stiegel Street.
(a) 400 West Stiegel Street, Restore 'N' More, south building wall.
(4) South Penn Street.
(a) 111 South Penn Street, H.C. Burgard Elementary School, south
building wall.
(5) South Grant Street.
(a) 147 West High Street, south wall of Graybill's Tool and Die.
(6) South Charlotte Street.
(a) 1 to 3 South Charlotte Street, southern wall (second- and thirdfloor
facade above single-story structure).
(b) 149 South Charlotte Street, VFW building, front facade.
I. Potential themes. The following is a listing of potential themes that may
assist property owners who are considering participating in the
Borough's mural program. The themes have been selected based on
historic significance related to the Borough, its founding, industrial
development and events.
(1) Depiction of trolley service to the Borough.
(2) Depiction of rail service.
(3) Potential use of a collage that would represent the Cat's Meow,
Railroad Station as they could be utilized as a direction feature.
(4) Bond Foundry.
(5) Hershey's Mill.
(6) Hollinger's Mill.
(7) Specific business: historic scene on the business's building.
§ 220-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-44
1:547
(8) Baron Stiegel (numerous scenes): Rose Ceremony, glass,
glassworks, mansion, arrival by horse-drawn carriage with band
playing, laying out of Manheim, purchase of land, etc.
(9) A series of murals on multiple structures that have a community or
historic theme or tell a story.
§ 220-44 MANHEIM CODE § 220-44
1:548
ARTICLE IV
Specific Criteria
§ 220-45. Specific standards for special exception and conditional
uses.
§ 220-46. Accessory buildings exceeding 680 square feet. [Amended
1-30-1996 by Ord. No. 536]
Within the Residential (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and COA) Zones, accessory
buildings exceeding 680 square feet in size are permitted by special
exception, subject to the following criteria:
A. In addition to the general criteria listed in §§ 220-111C and 220-122B,
the following sets forth standards that shall be applied to each
individual special exception or conditional use. These standards must
be satisfied prior to approval of any application for a special exception
or conditional use. The applicant shall be required to demonstrate
compliance with these standards and must furnish whatever evidence is
necessary to demonstrate such compliance. All uses must comply with
the standards expressed within the underlying zone, unless those
standards expressed for each special exception or conditional use
specify different standards; in such cases the specific special exception
or conditional use standards shall apply.
B. For the purposes of this article, any required setbacks imposed upon
special exceptions or conditional uses shall be measured from the
boundary line of the site for which the special exception or conditional
use is requested, regardless of whether or not this line corresponds to a
property line or a lease line.
A. The applicant shall explain the reasons why the accessory building must
exceed 680 square feet in gross floor area. Furthermore, the applicant
must describe the intended use of the accessory building, which must
be incidental to the principal use of the property but not associated with
a home occupation.
B. The maximum permitted height for accessory buildings exceeding 680
square feet in size shall be 20 feet.
C. The applicant shall demonstrate that the lot coverage requirements of
the zone in which the accessory building is proposed will not be
violated.
D. The Zoning Hearing Board may require the erection of a landscape
screen on the subject property if it determines that the proposed use
would disrupt the character of the neighborhood and/or adjoining
properties.
§ 220-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-47
1:549
§ 220-47. Adult-related uses.
Within the C-1 Zone, adult-related uses are permitted by conditional use,
subject to the following criteria:
A. An adult-related use shall not be permitted to be located within 1,000
feet of any other adult-related use.
B. No adult-related use shall be located within 200 feet of any residentially
zoned land.
C. No establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land
which contains any one or more of the following specified land uses:
(1) Amusement park.
(2) Camp (for minors' activity).
(3) Child-care facility.
(4) Church or other similar religious facility.
(5) Community center.
(6) Museum.
(7) Park.
(8) Playground.
(9) School.
(10) Other lands where minors congregate.
D. The distance between any two adult entertainment establishments shall
be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures, from the closest point on the exterior parcel line of each
establishment. The distance between any adult entertainment
establishment and any land use specified above shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest
point on the exterior parcel line of the adult entertainment
establishment to the closest point on the property line of said land use.
E. No materials, merchandise or film offered for sale, rent, lease, loan or
for view upon the premises shall be exhibited or displayed outside of a
building or structure.
F. Any building or structure used and occupied as an adult-related use
shall have an opaque covering over all windows or doors of any area in
which materials, merchandise or film are exhibited or displayed, and no
sale materials, merchandise or film shall be visible from outside the
building or structure.
§ 220-47 MANHEIM CODE § 220-47
1:550
§ 220-48. Amusement arcades.
Within the C-1 Zone, amusement arcades are permitted by special
exception, subject to the following criteria:
§ 220-49. Automobile filling stations (including minor incidental
repair).
Within the C-1 Zone, automobile filling stations (including minor incidental
repair) are permitted by special exception, subject to the following criteria:
G. No sign shall be erected upon the premises depicting or giving a visual
representation of the type of materials, merchandise or film offered
therein.
H. Each entrance to the premises shall be posted with a notice specifying
that persons under the age of 17 years are not permitted to enter
therein, and warning all other persons that they may be offended upon
entry.
I. No adult-related use may change to another adult-related use, except
upon approval of an additional conditional use.
J. The use shall not create an enticement for minors because of its
proximity to nearby uses where minors may congregate.
K. No unlawful sexual activity or conduct shall be permitted.
L. No more than one adult-related use may be located within one building
or shopping center.
A. All activities shall take place within a completely enclosed building.
B. The applicant must furnish evidence as to how the use will be controlled
so as to not constitute a nuisance due to noise or loitering outside the
arcade.
C. A minimum of one parking space for each 80 square feet of gross
leasable floor area shall be provided. In addition, any accessory uses
(e.g., snack bar) shall also require parking to be provided in accordance
with the schedule listed in § 220-33 of this chapter.
D. A working plan for the cleanup of litter shall be furnished and
implemented by the applicant.
A. The subject property shall have a minimum width of 125 feet.
B. The subject property shall front on an arterial road as defined in
§ 220-37 of this chapter.
C. The subject property shall be located at least 300 feet from any lot
containing a school, day-care facility, playground, library, hospital or
nursing, rest or retirement home.
§ 220-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-49
1:551
§ 220-50. Automobile reconditioning, service and repair facilities.
Within the C-1 Zone, automobile reconditioning, service and repair
facilities, including, but not limited to, auto mechanics, drive-through
lubrication services and tires, auto paint, brake, muffler, transmission,
windshield, auto body, car radio, and upholstery shop, are permitted by
special exception, subject to the following criteria:
D. The outdoor storage of motor vehicles (whether capable of movement
or not) for more than one week is prohibited.
E. All structures (including gasoline pump islands, but not permitted
signs) shall be set back at least 30 feet from any street right-of-way line.
F. No outdoor storage of automobile parts (new or used) shall be
permitted. No discarded automobile parts shall remain on the site for
more than one week from when they are removed from the vehicle.
G. Access driveways shall be a minimum of 28 feet wide and separated by
75 feet from one another if located along the same frontage as
measured from edge to edge.
H. All ventilation equipment associated with fuel storage tanks shall be set
back 100 feet and oriented away from any adjoining residentially zoned
properties.
I. The applicant shall furnish evidence that the disposal of all materials
will be accomplished in a manner that complies with state and federal
regulations.
A. All service and/or repair activities shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building.
B. All uses involving drive-through service shall provide sufficient on-site
stacking lanes to prevent vehicle backups on adjoining roads.
C. No outdoor storage of parts, equipment, lubricants, fuel, or other
materials used or discarded as part of the service or repair operation
shall be permitted.
D. All exterior vehicle storage areas shall be screened from adjoining
residentially zoned properties and roads.
E. The storage of unlicensed vehicles is prohibited.
F. Any ventilation equipment outlets associated with the service/repair
work area(s) shall not be directed toward any adjoining residentially
zoned property.
G. All vehicles shall be repaired and removed from the premises promptly.
H. The demolition or junking of automobiles is prohibited. Demolished
vehicles shall be removed from the site within two weeks of arrival.
§ 220-49 MANHEIM CODE § 220-50
1:552
§ 220-51. Automobile storage compounds.
Within the I Zone, automobile storage compounds are permitted by
conditional use, subject to the following:
§ 220-52. Banks and similar financial institutions with drivethrough
lanes.
Within the CBD Zone, banks and similar financial institutions with drivethrough
lanes are permitted by special exception, subject to the following
criteria:
I. The applicant shall furnish evidence that the disposal of materials will
be accomplished in a manner that complies with state and federal
regulations.
A. Any site used for the storage of more than 100 vehicles shall front solely
upon a collector or arterial road, as listed in § 220-37 of this chapter.
B. All exterior areas used for the storage of automobiles shall be
completely enclosed by a six-foot-high fence and shall be subject to the I
Zone's setback, landscaping and screening requirements imposed upon
off-street parking lots.
C. Access drives shall be governed by § 220-32 for a distance of 50 feet
from the edge of the street right-of-way. Beyond this, all areas used for
vehicle access or storage shall not be governed by § 220-33 (off-street
parking) of this chapter. However, all storage areas shall, at a minimum,
include a nonpaved all-weather dust-free surface.
D. Vehicles may be stored in a horizontal stacked configuration; however,
no vehicles shall be located more than 100 feet from a minimum
eighteen-foot-wide on-site access drive.
E. All lighting shall be designed and constructed so as not to cast glare on
adjoining roads and/or properties.
A. No drive-through lane entrance shall be located within 100 feet of the
intersection of any street or alley right-of-way lines.
B. All drive-through lanes shall be separated by curb from the parking lot's
interior driveways.
C. No more than two drive-through lanes shall be permitted.
D. Any exterior speaker/microphone system shall be arranged and/or
screened to prevent objectionable noise impact on adjoining properties
or the streetscape.
E. All drive-through lanes shall be designed and signed to maximize
pedestrian safety on and adjacent to the subject property.
§ 220-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-53
1:553
§ 220-53. Barber and beauty salons.
Within the COA Zone, barber and beauty salons are permitted by special
exception, subject to the following criteria:
§ 220-54. Bed-and-breakfasts.
Within the R-3, COA and CBD Zones, bed-and-breakfasts, as defined herein,
are permitted by special exception, subject to the following criteria:
§ 220-55. Boardinghouses.
Within the CBD and COA Zones, boardinghouses are permitted by special
exception, subject to the following criteria:
A. All such uses shall be contained within a detached building.
B. No more than two operators may provide service at any given time.
C. Four off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each operator. Such
parking spaces shall be screened from adjoining roads and properties
and shall be located in the rear yard.
D. One sign is permitted, which shall not exceed six square feet in total
sign area. Such sign shall be set back at least two feet from every side
and/or rear property line.
A. No modifications to the external appearance of the building which
would alter its residential character shall be permitted.
B. All floors above grade shall have direct means of escape to ground level.
Fire escapes, where practicable, shall not be located and affixed to the
front walls of the building.
C. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each room available
for rent, in addition to those required for the dwelling unit. Such spaces
shall be located in a side or rear yard and shall be screened from
adjoining residentially zoned properties and any street(s).
D. All parking areas shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all
property lines and screened from adjoining residentially zoned
properties and any street(s).
E. A bed-and-breakfast may erect one sign no larger than six square feet in
size. Such sign must be set back two feet from all side and/or rear lot
lines.
F. The applicants shall furnish evidence of an approved means of sewage
disposal and water supply prior to occupancy.
G. Meals shall be offered only to registered tenants and their guests.
H. Bed-and-breakfasts shall only be operated during times when the owner
occupies the premises.
§ 220-53 MANHEIM CODE § 220-55
1:554
§ 220-56. Car washes.
Within the C-1 Zone, car washes are permitted by special exception, subject
to the following criteria:
§ 220-57. Churches and related uses.
Within the R-1, R-3 and COA Zones, churches and related uses are
permitted by special exception, subject to the following criteria:
A. Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
B. The applicant shall furnish evidence that approved systems for sewage
disposal and water supply shall be used.
C. No modifications to the external appearance of the building (except fire
escapes) which would alter its residential character shall be permitted.
D. All floors above grade shall have direct means of escape to ground level.
E. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each room available
for rent in addition to those required for the dwelling unit.
F. All parking areas shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from all
property lines, and such parking shall be screened from adjoining
residentially zoned properties and any street(s).
G. Meals shall be offered only to registered tenants and their guests.
H. No signs advertising the use shall be permitted.
I. Within the CBD Zone, this use shall be restricted to second and third
floors, preserving the first-floor area for permitted business uses.
A. Public sewer facilities shall be utilized, and private on-lot recycled
water systems are encouraged.
B. Each washing bay shall provide a minimum one-hundred-foot-long onsite
stacking lane between the frontage and the entrance to the wash
bay.
C. All structures housing washing apparatuses shall be set back 50 feet
from any front or rear property line and 20 feet from any side lot line.
D. Trash receptacles shall be provided and routinely emptied to prevent
the scattering of litter.
E. The subject property shall front on an arterial or collector road, as
identified in § 220-37 of this chapter.
F. Waste disposal methods shall be presented and comply with all
applicable state and federal requirements.
A. House of worship.
§ 220-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-57
1:555
(1) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(2) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(3) All houses of worship shall have vehicular access to an arterial or
collector highway, as identified in § 220-37 of this chapter.
(4) Side yard setback: 50 feet on each side.
(5) All off-street parking areas shall be set back at least 25 feet from
the street right-of-way line.
B. Church-related residences (rectories and convents).
(1) All residential uses shall be accessory and located upon the same
lot or directly adjacent to a lot containing a house of worship.
(2) All residential uses shall be governed by the location, height and
bulk standards imposed upon other residences within the
underlying zone.
C. Church-related educational or day-care facilities.
(1) All educational or day-care uses shall be accessory and located
upon the same lot as a house of worship.
(2) If education or day care is offered below the college level, an
outdoor play area shall be provided at a rate of 65 square feet per
individual enrolled. Off-street parking lots shall not be used as
outdoor play areas. Outdoor play areas shall not be located within
the front yard and must be set back 25 feet from all property lines.
Outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by a six-foot-high
fence and screened from adjoining residentially zoned properties.
Any vegetative materials located within the outdoor play areas
shall be of a nonharmful type (poisonous, thorny, allergenic, etc.).
All outdoor play areas must provide a means of shade, such as
shade tree(s) or pavilion(s).
(3) Enrollment shall be defined as the largest number of students and/
or children under day-care supervision at any one time during a
seven-day period.
(4) Passenger dropoff areas shall be provided and arranged so that
passengers do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the
site.
(5) All educational or day-care uses shall be governed by the location,
height and bulk standards imposed upon principal uses within the
underlying zone.
(6) Unless the applicant can demonstrate that the off-street parking
associated with the house of worship is sufficient for the proposed
use, one off-street parking space shall be provided for each six
§ 220-57 MANHEIM CODE § 220-57
1:556
§ 220-58. Commercial day-care facilities.
Within the R-1 Zone, commercial day-care facilities are permitted by special
exception, subject to the following criteria:
§ 220-59. Commercial recreation facilities.
Within the C-1 Zone, commercial recreation facilities are permitted by
conditional use, subject to the following criteria:
students enrolled below grade 10 and/or one off-street parking
space for each three students, grades 10 and above.
(7) The applicant shall furnish evidence that all licenses have been
obtained.
D. Cemeteries.
(1) All burial plots or structures shall be located at least 50 feet from
any property line or street line.
(2) Assurances must be provided that water supplies of surrounding
properties will not be contaminated by burial activity within the
proposed cemetery.
(3) No burial plots or facilities are permitted in floodplain or floodfringe
areas.
A. An outdoor play area shall be provided at a rate of 65 square feet per
individual enrolled. Off-street parking compounds shall not be used as
outdoor play areas. Outdoor play areas shall not be located within the
front yard and must be set back 25 feet from all property lines. Outdoor
play areas shall be completely enclosed by a six-foot-high fence and
screened from adjoining residentially zoned properties. Any vegetative
materials located within the outdoor play areas shall be of a nonharmful
type (poisonous, thorny, allergenic, etc.). All outdoor play areas must
provide a means of shade, such as a shade tree(s) or pavilion(s).
B. Enrollment shall be defined as the largest number of students and/or
children under day-care supervision at any one time during a seven-day
period.
C. Passenger dropoff and pickup areas shall be provided on site and
arranged so that the passengers do not have to cross traffic lanes on or
adjacent to the site.
D. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each six students
enrolled.
E. The subject property must front along a collector or arterial road, as
identified in § 220-37 of this chapter.
F. The proposed use shall obtain all necessary state licenses and permits.
§ 220-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-59
1:557
§ 220-60. Conversion apartments. [Amended 8-29-2000 by Ord. No.
569]
Within the R-3, COA, CBD and PC-1 Zones, conversion apartments shall be
permitted by special exception, subject to the following:
A. If the subject property contains more than two acres, it shall front on an
arterial or collector road, as identified in § 220-37 of this chapter.
B. Those uses involving extensive outdoor activities shall provide
sufficient screening and/or landscaping measures to mitigate any visual
and/or audible impacts on adjoining properties.
C. Any structures exceeding the maximum permitted height may be
permitted so long as they are set back from all property lines at least
the horizontal distance equal to their height, plus an additional 50 feet.
Furthermore, such structures shall not be used for occupancy.
D. The applicant shall furnish evidence that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to the use of adjoining properties due to hours of operation,
noise, light, litter, dust and pollution.
E. Required parking will be determined based upon the types of activities
proposed and the schedule listed in § 220-33S. In addition, the Borough
Council may require an unimproved grassed overflow parking area to
be provided for peak-use periods. Such overflow parking areas shall be
accessible only from the interior driveways of the permanent parking
lot. Overflow parking areas shall contain fencing to prevent vehicles
from crossing adjoining properties or directly accessing adjoining
roads.
F. Any booths or other structures used for the collection of admission and/
or parking fees shall be set back and arranged to prevent vehicle
backups on adjoining roads during peak arrival periods. Any other
collection of fees (roaming parking lot attendants) shall be conducted in
a manner to prevent vehicle backups on adjoining roads. If at any time
after the opening of the commercial recreation facility the Borough
Council determines that traffic backups are occurring on adjoining
roads, and such backups are directly related to the means of access to
the subject property, the Borough Council can require the applicant to
revise means of access to relieve the undue congestion.
G. Any outside pedestrian waiting lines shall be provided with a means of
shade.
A. Conversion apartments shall only be permitted within buildings that
contained 3,000 or more square feet of habitable floor area on the
effective date of this chapter.
B. All dwelling units within the conversion apartment building shall
contain at least 750 square feet of habitable floor area.
§ 220-59 MANHEIM CODE § 220-60
1:558
§ 220-61. Drive-through and/or fast-food restaurants.
Within the C-1 Zone, drive-through and/or fast-food restaurants are
permitted by conditional use, subject to the following criteria:
§ 220-62. Dry cleaning pickup stations and laundromats.
Within the CBD Zone, dry cleaners and laundry stations are permitted by
special exception, subject to the following criteria:
§ 220-63. Family day-care facilities.
Within the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and COA Zones, family day-care facilities are
permitted by special exception, subject to the following criteria:
C. The applicant shall furnish evidence that an approved system of water
supply and sewage disposal will be utilized.
D. No modifications to the external appearance of the building that would
alter its residential appearance shall be permitted. Except that this
provision shall not apply to structures in the PC-1 Zone.
E. All floors above grade shall have direct means of escape to ground level.
F. Two off-street parking spaces per unit shall be provided.
G. The applicant shall obtain any required land development approvals.
H. Within the CBD Zone, this use shall be restricted to second and third
floors, preserving the first-floor area for permitted business uses.
A. The subject property shall front on an arterial or collector road, as
identified in § 220-37 of this chapter.
B. Exterior trash receptacles shall be provided and routinely emptied so to
prevent the scattering of litter. All applications shall include a
description of a working plan for the cleanup of litter.
C. All drive-through window lanes shall have at least sufficient space to
stack five vehicles waiting to order and shall be separated from the
parking lot's interior driveways by the use of curbs and/or planting
islands.
D. Any exterior speaker/microphone system shall be arranged and/or
screened to prevent objectionable noise impact on adjoining properties.
E. All exterior seating/play areas shall be completely enclosed by a threefoot-
high fence.
F. No part of the subject property shall be located within 200 feet of any
residentially zoned land.
A. No on-site dry cleaning operations shall be permitted.
§ 220-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-63
1:559
§ 220-64. Funeral homes.
Within the COA and CBD Zones, funeral homes are permitted by special
exception, subject to the following criteria:
§ 220-65. Heavy equipment sales, service and/or repair facilities.
Within the I Zone, heavy equipment sales, service and/or repair service
facilities are permitted by conditional use, subject to the following criteria:
A. All family day-care facilities shall be conducted within a detached
single-family dwelling by a resident of the dwelling.
B. A family day-care facility shall offer care and supervision to no more
than six minors who are not relatives of the caregiver during any
calendar day.
C. All family day-care facilities with enrollment of more than three minors
shall furnish a valid registration certificate for the proposed use issued
by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare.
D. An outdoor play area no less than 400 square feet in area shall be
provided. Such play area shall not be located within the front yard nor
any vehicle parking lot. A minimum four-foot-high fence shall
completely enclose the outdoor play area. Any vegetative materials
located within the outdoor area shall be free of a harmful type
(poisonous, thorny, allergenic, etc.). All outdoor play areas must include
a means of shade, such as a shade tree(s) or pavilion(s).
E. Passenger dropoff and pickup areas shall be provided on site and
arranged so that passengers do not have to cross traffic lanes on or
adjacent to the site.
A. Public sewer and water facilities shall be utilized.
B. Sufficient off-street parking shall be provided to prevent traffic backups
onto adjoining roads.
C. No vehicular access to the site shall be from an arterial road.
A. All service and/or repair activities shall be conducted within a wholly
enclosed building.
B. All uses involving drive-through service shall provide sufficient on-site
stacking lanes to prevent vehicle backups on adjoining roads.
C. No outdoor storage of parts, equipment, lubricants, fuel, or other
materials used or discarded as part of the service or repair operation
shall be permitted.
D. All exterior storage and/or display areas shall be screened from
adjoining residentially zoned properties. All exterior storage/display
§ 220-63 MANHEIM CODE § 220-65
1:560
§ 220-66. Heavy industrial uses.
Within the I Zone, heavy industrial uses are permitted by conditional use,
subject to the following criteria. The applicant shall provide a detailed
description of the proposed use in each of the following topics:
§ 220-67. Home improvement stores.
Within the C-1 Zone, home improvement stores are permitted by special
exception, subject to the following criteria:
areas shall be set back at least 50 feet from adjoining street lines and
shall be covered in an all-weather dust-free surface.
E. The storage of junked vehicles, boats, machinery, trucks, trailers,
mobile homes and heavy equipment vehicles on the property is
prohibited.
F. Any ventilation equipment outlets associated with the service/repair
work area(s) shall not be directed toward any adjoining residentially
zoned property.
G. All vehicles shall be repaired and removed from the premises promptly.
H. The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the proposed
operation, the materials used, the products produced, and the
generation and methods for disposal of any by-products. In addition, the
applicant shall furnish evidence that the disposal of all materials will be
accomplished in a manner that complies with all applicable laws and
ordinances.
A. The nature of the on-site processing operations, the materials used in
the process, the products produced, and the generation and methods
for disposal of any by-products. In addition, the applicant shall furnish
evidence that the disposal of materials will be accomplished in a
manner that complies with state and federal regulations.
B. The general scale of the operation in terms of its market area, specific
floor space requirements for each step of the industrial process, the
total number of employees on each shift, and an overall needed site
size.
C. Any environmental impacts that are likely to be generated (e.g., odor,
noise, smoke, dust, litter, glare, vibration, electrical disturbance,
wastewater, stormwater, solid waste, etc.) and specific measures
employed to mitigate or eliminate any negative impacts. The applicant
shall further furnish evidence that the impacts generated by the
proposed use fall within acceptable levels, as regulated by applicable
laws and ordinances.
D. Traffic study prepared by a professional traffic engineer, as detailed in
§ 220-41 of this chapter.
§ 220-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-67
1:561
§ 220-68. Home occupations.
Within the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, COA and CBD Zones, home occupations are
permitted by special exception, subject to the following criteria:
§ 220-69. Kennels.
Within the C-1 and I Zones, kennels are permitted by special exception,
subject to the following criteria:
A. All outdoor storage and display areas (exclusive of nursery and garden
stock) shall be screened from adjoining roads and properties.
B. If the subject property contains more than one acre, it shall front along
an arterial road, as identified in § 220-37 of this chapter.
A. Only single-family detached owner-occupied dwellings may contain one
home occupation.
B. Only resident employees shall be permitted.
C. Such occupations shall be incidental or secondary to the use of the
property as a residence and are limited to those occupations
customarily conducted within a dwelling unit.
D. No off-street parking, besides those required for the residence, shall be
permitted.
E. Retail sales shall be limited to goods and services that are produced or
repaired on the site. No more than 50 square feet of retail display area
shall be permitted. No goods shall be visible from the outside of the
dwelling.
F. The area used for the practice of a home occupation shall occupy no
more than 25% of the total floor area of the dwelling unit or 500 square
feet, whichever is less. All home occupation activities shall be
conducted within the dwelling building.
G. No manufacturing, repairing or other mechanical work shall be
performed in any open area. Such activity shall be conducted in such a
way that no noise, odor, vibration, electromagnetic interference or
smoke shall be noticeable at or beyond the property line.
H. No external storage of materials or products shall be permitted. No
storage in accessory structures or attached garages shall be permitted.
I. The exterior appearance of the structure or premises is constructed and
maintained as a residential dwelling.
J. One nonilluminated sign, not to exceed two square feet in display area,
shall be permitted.
A. No animals shall be boarded outside of a completely enclosed building.
§ 220-67 MANHEIM CODE § 220-69
1:562
§ 220-70. Mini warehouses. [Amended 8-29-2000 by Ord. No. 569]
Within the C-1 and PC-1 Zones, mini warehouses are permitted by special
exception, subject to the following criteria:
B. All external exercise runs or areas shall be located within the rear yard,
completely enclosed by a minimum six-foot-high fence, and located no
less than 10 feet from all property lines.
C. The outdoor running/exercising of animals shall only be permitted if a
responsible employee oversees such activities.
D. The applicant shall demonstrate a working plan for the regular cleanup
and proper disposal of all animal wastes.
E. Operation of dog kennels shall comply with the Dog Law, Act of
December 7, 1982, P.L. 784, No. 225, as amended, 3 P.S. § 459-101 et
seq., and all applicable regulations of the Department of Agriculture.
A. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided according to the schedule
listed in § 220-33S of this chapter.
B. Parking shall be provided by parking/driving lanes adjacent to the
buildings. These lanes shall be at least 26 feet wide when cubicles open
onto one side of the lane only, and at least 30 feet wide when cubicles
open onto both sides of the lane.
C. Required parking spaces may not be rented as, or used for, vehicular
storage. However, additional external storage area may be provided for
the storage of privately owned travel trailers and/or boats, so long as
such external storage area is screened from adjoining residentially
zoned land and adjoining roads and is located behind the minimum
front yard setback line. This provision shall not be interpreted to permit
the storage of partially dismantled, wrecked or inoperative vehicles.
D. All storage shall be kept within an enclosed building, except that the
storage of flammable, highly combustible, explosive or hazardous
chemicals shall be prohibited. Any fuel tanks and/or machinery or other
apparatuses relying upon such fuels shall be stored only in an external
storage area as described above.
E. An on-site manager shall be required to occupy the site during normal
working hours and shall be responsible for maintaining the operation of
the facility in conformance with the conditions of approval and all
applicable ordinances.
F. Because of the danger from fire or explosion caused by the
accumulation of vapors from gasoline, diesel fuel, paint, paint remover,
and other flammable materials, the repair, construction or
reconstruction of any boat, engine, motor vehicle or furniture is
prohibited.
§ 220-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-70
1:563
§ 220-71. Mobile home parks.
Within the R-4 Zone, mobile home parks are permitted by conditional use,
subject to the following criteria:
G. No door openings for any mini warehouse storage unit shall be
constructed facing any adjoining residentially zoned property.
Additionally, in the PC-1 Zone, no door opening which provides access
to a storage facility shall be situated in a manner which faces an
adjoining public right-of-way, walkway, bike path or open space/park
area.
H. Mini warehouses shall be used solely for the dead storage of property.
The following lists examples of uses expressly prohibited upon the site:
(1) Auctions, commercial wholesale or retail sales, or garage sales.
(2) The servicing, reconditioning, repair or fabrication of motor
vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers, appliances or other similar
equipment.
(3) The operation of power tools, spray-painting equipment, table
saws, lathes, compressors, welding equipment, kilns or other
similar equipment.
(4) The establishment of a transfer and storage business.
(5) Any use that is noxious or offensive because of odors, dust, noise,
fumes or vibrations.
I. The applicant shall adequately demonstrate that all mini warehouse
rental and/or use contracts shall specifically prohibit these uses.
J. In the PC-1 Zone, the development of mini warehouses shall be
restricted to the conversion of a building which existed at the time of
the creation of the PC-1 Zone.
A. A mobile home park shall contain a minimum of two acres.
B. All mobile home parks shall be served by public water and public
sanitary sewer facilities.
C. Maximum density in a mobile home park shall be 5.8 units per acre.
D. All mobile home lots shall contain at least 4,250 square feet.
E. Each mobile home lot shall have a minimum front yard of 30 feet, rear
yard of 20 feet and two side yards of 10 feet each. In no case shall the
distance between any two mobile homes be less than 20 feet. (These
setbacks shall also apply to mobile home park offices, service, utility or
other buildings.)
§ 220-70 MANHEIM CODE § 220-71
1:564
F. All mobile home parks shall be provided with a perimeter landscape
buffer strip that is at least 25 feet wide. Such width shall be measured
from adjoining property and rights-of-way lines.
G. Each mobile home shall be placed on a six-inch-thick poured concrete
pad over a six-inch stone base, the length and width of which shall be at
least equal to the length and width of the mobile home it is to support.
Each pad shall include properly designed utility connections. Protective
skirting shall be placed around the area between the pad and the floor
level of each mobile home so as to prevent that area from forming a
harborage for rodents, to allow the creation of a fire hazard, or to
expose unsightly conditions.
H. Each mobile home shall be provided with a minimum of two paved
parking spaces containing at least 180 square feet of bituminous or
concrete surface, which shall be located on the mobile home lot. If onstreet
parking is not provided, one additional off-street parking space
per unit shall be provided in a common visitor parking compound. Such
visitor parking compounds shall be sized, arranged and located so that
the spaces are within 300 feet walking distance to any unit served.
Access to all parking spaces shall be limited to interior roads of the
mobile home park; in no case shall access to such parking spaces be
provided from adjoining public roads.
I. Interior mobile home park roads with no on-street parking shall be
paved with an all-weather dust-free surface at least 24 feet wide. An
additional width of 10 feet shall be provided for each lane of on-street
parking.
J. Individual mobile home owners may install accessory or storage sheds,
extensions and additions to mobile homes and exterior patio areas. Any
such facilities so installed shall not intrude into any required front, side
or rear yard and, in every case, shall substantially conform in style,
quality and color to the existing mobile homes.
K. There shall be a minimum of 25% of the gross acreage of the mobile
home park devoted to active and/or passive common recreational
facilities. Responsibility for maintenance of the recreational areas shall
be with the landowner and/or the operator. Should the landowner and/
or the operator neglect to maintain the designated recreational area as
depicted on the plan, the Borough may then maintain said areas and
assess the landowner for any costs incurred.
L. A visual screen shall be placed along the mobile home park boundaries
that adjoin other residentially zoned properties. Such screen can
consist of sight-tight fencing, vegetative materials, or earthen berms
that are so arranged to effectively block the views from ground level on
adjoining properties. Screening shall be provided between ground level
and at least a height of six feet. If sight-tight fencing is used, it shall not
encompass more than 50% of the total surface area of the required
screen.
§ 220-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-72
1:565
§ 220-72. Nightclubs.
Within the C-1 Zone, nightclubs are permitted by conditional use, subject to
the following criteria:
§ 220-73. Office conversions.
Within the COA Zone, office conversions of detached dwellings that existed
on the effective date of this chapter are permitted by special exception,
subject to the following:
§ 220-74. Outdoor cafes. [Amended 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622;
6-28-2016 by Ord. No. 650]
A. No part of the subject property shall be located within 200 feet of any
residentially zoned land.
B. The applicant shall furnish evidence that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to the use of adjoining properties due to hours of operation,
light and/or litter.
C. The applicant shall furnish evidence as to how the use will be controlled
so as to not constitute a nuisance due to noise or loitering outside the
building.
D. A working plan for the cleanup of litter shall be furnished and
implemented by the applicant.
A. No exterior structural modifications to the building (except for fire
escapes) shall be permitted.
B. The site shall front on and have vehicular access to a collector or
arterial road, as listed in § 220-37 of this chapter.
C. Off-street parking shall be provided in the rear or side yards and shall
be screened from adjoining roads and properties.
D. One sign shall be permitted, not exceeding six square feet in total sign
area.
E. All activities must be conducted within a completed enclosed building.
A. Outdoor cafes serving alcohol shall provide evidence confirming
compliance with all applicable state laws, including but not limited to,
those of the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
B. Outdoor cafes shall only be permitted by right as accessory uses to a
principal restaurant. The hours of operation shall coincide with the
hours of operation of the restaurant to which it is an accessory use, but
in no case shall the outdoor cafe operate between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
§ 220-72 MANHEIM CODE § 220-74
1:566
§ 220-75. Private clubhouses.
Within the COA and CBD Zones, the conversion of buildings that existed
on the effective date of this chapter to private clubs shall be permitted by
special exception, subject to the following:
C. Outdoor dining may be located on a sidewalk, provided that there shall
be a minimum pathway of at least four feet in width along the sidewalk
that is free of obstacles to allow for pedestrian traffic.
D. Outdoor cafes located within a side and/ or rear yard shall be screened
from adjoining properties with fencing or vegetation that provides a
complete visual barrier between ground level and six feet in height.
E. Outdoor furnishings are limited to tables, chairs, umbrellas, and items
listed in Subsection H of this section below.
F. Outdoor furniture shall be removed from the sidewalk and stored inside
the restaurant or in a rear or side yard after operating hours. Outdoor
furnishings that consist of all-in-one, combination seating/tables shall
not be required to be removed daily.
G. Any lighting or music systems serving the outdoor cafe shall be located
and designed so as not to constitute a nuisance to adjoining properties.
H. Planters, posts with ropes, and other removable enclosures, as well as a
reservation podium, are required as a way of defining the area occupied
by the outdoor dining on a sidewalk.
I. Refuse facilities shall be provided and maintained by the restaurant. All
areas within the outdoor cafe, as well as the surrounding area,
including but not limited to the sidewalk, shall be kept clear of all refuse
and shall be kept clean. Food and drink spills, etc., shall be cleaned
immediately.
J. Advertising or promotional features shall be limited to umbrellas, menu
signs, sandwich board signs and canopies and must be consistent with
§ 220-36 of this chapter.
A. No exterior structural modifications to the building (except for fire
escapes) shall be permitted.
B. The site shall front on and have vehicular access to a collector or
arterial road, as listed in § 220-37 of this chapter.
C. Off-street parking shall be provided in the rear or side yards and shall
be screened from adjoining roads and properties.
D. One sign shall be permitted, not exceeding six square feet in total sign
area.
E. All activities must be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
§ 220-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-76
1:567
§ 220-76. Public and private schools.
Within the R-1, R-3 and COA Zones, public and private schools are
permitted by special exception, subject to the following criteria:
§ 220-77. Recycling facilities for paper, plastic, glass and metal
products.
Within the I Zone, recycling of paper, plastic, glass and metal products is
permitted by conditional use, subject to the following criteria:
§ 220-78. Shopping centers.
Within the C-1 Zone, shopping centers may be permitted by conditional use,
subject to the following:
A. All height, area, setback and coverage standards within the underlying
zone shall apply.
B. All off-street parking lots shall be screened from adjoining residentially
zoned properties.
C. If education is offered below the college level, an outdoor play area
shall be provided, at a rate of 65 square feet per individual enrolled. Offstreet
parking lots shall not be used as outdoor play areas. Outdoor play
areas shall not be located within the front yard and must be set back 10
feet from all property lines. Outdoor play areas shall be completely
enclosed by a six-foot-high fence and screened from adjoining
residentially zoned properties. Any vegetative materials located within
the outdoor play area shall be of a nonharmful type (poisonous, thorny,
allergenic, etc.). All outdoor play areas must provide a means of shade,
such as a shade tree(s) or pavilion(s). Enrollment shall be defined as the
largest number of students on the site at any one time during a sevenday
period.
D. Passenger dropoff and pickup areas shall be provided and arranged so
that students do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the
site.
E. Within the COA Zone, private schools shall only be conducted within
buildings that existed on the effective date of this chapter.
A. All operations, including collection, shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building.
B. There shall be no outdoor storage of materials processed, used or
generated by the operation.
C. The applicant shall explain the scope of operation and any measures
used to mitigate problems associated with noise, fumes, dust and litter.
D. The applicant shall present a working plan to assure the immediate
collection of stray debris.
§ 220-76 MANHEIM CODE § 220-78
1:568
§ 220-79. Taverns.
Within the C-1 Zone, taverns are permitted by special exception, subject to
the following criteria:
A. The subject property shall front on an arterial road, as identified in
§ 220-37 of this chapter.
B. Design standards.
(1) Zone: C-1.
(2) Minimum lot area: 43,560 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(4) Maximum lot coverage: 70%.
C. A minimum of 5 1/2 off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each
1,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area. This parking requirement
is also subject to the permitted reduction described in § 220-33Q of this
chapter.
D. Both public sewer and public water shall be utilized.
E. A traffic study shall be submitted by a qualified traffic engineer
concerning the adequacy of the existing and/or proposed road systems
to accommodate increased traffic from the shopping center
development. Such study shall be prepared in accordance with § 220-41
of this chapter.
F. The shopping center shall be permitted to erect one planned center
sign along each of the center's frontages. At least 50% of the total sign
area shall be devoted to advertisement of the shopping center's name.
The size of such sign shall not exceed one square foot for each four feet
of frontage contained within the shopping center. In no case shall a
planned center sign exceed a maximum size of 64 square feet nor an
overall height of 20 feet. In addition, individual uses within the
shopping center may have signs; however, such signs shall be flat wall,
wall projecting, or roof signs, as defined in § 220-36B of this chapter.
A. The subject property shall be screened from any adjoining residentially
zoned land.
B. The applicant shall furnish evidence that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to the use of adjoining properties due to hours of operation,
light and/or litter.
C. The applicant shall furnish evidence as to how the use will be controlled
so as to not constitute a nuisance due to noise or loitering outside the
building.
D. A working plan for the cleanup of litter shall be furnished and
implemented by the applicant.
§ 220-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-80
1:569
§ 220-80. Village cluster developments.
Within the R-1 Zone, village cluster developments shall be permitted by
conditional use, subject to the following:
A. Purpose.
(1) In compliance with §§ 606 and 605 of the Act, this zone provides an
optional set of design standards that can be applied to only
property located within the R-1 Residential Zone. These optional
design standards seek to achieve a village-type setting that is
characteristic of much of the Borough's built environment and
heritage. All of the design standards of this zone are vital if the
"village" atmosphere is to be achieved. While many of the following
requirements deal with issues that typically transcend zoning
jurisdiction, they are provided as design options and are, therefore,
considered voluntarily self-imposed by prospective developers but
enforceable by the Borough.
(2) Some of the specific development objectives of the zone include the
design and construction of neighborhoods that:
(a) Are distinct in their incorporation of important natural and
cultural features.
(b) Provide for a diversity of housing types, sizes and costs with
particular emphasis on scattered-site affordable housing
opportunities.
(c) Provide for convenient vehicular access to the neighborhood's
edge but increased reliance upon pedestrian movements
within its bounds.
(d) Integrate local businesses and trades to enhance resident
convenience and offer limited employment opportunities.
(e) Make efficient use of local infrastructure and services.
(f) Reflect the historic and traditional building styles so abundant
within the Borough.
(g) Reserve and feature civic uses and open spaces as community
focal points.
(h) Provide safe, efficient and compatible linkages with existing
nearby land uses, streets, sidewalks, etc.
(i) Invite regular and frequent social interaction among its
inhabitants.
(j) Blend all of these above-described features in a way that
promotes community identification and a "sense of belonging"
for the residents.
§ 220-80 MANHEIM CODE § 220-80
1:570
(3) These development objectives will be used as a measure of
conformance with any proposed development under this section.
B. Relationship to other ordinances and sections of this chapter. The
provisions of this § 220-80 create an optional and inseverable set of
design standards which may be applied to lands within the R-1 Zone.
Such standards may only be applied to property upon approval by
Borough Council and written acceptance by the landowner of all
requirements of this section and any valid conditions of approval
attached by Borough Council. Such standards establish different land
use and design requirements from those contained in this and other
ordinances of the Borough. To the extent the regulations within this
section differ (are more, or less restrictive) from others, those within
this section shall govern. However, all other provisions of this and other
ordinances of the Borough shall remain in full force.
C. Severability and repealer. Should any part of this § 220-80 be declared
invalid by the courts, the entire § 220-80 shall be automatically
repealed.
D. Review procedures. All proposals shall be governed by the application
and review procedures for conditional uses according to § 220-122 of
this chapter. The remaining requirements shall be used as the specific
criteria for evaluating the approval of any conditional use(s).
E. Conditional uses.
(1) Public uses and public utilities structures.
(2) Public and nonprofit parks and playgrounds.
(3) Churches and related uses.
(4) Single-family detached dwellings.
(5) Duplexes.
(6) Townhouses with no more than four units per building.
(7) Quadruplexes.
(8) Accessory building apartments with no more than one dwelling
unit.
(9) Home occupations, subject to the criteria listed in § 220-68 of this
chapter.
(10) Family day-care facilities, subject to the criteria listed in § 220-63
of this chapter.
(11) Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
F. Minimum area requirements. All applications shall contain no less than
10 contiguous acres. However, applications that expand previously
§ 220-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-80
1:571
approved village cluster developments shall have no minimum area
requirements.
G. Required mixture of uses. All village cluster developments shall provide
a mixture of uses that conform with the following ratios of net acreage
(excluding streets, alleys, and utility rights-of-way):
Use Required Percentage
Public, civic, open spaces Minimum 30%
Single-family detached dwellings (including
accessory apartments)
Minimum 40%
Other dwellings (duplexes, townhouses,
quadruplexes)
10% to 30%
H. Maximum coverage. In no case shall more than 55% of a village cluster
development site be covered with buildings and/or other impervious
surfaces.
I. Residential design requirements.
(1) Lot design standards. See following table:
Required Setbacks2
Permitted
Dwelling
Type
Maximum
Permitted
Density
(units/net
acre)
Minimum
Lot
Width at
Building
Line
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
(percent)
Front
Build-To
Line1
(feet)
One Side
(feet)
Both
Sides
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Singlefamily
detached
7 50 50%3 10 6 12 20
Duplex 7 40 per
unit
70% 10 6 per unit N/A 20
Townhouse 7 18 per
unit
70% 10 10, end
units
N/A 20
Quadruplex 7 30 per
unit
70% 10 10, end
units
N/A 20
§ 220-80 MANHEIM CODE § 220-80
1:572
NOTES:
1 No less than 70% of a building's front facade (including the front facade of any covered
or uncovered porches) must be located on the front build-to line; except, however, no less
than 50% of any townhouse or quadruplex building must be located on the front build-to
line. Front build-to lines shall be measured between the edges of the street right-of-way
and the closest facade of the building, including porches. No part of any building shall
extend closer to a street than the front build-to line.
2 Required setbacks for accessory structures shall be 10 feet from rear lot lines and six
feet from side lot lines. No accessory buildings shall be permitted within the front yard.
3 Maximum lot coverage requirements shall not apply to porches located within the front
yard.
(2) Residential building design standards. All residences shall comply
with the following:
(a) Building height. All principal residences shall be 1, 2 or 3
stories in height. Accessory buildings shall be no more than 20
feet high unless an accessory apartment is provided; in such
cases, an accessory building can extend up to two stories.74
(b) Building orientation and porches. All residential buildings'
main entrances shall face the lot's front yard. At least 50% of
all detached dwellings located along a public street within the
same block shall include porches within the front yard. When a
dwelling with a porch is located on a corner lot, the porch shall
extend parallel along both front lot lines.
(c) Residential building width. No residential building shall be
greater than 80 feet wide as measured parallel or
approximately parallel with any street line.
(d) Architectural considerations. All proposals must incorporate
architectural treatments and styles that complement the
Borough's historic resources. All applications shall include the
preparation of textual and (typical) graphic descriptions by a
commonwealth-registered architect of proposed architectural
features and styles. Such descriptions shall be analyzed with
the following criteria:
[1] Proportion of building's front facades. The relationship
between the width of the front of the building and the
height of the front of the building.
[2] Proportion of openings within the building. The
relationship of width to height of windows and doors.
[3] Rhythms of solids to voids in the front facade. Since
rhythm is a repeated and recurrent alteration of strong
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-80
1:573
and weak architectural elements, a rhythm of masses to
openings in a building should be maintained.
[4] Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. In moving past a
series of buildings, a rhythm of recurrent or repeated
building masses to spaces between them should be
experienced.
[5] Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections. Moving past
a series of structures, one experiences a rhythm of
entrances or projections at an intimate scale.
[6] Relationship of materials. Within an area, the predominant
materials may be brick, stone, stucco, wood siding or other
material.
[7] Relationship of textures. The predominant textures of an
area may be smooth, such as stucco, or rough, as brick
with tooled joints, or horizontal wood siding, or other
textures.
[8] Walls of continuity. Physical ingredients, such as brick
walls, wrought iron fences, evergreen landscape masses,
building facades or combinations of these, form
continuous, cohesive walls of enclosures along the street.
[9] Relationship of landscaping. There may be a
predominance of a quality and quantity of landscaping,
although emphasis herein shall be with the amounts and
continuity of landscaping.
[10] Paving materials. There may be a predominance in the use
of brick pavers, cobblestones, granite blocks or others.
[11] Directional expression of front elevation. Structural shape,
planning of openings and architectural detail may provide
a predominantly vertical, horizontal or nondirectional
character to the building's facade.
[12] Scale. Scale is created by the size of units of construction
and architectural detail that relate to the size of man. It
can also be determined by building mass and how it relates
to open space. The major elements of scale may be brick or
stone units, window or door openings, porches and
balconies, etc.
[13] Relationship of color. Insofar as the mass and detail, such
as trim, are concerned, a predominant color that may be of
a natural material or a patina colored by time. Blending
colors of trim is also a factor.
[14] Relationship of architectural details. Architectural details
and their relationship to the structure in question and
§ 220-80 MANHEIM CODE § 220-80
1:574
adjacent ones, including, but not limited to, cornices,
lintels, arches, quoins, balustrades and ironwork,
chimneys, etc.
[15] Relationship of roof shapes. Buildings should have
compatible roof shapes, such as gable, mansard, hip, flat,
gambrel and/or other kinds of roof shapes.
[16] A description of any nonstructural site improvements
(buffering, landscaping and screening) that will be used to
protect the integrity of the historic resources.
(3) Vehicular access and parking requirements for residences.
(a) All driveways and off-street parking shall be provided within
the rear yard. However, one joint-use driveway shall be
permitted to extend into the front yard to connect with the
public street along a common lot line serving at least three
adjoining residences. Driveway widths shall range between 10
feet and 12 feet. In no case shall any joint-use driveway serve
more than four dwelling units.
(b) For purposes of this zone, § 220-31 of this chapter is partially
waived to allow the creation of dwelling lots that do not have
public street frontage; however, such lots must front along a
commonly held pedestrian path and have direct access to a
public alley or a joint-use driveway. In such cases, the lot's
front yard shall be that which is along the common pedestrian
path. Furthermore, the lot's front build-to line shall be
measured from the edge of the common pedestrian path.
(4) All mail and newspaper boxes shall be attached to the building's
front facade.
(5) No residential swimming pools, except portable kiddie pools, shall
be permitted.
J. Open space design requirements. As specified in § 220-80G, no less
than 30% of the total development site's net acreage shall be devoted to
public, civic and open space uses. The following standards shall also be
applied to these areas:
(1) Of the total 30% required, no less than 2/3 shall be used for
commonly held public open spaces. The remaining 1/3 shall be
reserved for developed public and civic uses, such as playgrounds,
picnic pavilions, neighborhood parks, public schools, churches,
meeting halls, swimming pools, libraries, museums and other
similar uses.
(2) The location and design of required public open spaces shall be
largely determined by a proper site planning process. As part of
§ 220-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-80
1:575
this process, applicants shall be required to prepare a natural and
cultural features inventory of the site.
(a) Qualified experts must identify and plot each of the following
found on the proposed site:
[1] One-hundred-year floodplains.
[2] Steep slopes (greater than 15%).
[3] Wetlands, streams, ponds or other water bodies.
[4] Sinkholes, caves, vistas or other significant geologic
features.
[5] Threatened or endangered species habitats.
[6] Archaeologic resources.
[7] Historic resources.
[8] Significant stands of mature trees.
(b) From this inventory and plot, it shall be incumbent upon the
applicant to demonstrate that the proposed schematic design
of the village cluster development minimizes disturbance of
but integrates these features to provide a safe and attractive
network of common pedestrian paths that link areas within the
proposed development and connect with nearby uses of the
Borough. All common pedestrian paths shall consist of an allweather
durable surface that is at least six feet wide.
(3) For applications involving 30 or more acres, community-oriented
recreation facilities shall be required. Such community recreation
facilities shall include uses that serve the entire Borough, rather
than just the residents of the proposed development. Examples of
such uses could include, but not be limited to, multiple athletic
fields, band shells, community centers, skating rinks, community
gardens, swimming pools, etc.
(4) An essential element of the village cluster development application
is a written description and plan for the disposition of ownership of
common open space land designating those areas to be offered for
dedication or to be owned by the specific form of organization
proposed. The common open space shall be owned and maintained
in a manner to ensure its preservation. This shall be accomplished
through one of the following:
(a) An offer of dedication to the Borough. The Borough shall not be
obligated to accept dedication of the common open space.
(b) With permission of the Borough, and with appropriate deed
restrictions in favor of the Borough in language acceptable to
the Borough Solicitor, the developer may transfer ownership of
§ 220-80 MANHEIM CODE § 220-80
1:576
the common open space or a portion thereof to a private,
nonprofit organization among whose purposes is the
preservation of open space land and/or natural resources. The
organization shall be a bona fide conservation organization
with a perpetual existence; the conveyance must contain
appropriate provisions for reverter or retransfer if the
organization is unable to maintain the land, and the
organization must enter into a maintenance agreement with
the Borough.
(c) The developer shall provide for and establish an organization
for the ownership and maintenance of the common open space
which shall be generally consistent with the requirements for
unit owners' associations found in the Pennsylvania Uniform
Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq. If such an
organization is created, the agreements of sale and deeds for
all lots shall contain the following requirements in language
acceptable to the Borough Solicitor:
[1] Such organization shall not dispose of the common open
space by sale or otherwise except to the Borough, unless
the Borough has given prior written approval. Such
transfer shall be made only to another organization which
shall maintain the common open space in accordance with
this chapter.
[2] The organization and all lot owners shall enter into a
maintenance agreement with the Borough and shall agree
to be bound by the provisions of Article VII of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code relating to the
maintenance of deteriorating common open space by
municipalities.
[3] The Borough may require the establishment of a reserve
fund to provide for maintenance of, or capital
improvements to, the common open space.
K. Streets, sidewalks and alleys. Within the village cluster development,
the following design standards shall be applied to streets, sidewalks
and alleys:
(1) The following table lists required street, sidewalk, and alley widths:
Number of
Travel
Lanes
Number of
Parallel
Parking
Lanes
Required
Cartway
Width
(feet)
Required
Sidewalk
Width1
(feet)
Required
Right-of-
Way Width
(feet)
2 2 28 20 48
2 1 22 20 42
§ 220-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-80
1:577
Number of
Travel
Lanes
Number of
Parallel
Parking
Lanes
Required
Cartway
Width
(feet)
Required
Sidewalk
Width1
(feet)
Required
Right-of-
Way Width
(feet)
1 2 26 20 46
1 1 18 20 38
2-way alleys 02 14 0 14
1-way alleys 02 11 0 11
NOTES:
1 Sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of any public
street. Such sidewalks shall be five feet wide and separated
from the edge of the cartways by vertical curbs. [See
220-80K(4).]
2 No parking shall be permitted within alleys.
(2) Where practicable, the design of streets, alleys and sidewalks
should provide for through traffic and pedestrian movements and
should interconnect with existing nearby streets, alleys and
sidewalks. The use of cul-de-sac streets and alleys is forbidden,
unless accompanied by plans of future adjacent street connections.
(3) All public streets that connect with existing arterial or collector
roads (as listed in § 220-37 of this chapter) and/or act as collector
roads within the proposed development shall be designed with a
minimum center-line turning radius of 150 feet. All other roads
shall be designed with a minimum center-line turning radius of 80
feet.
(4) Both sides of all public streets shall be lined with five-foot-wide
sidewalks, and five-foot-wide sidewalk planting strips. Sidewalks
and sidewalk planting strips should weave beside, and in and out
of, one another. At driveway, access drive, and street intersections,
all sidewalks shall include aprons for access by handicapped
persons according to standards contained within the latest version
of the Pennsylvania Universal Accessibility Standards. Sidewalk
planting strips shall stop no less than 20 feet from the curbline of
an intersecting street; in these areas ten-foot-wide sidewalks shall
be provided. In addition, sidewalk planting strips can be replaced
with ten-foot-wide sidewalks at locations of passive pedestrian
nodes (e.g., benches, fountains, public transit stops, and access
points of public uses and parks). One shade tree shall be provided
every 50 feet or fraction thereof of linear sidewalk planting strip.
L. Public utility and service requirements. All proposals must comply with
the following:
§ 220-80 MANHEIM CODE § 220-80
1:578
(1) Both public sewer and public water shall be used throughout the
development.
(2) Where practicable, the retention and regenerative percolation of
stormwater runoff shall be located within common passive open
spaces.
(3) All utility lines shall be located underground and within public
streets, alleys or other public rights-of-way. Any required utility
structures, buildings, pump stations, transformers or other similar
devices shall be screened from adjoining properties and roads.
(4) All public streets shall be provided on one, or both, side(s) with
streetlights. Such streetlights shall be placed every 100 lineal feet
and shall be of such design and light intensity to complement the
Borough's historic character.
(5) Bus stops shall be placed at appropriate location(s) along major
roads serving the proposed development. Their distribution shall
be such that no residence within the development shall be situated
more than 1,000 feet from its bus stop. Furthermore, the selection
of bus stops shall be logically connected with any existing bus
routes. Bus stops shall consist of a minimum pedestrian node
consisting of one ten-foot-by-twenty-foot sidewalk section, one
permanently anchored park bench and a shade tree. Such bus stops
shall be provided even if existing bus routes do not currently serve
the area.
(6) Applicants must develop and map a plan for the removal of snow
from public streets, sidewalks, common pedestrian paths and
courtyards and alleys. Such plan must identify snowplow drop
locations and where vehicles will be stored during snow emergency
periods.
(7) Applicants are required to obtain a letter from the Fire Chief of the
company that would provide first-call service to the proposed
development. Such letter should describe any foreseeable
problems regarding fire protection for the proposed development.
Particular attention should focus upon the location of fire hydrants
and street turning radii.
M. Subsequent revisions within the village cluster development.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection M(2) and (3), any change
proposed within a previously approved village cluster development
will require the obtainment of a conditional use according to the
procedures and standards listed in § 220-122 of this chapter. The
evaluation of such conditional use will be based upon its
compliance with the specific requirements of this § 220-80 and
other applicable provisions of this chapter, as well as any
conditions of approval attached to the original approval.
§ 220-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-80
1:579
§ 220-81. Warehousing and wholesale trade establishments.
Within the I Zone, warehousing and wholesale trade establishments are
permitted by conditional use, subject to the following criteria. The applicant
shall provide a detailed description of the proposed use in each of the
following topics:
(2) Minor revisions of existing uses which were previously approved as
part of a village cluster development are permitted by right, if they:
(a) Do not violate any design standards specifically imposed upon
the proposed use and its site.
(b) Do not change any principal use.
(c) Do not violate any of the standards imposed upon the entire
development.
(d) Do not violate any conditions attached to the original approval
of the village cluster development.
(3) The following accessory uses may be established by special
exception, subsequent to approval of a village cluster development,
subject to their respective specific criteria and the rules and
procedures of § 220-111C of this chapter:
(a) Home occupations. (See § 220-68 of this chapter.)
(b) Family day-care facilities. (See § 220-63 of this chapter.)
A. The nature of the on-site activities and operations, the types of
materials stored, the frequency of distribution and restocking, the
duration period of storage of materials and the methods for disposal of
any surplus or damaged materials. In addition, the applicant shall
furnish evidence that the disposal of materials will be accomplished in a
manner that complies with state and federal regulations.
B. The general scale of the operation in terms of its market area, specific
floor space requirements for each activity, the total number of
employees on each shift and an overall needed site size.
C. Any environmental impacts that are likely to be generated (e.g., odor,
noise, smoke, dust, litter, glare, vibration, electrical disturbance,
wastewater, stormwater, solid waste, etc.) and specific measures
employed to mitigate or eliminate any negative impacts. The applicant
shall further furnish evidence that the impacts generated by the
proposed use fall within acceptable levels as regulated by applicable
laws and ordinances.
D. A traffic study prepared by a professional traffic engineer shall be
provided in accordance with § 220-41 of this chapter.
§ 220-80 MANHEIM CODE § 220-82
1:580
§ 220-82. Transitional cottages. [Added 1-30-1996 by Ord. No. 540]
Within the R-1, R-2, R-3 and COA Zones the establishment of transitional
cottages, as accessory uses to either an existing church or public use, shall
be permitted through the conditional use process, subject to the following
criteria:
A. The transitional cottage shall be sponsored, monitored and under the
direct supervision of a recognized nonprofit housing organization such
as church, community or public housing group.
B. The applicants shall provide credible evidence that the cottage(s) will
be targeted to benefit residents of the Borough and the immediate
adjacent area.
C. The applicants shall provide a written operational plan which shall
provide credible evidence as to the intended occupancy, services and
benefits which the cottage(s) will provide to the individuals/families
being assisted.
D. The applicants shall provide a copy of the qualifications and restrictions
which may apply to those individuals which may become occupants of
the transitional cottage.
E. The design standards (minimum setbacks, maximum lot coverage
criteria, etc.) of the base zoning district shall be strictly adhered to.
F. The dwelling unit shall be constructed and placed in conformity with all
currently applicable residential construction/building codes, or it shall
be designed, constructed and certified under the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974
or other currently applicable manufactured housing code.
G. The transitional cottage shall be placed on a properly designed
foundation, to be certified by an engineer registered in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
H. The applicants shall provide credible evidence that the transitional
cottage will be properly connected to all public utilities (i.e., water,
sewer, electric, etc.), on-lot wells and septic systems wells and septic
systems will not be permitted.
I. The maximum area of lot coverage, base on the footprint of the
building, shall not exceed 500 square feet per cottage.
J. The maximum height of the dwelling shall not exceed 20 feet, including
any sleeping/storage loft and elevated foundation area.
K. The improvements associated with the transitional cottage(s) shall
provide a minimum clear yard area of 20 feet between the sides of
adjacent cottages. However, the rear walls of cottages may be placed
directly adjacent to each other as long as each wall, roof and floor
§ 220-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-82
1:581
§ 220-83. Wireless and cellular communications antennas, support
structures/towers and cellular sites. [Added 3-28-2000 by Ord. No.
567; as amended 8-29-2000 by Ord. No. 569]
The purpose of these regulations is to balance the rights of wireless
communications providers to locate reasonable and safe facilities in the
Borough for the purpose of providing a secondary level of convenience to
their customers while respecting the Borough's duty to protect the general
health, safety and welfare.
assembly has been constructed of materials which would provide a
minimum one-hour fire-resistive rating.
L. The plans shall show adequate off-street parking and driveway access
for no less than two vehicles per cottage, in addition to the
requirements for the principal use.
M. The applicants, due to the size of the cottages, shall make adequate
provisions for the exterior storage and ultimate disposal of trash and
rubbish in covered leakproof containers.
N. The applicants shall provide credible evidence in reference to the
maintenance of the cottages and shall further provide an operating plan
to reference the replacement, renovation or removal of deteriorated or
vacant cottage(s).
O. The Borough Council shall have the right to place conditions upon the
applicants as are deemed necessary, such as, but not limited to,
landscaping and/or screening.
P. The applicant shall comply with the provisions of § 220-122, Conditional
uses, of this chapter.
A. Within the Residential (R-1), Industrial (I) and Planned Industrial/
Corporate Center (PC-1) Zones, wireless and cellular communications
antennas and antenna support structures/towers and cellular sites shall
be permitted as conditional uses, subject to the following criteria:
(1) The applicant shall be required to demonstrate, using technological
evidence, that the location of the antenna will adequately satisfy its
function within the applicant's design grid system.
(2) The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed height of the
antenna support structure and antenna are set at the minimum
height required to provide a satisfactory level of service.
(3) The height of the antenna support structure and/or the wireless or
cellular communications antenna, whichever is highest, shall be
equal to or less than the horizontal distance between the structures
and any adjacent property line which either serves as the limit of a
public right-of-way (i.e., street, alley, railroad, etc.) or which
§ 220-82 MANHEIM CODE § 220-83
1:582
provides a common line between the subject property and an
adjoining residentially zoned property.
(4) If the applicant proposes to build an antenna support structure (as
opposed to mounting the antenna on an existing structure) as part
of the development of a wireless or cellular communications
antenna and cellular site, it shall demonstrate the lack of
availability of any existing structures which would be able to
handle the load-bearing requirements necessary to support the
proposed telecommunications equipment within its target circle or
within a one-fourth-mile radius of the proposed site (which are
properly zoned) on which the wireless or cellular communications
antenna could be located.
(5) The applicant shall provide evidence that any and all required guy
wire anchors will be no less than 40 feet from any property line
associated with any proposed antenna support structure.
(6) Any proposed antenna support structure shall be required to
accommodate a minim of two and a maximum of three other users,
including, but not limited to, other wireless and cellular
communications companies, local police, fire, ambulance or other
emergency service providers. For that purpose, the antenna
support structure will be permitted to exceed the minimum design
height justified by the applicant by a distance of 10 feet, and the
applicant will be permitted to occupy the highest probable
elevation. (Applicants for occupancy of the reserved space shall
submit documentation to the Codes Compliance Officer showing
that their wireless or cellular communications antennas and
associated equipment comply with the provisions of this section.
The Codes Compliance Officer may grant approval as a permitted
use review for the additional service provider(s) on applications
involving the antenna support structures which were approved via
the conditional use process if the application shows compliance
with provisions of this article and conditions included in the formal
zoning decision. The Codes Compliance Officer shall also have the
right to require that these supplemental applications are reviewed
under the conditional use procedures should he/she determine that
the application and supplemental information does not clearly meet
the provisions of the ordinance or the conditions contained in the
formal conditional use decision.)
(7) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed antenna support
structure is safe and that the surrounding area will not be
negatively impacted by structural failure of either the support
structure or the brackets by which equipment is mounted to the
support structure. To this end, the setback distance shall be proven
to be large enough to accommodate such failure(s) on the
applicant's property. Credible testimony shall be provided in the
form of an analysis submitted by the applicant's engineer.
Consideration shall also be given in the analysis to other potential
§ 220-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-83
1:583
hazards, such as ice falling from the structure, and the effects local
wind design factors may have on falling objects.
(8) The applicant shall show credible evidence that the wireless or
cellular communications company involved in the proposal is
licensed by all federal and commonwealth agencies having
jurisdiction, including, but not limited to, the Federal
Communications Commission and its successors.
(9) No antenna support structure may be artificially lighted, except as
may be required by the Federal Aviation Administration, and then
only in accordance with plans submitted, reviewed and acted upon
by the Manheim Borough Planning Commission, the Manheim
Borough Historic Commission and the Manheim Borough Council.
(10) All accessory or associated equipment related to the wireless or
cellular communications antenna and towers and cellular site shall
be contained in a completely enclosed building and/or otherwise
shall be adequately screened (by use of vegetative screenings or
solid fencing) from all adjoining residentially zoned properties or
any property that supports Class I or Class II historic resources, in
which case the applicant shall show that his enclosure/screening
proposal has been reviewed and acted upon by the Manheim
Historic Commission.
(11)No equipment shall be permitted to generate noise, vibration,
smoke, odor or hazardous emissions or effects which may be
detected at any perimeter property line or public right-of-way.
(12) Accessory uses associated with the cellular site, such as business
office, parking areas, driveways, etc., shall be established in
compliance with the general provisions of the zoning district in
which the use is proposed to be located and shall be shown on the
site plan at the time of the conditional use review.
(13) The antenna support structure shall be required to include anticlimbing
devices approved by the manufacturer and acceptable to
the Borough.
(14) A fence shall be established around the perimeter of any cellular
site which contains an antenna support structure. The fence shall
be constructed of acceptable materials and to a height which is in
compliance with the general provisions of this chapter.
(15) The applicant shall agree to file an annual status report with the
Codes Compliance Officer to advise the Borough of the current
status of the wireless or cellular communications antenna, its
support structure and all related equipment. The report shall
include a listing of any equipment updates and/or facility
modifications which occurred since the previous report period and
projections for continued use of the facilities. This annual report
shall include all pertinent information such as the name, address
§ 220-83 MANHEIM CODE § 220-83
1:584
and emergency telephone number for the operator, owner and
other associated party(s), as well as a certificate of insurance
evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering the
wireless and cellular communications antenna, the antenna
support structure/tower, the cellular equipment and the site.
(16) The applicant shall provide a draft written agreement, which shall
establish a clear line of responsibility for the erection and
maintenance of the wireless or cellular antennas, support
structures and all related equipment. The agreement shall
acknowledge responsibility for removal of wireless or cellular
communications antennas, antenna support structures and related
accessory equipment which cease to be used for their intended
purpose(s) for a period of 90 days. The agreement shall be signed
by all appropriate parties and shall further acknowledge the
Borough's right to pursue any necessary action to have such
equipment and facilities removed in accordance with the provisions
of Subsection C herein.
(17)Within the R-1 Zone, only properties which are in public ownership
and currently support public uses, as defined herein, shall be
permitted to be further developed for support of wireless or
cellular communications antennas and towers and cellular sites,
provided they are developed in accordance with the previous
criteria.
B. Within the Highway Commercial (C-1) Zone, wireless and cellular
communications antennas and cellular sites shall be permitted as
special exception uses, subject to the following criteria:
(1) A wireless cellular communications antenna shall be permitted to
be attached to an existing smokestack, church steeple, water
tower, farm silo or other similar structure which existed within the
C-1 Zone on the date of the adoption of this section, provided that:
(a) The property in question supports a commercial principal use
which has been found to be in general conformity with
applicable provisions of this chapter.
(b) The height of the antenna shall not exceed the height of the
existing structure to which it will be secured by more than 10
feet.
(2) All accessory or associated equipment related to the cellular site
shall be contained in a completely enclosed building and/or shall be
adequately screened (by use of vegetative screening or solid
fencing) from all adjoining residentially zoned properties (for the
purpose of this criteria, established single-family dwellings on
properties zoned COA or CBD shall be deemed to be residentially
zoned properties) or any property that supports Class I or Class II
§ 220-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-83
1:585
historic resources, in which case the applicant shall show that his
enclosure/screening proposal has been reviewed and acted upon by
the Manheim Historic Commission.
(3) No equipment shall be permitted to generate noise, vibration,
smoke, odor or hazardous emissions or effects which may be
detected at any perimeter property line or public right-of-way.
(4) Accessory uses associated with the cellular site, such as business
office, parking areas, driveways, etc., shall be established in
compliance with the general provisions of the zoning district in
which the use is proposed to be located and shall be shown on the
site plan at the time of the special exception review.
(5) Any applicant proposing to attach a wireless or cellular antenna to
a Class I or Class II historic resource shall be required to show that
its proposal has been reviewed and acted upon by the Manheim
Borough Historic Commission.
(6) The height of the structure and/or the height of the antenna,
whichever is higher, shall not be more than 25% greater than the
maximum height limitation of the underlying zoning district, unless
the applicant has satisfactorily provided proof of the following:
(a) The applicant shall be required to demonstrate, using
technological evidence, that the height of the antenna is
required in order to address a function in the applicant's grid
system which is directly related to providing service to
residents within the Borough or that the use is one that will
provide direct benefit for police, ambulance, fire or other
emergency personnel, which cannot otherwise be gained, thus
providing for the public health, safety and general welfare of a
larger group of citizens.
(b) It shall be demonstrated that the antenna is located at the
minimum height required to function satisfactorily.
(c) The structure to which the antenna is to be secured shall be set
back from the property line(s) a minimum distance
demonstrated to be sufficient to protect other property(s)
(including, but not limited to, public rights-of-way) from the
potential impact related to structural failure of either the
support structure or the brackets by which equipment is
mounted to the support structure. This setback distance shall
be large enough to accommodate such failure(s) on the
applicant's property. The distance shall be determined by the
Board's acceptance of credible testimony, which shall be
provided in the form of an analysis submitted by the applicant's
engineer. Consideration shall also be given in the analysis to
other potential hazards, such as ice falling from the structure,
and the effect local wind design factors may have on falling
objects.
§ 220-83 MANHEIM CODE § 220-83
1:586
(7) The applicant shall show that the bracket system has been
adequately designed to withstand a constant wind factor of 90
miles per hour.
(8) The applicant shall also show that attachment of the antenna and
bracket system will not adversely affect the structure to which it is
secured. Sealed engineering drawings and documentation shall be
required.
(9) The antenna shall not be artificially illuminated. Lighting of the
antenna which occurs due to the manner that the support structure
(flagpole, steeple, etc.) has been illuminated will not be ruled to
violate this provision.
(10) The applicant shall show credible evidence that the wireless or
cellular communications company involved in the proposal is
licensed by all federal and commonwealth agencies having
jurisdiction, including, but not limited to, the Federal
Communications Commission and its successors.
(11) The applicant shall agree to file an annual status report with the
Codes Compliance Officer to advise the Borough of the current
status of the wireless or cellular communications antenna, brackets
and all related equipment. The report shall include a listing of any
equipment updates and/or facility modifications which occurred
since the previous report period and projections for continued use
of the facilities. This annual report shall include all pertinent
information, such as the name, address and emergency telephone
number for the operator, owner and other associated party(s), as
well as a certificate of insurance evidencing general liability
coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence
and property damage coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per occurrence, covering the wireless and cellular
communications antenna, the antenna support structure/tower, the
cellular equipment and the site.
(12) The applicant shall provide a draft written agreement, which shall
establish a clear line of responsibility for the erection and
maintenance of the wireless or cellular antennas, brackets and all
related equipment. The agreement shall acknowledge
responsibility for the removal of wireless or cellular
communications antennas, brackets and related accessory
equipment which cease to be used for their intended purpose(s) for
a period of 90 days. The agreement shall be signed by all
appropriate parties and shall further acknowledge the Borough's
right to pursue any necessary action to have equipment and
facilities removed in accordance with the provisions of Subsection
C herein.
(13) Where appropriate or deemed necessary by the Board, the
structure shall be equipped with anti-climbing devices.
§ 220-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-83
1:587
§ 220-84. Caterers. [Added 8-29-2000 by Ord. No. 569]
Within the PC-1 Zone, the establishment of a catering operation shall be
permitted by special exception, within a structure which existed at the time
of the creation of the PC-1 Zone, subject to the following criteria:
C. Obsolete wireless or cellular antennas, support structures, brackets
and related accessory equipment and/or facilities shall be removed in
accordance with the provisions agreed upon during the special
exception or conditional use hearing, as provided by Subsections A(16)
and B(12), except that antenna support structures which are occupied
by multiple users and shared equipment and/or accessory facilities shall
be permitted to remain. If the responsible party fails to take action to
remove the antenna(s), their support facilities, brackets, accessory
equipment, etc., the Codes Compliance Officer shall provide written
notification to the property owner or other responsible party that the
antenna, support structures, brackets, related materials shall be
removed within 30 days of receipt of the notice. If such person fails or
refuses to remove such antenna, support structure, brackets or
facilities, in accordance with the provisions of the notice, the Codes
Compliance Officer may have the antenna, support structure, brackets
and related facilities removed at the expense of the property owner
and/or the person(s) responsible for the erection and/or maintenance of
the antenna, support structure, brackets and related equipment and
facilities, in accordance with the provisions of the original agreement,
or if there is no agreement, to the extent that the Codes Compliance
Officer must undertake any legal action to remove said wireless or
cellular antenna, support structure, bracket, accessory equipment,
facilities, etc.; the cost of such legal action, including, but not limited to,
reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Borough, shall be paid by the
property owner and/or the party responsible for the erection and/or
maintenance of the antenna, support structure, brackets and accessory
equipment.
D. Other regulations or provisions governing cellular antennas, support
structures and cellular sites. In addition to the regulations within this
section, applicants shall be required to show that its proposal is in
compliance with all other Borough ordinances, regulations and codes,
including, but not limited to, those found in § 220-22, Historic
Preservation Overlay Zone, of this chapter and Ordinance No. 486, the
Manheim Borough Floodplain Ordinance (Chapter 124).75
A. The caterer or catering operation shall consist of the preparation and
delivery of prepared meals and/or food products from the site of
preparation to an off-premises client/consumer.
B. The use shall not be one that shall have any on-site dining or banquet
facility for consumption of the food prepared.
75.Editor's Note: Ord. No 486 was superseded 6-28-2005 by Ord. No. 591.
§ 220-83 MANHEIM CODE § 220-84
1:588
§ 220-85. Computer training facilities. [Added 8-29-2000 by Ord.
No. 569]
Within the PC-1 Zone, the establishment of a computer training facility shall
be permitted by special exception, within a structure which existed at the
time of the creation of the PC-1 Zone, subject to the following criteria:
§ 220-86. Health and fitness club or karate studio. [Added
8-29-2000 by Ord. No. 569]
Within the PC-1 Zone, the establishment of a health and fitness club or
karate studio shall be permitted by special exception, within a structure
which existed at the time of the creation of the PC-1 Zone, subject to the
following criteria:
C. The catering operation shall be required to show that delivery, food
storage, refrigeration, preparation, cooking, packaging, waste
handling, recycling and delivery operations have been designed to meet
all regulatory requirements.
D. The caterer or catering operation shall provide proof that all required
permits and licenses have been obtained and shall further be required
to display current licenses at all times.
E. The applicant, building or property owner shall show credible evidence
that the catering operation will not be adversely impacted by
development of any residual building area that will not be occupied by
the catering use.
F. The applicant shall show that all precautions have been taken to
floodproof or elevate the proposed use, based on floodplain criteria.
A. Establishment of computer training facilities shall be permitted,
provided the applicant can show that there is adequate parking area to
support the anticipated class sizes at a rate of one space per student.
B. If the use involves classes back to back, then the parking requirements
shall be increased to 75% of the total attendance of the two largest
consecutive classes.
C. The applicant, building or property owner shall show credible evidence
that the operation will not be adversely impacted by development of any
residual building area that will not be occupied by the use.
D. The applicant shall show that all precautions have been taken to
floodproof the facility. Special attention shall be directed to electric
services.
A. Establishment of a health and fitness club or karate studio shall be
permitted, provided the applicant can show that adequate parking is
available to support one parking space for every 200 square feet of
gross floor area plus one space for each instructor and/or employee.
§ 220-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-86
1:589
§ 220-87. Medical or dental clinic. [Added 8-29-2000 by Ord. No.
569]
Within the PC-1 Zone, the establishment of a medical or dental clinic shall
be permitted by special exception, within a structure which existed at the
time of the creation of the PC-1 Zone, subject to the following criteria:
§ 220-88. Microbrewery. [Added 8-29-2000 by Ord. No. 569]
Within the PC-1 Zone, the establishment of a microbrewery shall be
permitted by special exception, within a structure which existed at the time
of the creation of the PC-1 Zone, subject to the following criteria:
B. Access between the parking area and facility shall also feature a well-lit
dropoff/pickup area which shall be on the same side of the street or
within the parking lot of the proposed use; provided, however, that
access to the dropoff/pickup area is properly designed to be in the
generally accepted traffic flow pattern. Crossover traffic patterns shall
be avoided.
C. The facility shall be designed to incorporate a reasonable number of
restroom, shower and locker room facilities, based on the anticipated
number of male and female members.
D. The applicant, building or property owner shall show credible evidence
that the operation will not be adversely impacted by development of any
residual building area that will not be occupied by the use.
E. The applicant shall show that all precautions have been taken to
floodproof or elevate the proposed use, based on floodplain criteria.
A. The clinic shall provide office space for a minimum of three
professionals as well as appropriate support staff (i.e., nurses, clerks,
receptionists, etc.).
B. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the general
provisions of § 220-33 of this chapter.
C. The applicant, building or property owner shall show credible evidence
that the operation will not be adversely impacted by development of any
residual building area that will not be occupied by the use.
D. The applicant shall show that all precautions have been taken to
floodproof or elevate the proposed use, based on floodplain criteria.
E. The applicant shall provide credible evidence that all hazardous
materials related to the clinic are properly and safely stored and
handled.
A. The applicant shall present a complete narrative describing the
proposed facility and all related ancillary uses, which it intends to
establish on site.
§ 220-86 MANHEIM CODE § 220-88
1:590
§ 220-89. Parking garage. [Added 8-29-2000 by Ord. No. 569]
Within the PC-1 Zone, the establishment of a parking garage shall be
permitted by special exception, within a structure which existed at the time
of the creation of the PC-1 Zone, subject to the following criteria:
B. The applicant's business plan shall address receiving and handling of
materials as well as pickup and distribution plans.
C. The microbrewery shall be limited to an annual rate of output not to
exceed 4,000 barrels per year. (This limit shall include multiple brews
to the point where the total combined production does not exceed 4,000
barrels; for example, five different brews at an annual production rate
of 800 barrels equals 4,000 barrels.)
D. The applicant shall provide credible evidence that the use will be
established in accordance with local, county, state and federal
regulations which govern microbreweries, including, but not limited to,
the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board and Federal Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco and Firearms.
E. If the applicant's proposal includes historic preservation efforts in
relation to restoration of a complete structure that is or could be
registered as a Class I or Class II historic resource, additional ancillary
uses may be permitted, including the following: retail sales of brewery
products and supplies; sale of tourism-related items; and sampling of
products in accordance with local, county, state and federal regulations.
F. The applicant, building or property owner shall show credible evidence
that the operation will not be adversely impacted by development of any
residual building area that will not be occupied by the use.
G. The applicant shall show that all precautions have been taken to
floodproof or elevate the proposed use, based on floodplain criteria.
H. The application shall not include the creation of a tavern, restaurant,
nightclub or any similar use.
A. The intention of this provision is to permit the first floor or ground level
of existing structures to be converted into parking facilities to support
other permitted uses which may be developed on either portions of the
ground level or on higher floors. The goal is to design the parking
facility so that it would occupy areas which are flood-prone while
providing additional opportunity to reuse other portions of the existing
structure(s).
B. The applicant shall show that the building in question is structurally
capable of supporting all anticipated design loads while at the same
time resisting currents associated with floodwaters, based on the
floodplain report and design criteria.
§ 220-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-89
1:591
§ 220-90. Schools, public, private, commercial and vocational,
mechanical trade. [Added 8-29-2000 by Ord. No. 569]
Within the PC-1 Zone, the establishment of schools as listed herein shall
be permitted by special exception, within a structure which existed at the
time of the creation of the PC-1 Zone. For the general guidelines, the
criteria provided in § 220-76 of this article shall prevail. However, since
it is the objective to provide for reuse of existing industrial structures,
certain modifications to those provisions are necessary. It shall therefore
be understood that where there is a difference or where the language of
§ 220-76 disagrees with the following, the following criteria shall prevail:
C. The applicant shall provide credible evidence that the other uses
proposed to be supported by the parking garage are sufficiently
protected from hazards which may be related to the establishment of
the parking garage (i.e., carbon monoxide, etc.).
D. The applicant shall be permitted a maximum ten-percent reduction to
the required off-street parking requirements of § 220-33 of this chapter
for implementing a plan to develop the ground floor of an existing
structure in this manner.
A. The height, area, setback and coverage criteria referred to by
§ 220-76A shall only apply where feasible, since it is not the intent to
force demolition and reconstruction of the existing structures. That
being said, the applicant shall show that adequate open space area is
either in existence on the premises or within 1,000 feet of the
structure(s) to be used.
B. The applicant shall be restricted in that elementary education shall not
be considered as a desired use. This is in part due to the existence of
the Chickies Creek, which lies in immediate proximity to the existing
structures.
C. Section 220-76C requires the creation of a six-foot-high fence around
outdoor play areas. It is the intent that open space associated with the
PC-1 Zone shall be open space. Therefore, fencing shall be avoided
except where it is necessary to provide for the public safety and welfare
of those utilizing and accessing the premises.
D. The applicant shall show credible evidence that the use is being
proposed in strict conformity with all local, county, state and federal
guidelines and that the structure to be occupied has been certified as
safe for the proposed type of occupancy.
E. The applicant, building or property owner shall show credible evidence
that the operation will not be adversely impacted by development of any
residual building area that will not be occupied by the use.
F. The applicant shall show that all precautions have been taken to
floodproof or elevate the proposed use, based on floodplain criteria.
§ 220-89 MANHEIM CODE § 220-91
1:592
§ 220-91. Trail support facilities. [Added 8-29-2000 by Ord. No.
569]
Certain uses would be advantageous to the creation of a walking, biking
or ecology trail in the area adjacent to the existing vacant industrial
structures. A short list of these uses would include, but not be limited to,
bike rental or repair shop, bike lockers, public restrooms and/or locker
rooms, snack/ice cream shop, newsstand, etc. Within the PC-1 Zone, the
establishment of trail support facilities shall be permitted by special
exception, within a structure which existed at the time of the creation of the
PC-1 Zone, subject to the following criteria:
§ 220-92. Veterinary office or animal hospital. [Added 8-29-2000 by
Ord. No. 569]
Within the PC-1 Zone, the establishment of a veterinary office or animal
hospital shall be permitted by special exception, within a structure which
existed at the time of the creation of the PC-1 Zone, subject to the following
criteria:
A. The facility shall be one that can show a direct relationship and benefit
to the community goal of establishing walking, biking and/or ecology/
environmental trails along the Chickies Creek watershed.
B. The applicant shall present a complete narrative describing the
proposed facility and all related ancillary uses which it intends to
establish on site or within a particular structure.
C. The narrative/business plan shall indicate intended hours of operation,
which should coincide with the hours during which a trail would
logically be used. For that purpose, weekend hours will be desired in
addition to weekday.
D. The applicant, building or property owner shall show credible evidence
that the operation will not be adversely impacted by development of any
residual building area that will not be occupied by the use.
E. The applicant shall show that all precautions have been taken to
floodproof or elevate the proposed use, based on floodplain criteria.
A. The veterinary office or animal hospital may provide office space for
one to five professionals as well as appropriate support staff (i.e.,
trainers, aides, clerks, receptionists, etc.).
B. The facility shall be permitted to treat the following on premises:
household pets, domestic animals, domestic fowl, small animals, wild
animal, wild fowl or game birds as defined by this chapter.
C. The facility shall not be permitted to treat the following on premises:
farm animals or large animals, as defined, or any other animal, fowl or
exotic pet or zoo animal not specifically addressed by this chapter
under one of the previously noted definitions.
§ 220-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-92
1:593
§ 220-93. Warehousing. [Added 8-29-2000 by Ord. No. 569]
Within the PC-1 Zone, the establishment of a warehouse facility shall be
permitted by special exception, within a structure which existed at the time
of the creation of the PC-1 Zone, subject to the following criteria:
D. The applicant shall submit a narrative/business plan that shall describe
the facility as well as the services which it intends to provide.
E. The applicant's business plan shall address disposal of animal wastes as
well as a method for the disposal of all other waste materials.
F. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the general
provisions of § 220-33 of this chapter.
G. The applicant shall show credible evidence that the operation will not
create an adverse impact on other uses within the same building or
which will affect the use of other adjacent buildings (i.e., noise, odor,
etc.).
H. The applicant, building or property owners shall show credible
evidence that the operation will not be adversely impacted by
development of any residential building area that will not be occupied
by the use.
I. The applicant shall show that all precautions have been taken to
floodproof or elevate the proposed use, based on floodplain criteria.
J. The applicant shall provide credible evidence that all hazardous
materials related to the treatment of animals are properly and safely
stored and handled.
K. Housing of animals being treated may be permitted, provided that the
accommodations are totally within the structure or within a walled
courtyard area. Such courtyard area shall be constructed so that
animals cannot be viewed from the outside.
L. In addition to services generally associated with a veterinary's office or
animal hospital, the use may include educational programs and classes
related to animals (i.e., pet selection seminars, obedience classes, pet
fitness, grooming, etc.).
A. The applicant shall provide credible evidence, including a site plan and
other exhibits and testimony, which shall show that loading/unloading
standards provided within § 220-34 of this chapter have been met.
B. The applicant shall provide a listing of materials that are intended to be
stored within the structure.
C. The storage of hazardous materials shall only be approved in
compliance with regulations promulgated by local, county, state and/or
federal laws, including, but not limited to, BOCA Fire Prevention Code/
1996 (see Chapter 100), Right-to-Know, OSHA, etc.
§ 220-92 MANHEIM CODE § 220-93
1:594
§ 220-94. Agribusiness. [Added 8-29-2000 by Ord. No. 569]
Certain agribusinesses may be appropriate within the PC-1 Zone, provided
the use is properly designed and established. In general, the uses approved
shall be those that would create a minimum disturbance or effect on a
residential community (i.e., uses which do not create noise, odor, dust,
smoke, fire, glare, etc.) and which would best share infrastructure with
tractor-trailers, cars, bicycles and pedestrians. The following
agribusinesses shall be permitted by conditional use, subject to the
following criteria:
D. The applicant, building or property owner shall show credible evidence
that the operation will not be adversely impacted by development of any
residual building area that will not be occupied by the use.
E. The applicant shall show that all precautions have been taken to
floodproof or elevate the proposed use, based on floodplain criteria.
F. The applicant shall show credible evidence that the operation will not
create an adverse impact on other uses within the same building or
which will affect the use of other adjacent buildings (i.e., noise, odor,
dust, smoke, fire, glare, etc.).
A. Facilities for the repair and servicing of agricultural equipment and
vehicles, including the direct sale of parts and supplies as an ancillary
use.
(1) The applicant shall submit a narrative/business plan which shall
address all aspects of the proposed use, including, but not limited
to, business hours, services to be provided, type of equipment and
vehicles to be serviced and site design information which shall
clearly show off-street parking, driveways and locations of garage
doors, etc.
(2) All repairs and service operations shall take place in a completely
enclosed building.
(3) There shall be no prolonged exterior storage of any equipment and/
or vehicles which are waiting for repairs or service. In addition,
such storage shall only be permitted on a portion of the premises
which has been screened in accordance with provisions of
§ 220-21L.
(4) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the general
provisions of § 220-33 of this chapter.
(5) The business plan shall address methods for disposal of all
materials and products which may be associated with the use (i.e.,
removed parts, tires, used liquids, oils, transmission fluids, etc.).
§ 220-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-94
1:595
(6) The applicant shall show credible evidence that the use is being
proposed in strict conformity with all local, county, state and
federal guidelines.
B. Facilities for the repair and servicing of carriages, buggies and other
horse-drawn rigs, including blacksmith, farrier and harness shops.
(1) The applicant shall submit a narrative/business plan which shall
address all aspects of the proposed use, including, but not limited
to, business hours, services to be provided, and site design
information which shall clearly show off-street parking, driveways
and locations of garage doors, etc.
(2) All repairs and service operations shall take place in a completely
enclosed building.
(3) There shall be no prolonged exterior storage of any carriages or
buggies which are waiting for repairs or service. In addition, such
storage shall only be permitted on a portion of the premises which
has been screened in accordance with the provisions of § 220-21L.
(4) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the general
provisions of § 220-33 of this chapter. In addition, the applicant's
site plan shall provide a clear indication of areas which will be
accessible for horses and horse-drawn carriages. Such facilities
shall include hitching posts and other necessary facilities.
(5) The business plan shall address methods for disposal of all
materials and products which may be associated with the use (i.e.,
removed parts, tires, wheels, used fluids, manure, etc.).
(6) The applicant shall show credible evidence that the use is being
proposed in strict conformity with all local, county, state and
federal guidelines.
C. Processing and canning operations dealing with locally grown crops.
(1) The applicant shall submit a narrative/business plan which shall
address all aspects of the proposed use, including, but not limited
to, business hours, type of products to be processed or canned,
crops associated with the processing or canning operation and
truck receiving and shipping/distribution trip counts.
(2) The applicant's business plan shall be accompanied by a site plan
which shall clearly show off-street parking, driveways, loading/
unloading areas, waste and recycling facilities and all other
improvements, as well as all open space/landscape areas.
(3) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the general
provisions of § 220-33 of this chapter.
(4) The business plan shall address methods for disposal of all
materials and products which may be associated with the use.
§ 220-94 MANHEIM CODE § 220-94
1:596
§ 220-95. Community rehabilitation facilities and group care and
treatment center. [Added 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622]76
Within the Planned Industrial/Corporate Center (PC-1) Zone, the
establishment of a community rehabilitation facility or group care and
treatment center shall be permitted by conditional use, subject to the
following criteria:
(5) The applicant shall show credible evidence that the use is being
proposed in strict conformity with all local, county, state and
federal guidelines.
D. Grain mills dealing with processing of local crops for the manufacturing
of flour, feed and products.
(1) The applicant shall submit a narrative/business plan which shall
address all aspects of the proposed use, including, but not limited
to, business hours, type of products to be manufactured, crops
associated with the processing or milling operation, and truck
receiving and shipping/distribution trip counts.
(2) The applicant's business plan shall be accompanied by a site plan
which shall clearly show off-street parking, driveways, loading/
unloading areas, waste and recycling facilities and all other
improvements as well as all open space/landscape areas.
(3) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the general
provisions of § 220-33 of this chapter.
(4) The business plan shall address methods for disposal of all
materials and products which may be associated with the use.
(5) The applicant shall show credible evidence that the use is being
proposed in strict conformity with all local, county, state and
federal guidelines.
(6) The applicant shall submit detailed elevations showing the
anticipated height of any and all conveyance systems, chutes and
catwalks. The maximum height of these structures shall not be
higher than 15 feet above the structure(s) to which they are
attached.
A. The maximum number of clients to be served at the facility shall be 10.
B. The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the proposed use,
including, but not limited to, number of clients to be served at the
facility, the nature of clients to be served, the type of treatment and
care to be provided, hours of operation, number of employees and
residents, licensing requirements, proposed plan of operation, security
76.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original Section 451, Restaurants, added
8-29-2000 by Ord. No. 569.
§ 220-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-95
1:597
§ 220-96. Retail sales, services and/or rental of goods in excess of
2,000 square feet. [Added 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622]
Where the provisions of Subsections A through E below are different from
those stated in the applicable subdivision and land development ordinance,
these provisions shall be the minimum requirements for the proposed use.
measures and supervision for the safety of residents and the
community.
C. The applicant shall provide evidence that the facility is sponsored and
operated by an agency or entity that is licensed, registered or certified
by an applicable county, state or federal agency and that the facility is
licensed and/or approved by an applicable county, state or federal
agency and, if applicable, the agency or entity holds a valid contract
with such applicable county, state or federal agency.
D. The facility shall have twenty-four-hour on-site supervision by
professionals trained to supervise the types of clients to be served by
the facility.
E. All structures shall be located at least 600 feet from the property line of
any property containing a residence, school, day-care facility, camp,
church, community center, playing fields, playground, library or
hospital or other community rehabilitation facility or group care and
treatment center, as applicable.
F. The applicant shall show credible evidence that the use being proposed
is in strict conformity with all local, county, state and federal guidelines
and regulations.
A. Lot size must be greater than one acre.
B. Rehabilitation of existing buildings to accommodate an excess of 2,000
square feet of retail shall provide the following streetscape
improvements and public amenities.
(1) Street shade trees shall be planted at a maximum spacing of 40 feet
on center. Street shade trees may be planted in tree pits, a
minimum of four feet wide and six feet long, or, preferably, in a
continuous tree lawn, a minimum of three feet in width, located
between the curb and the sidewalk. If the frontage of the property
is less than 40 feet, at least one street tree will be provided.
(2) Pedestrian-oriented lighting at a maximum spacing of 50 feet or as
recommended by the manufacturer to achieve adequate levels of
sidewalk illumination. Lighting shall have cutoff features to limit
glare and unnecessary light pollution. If the frontage of the
property is less than 50 feet, and pedestrian lighting does not exist
along the frontage, one pedestrian light shall be provided.
§ 220-95 MANHEIM CODE § 220-96
1:598
§ 220-96.1. Limited lodging. [Added 11-12-2019 by Ord. No. 667]
C. New development shall follow the provisions in § 220-22N and O of the
Historic Preservation Overlay Zone.
D. Buildings shall be constructed with at least two occupied stories and
shall have a maximum height of 45 feet.
E. New development shall provide the following streetscape
improvements and public amenities:
(1) Public sidewalks shall have a minimum unobstructed width of 10
feet.
(a) The Borough Council may alter this, if necessary, if it is
demonstrated that existing topographic or other physical site
conditions make this standard not feasible. However, the
unobstructed width of a sidewalk shall not be less than five
feet.
(2) Street shade trees shall be planted at a maximum spacing of 40 feet
on center. Street shade trees may be planted in tree pits, a
minimum of four feet wide and six feet long, or, preferably, in a
continuous tree lawn, a minimum of three feet in width, located
between the curb and the sidewalk.
(3) Pedestrian-oriented lighting at a maximum spacing of 50 feet or as
recommended by the manufacturer to achieve adequate levels of
sidewalk illumination. Lighting shall have cutoff features to limit
glare and unnecessary light pollution.
(4) Benches and other street furniture at appropriate locations, subject
to the review and recommendation of the Planning Commission and
approval of Borough Council.
(5) Sidewalk bulb-outs at corners or midblock, to enhance pedestrian
safety and/or provide permeable planting area, shall be provided
where possible. Bulb-outs shall have brick or comparable material
along borders or plantings to match adjacent sidewalks and
properties.
(6) New sidewalk and trail connections shall be made where trails and
other sidewalks connect with the property.
(7) For developments larger than 10,000 square feet, there shall be a
public plaza that is accessible from the sidewalk and open to the
public. The plaza shall be a minimum of 400 square feet, and a
minimum of 20% of the plaza shall be planted.
(8) The Borough Council shall consider acceptable substitutions to the
items above if site constraints or a comparable or improved
alternative is presented.
§ 220-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-96.1
1:599
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BEDROOM — A private room or space designed to be used for sleeping
purposes with two means of egress, one of which must be a window
meeting the minimum standards for emergency egress per the current
building code. The room must include a closet. Space used for eating,
cooking, bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility rooms
and similar uses are not considered bedrooms. Space used or intended
for general and informal use such as a living room, den, sitting room,
family room or similar is not to be considered a bedroom. No bedroom
shall contain appliances such a coffee maker, microwave, refrigerator,
hot plate or similar cooking aid.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT — As defined in Chapter 166, Rental Property,
in the Manheim Borough Code of Ordinances.
DWELLING UNIT — As defined in Chapter 166, Rental Property, in the
Manheim Borough Code of Ordinances.
GUEST — A visitor to the limited lodging rental unit, but not
constituting an occupant.
LIMITED LODGING DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit where the
space is available for rent year-round, and where the provision of
lodging to any particular occupant is limited to a stay of less than 15
consecutive days.
LIMITED LODGING RENTAL OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A document
issued by the Code Official to the owner of a limited lodging rental unit
pursuant to this section.
LIMITED LODGING RENTAL UNIT — A limited lodging dwelling unit or
a limited lodging rooming unit.
LIMITED LODGING ROOMING UNIT — A rooming unit where the
space is available for rent year-round, and where the provision of
lodging to any particular occupant is limited to a stay of less than 15
consecutive days.
LIMITED LODGING STAY — Less than 15 days of continued occupancy
by occupants in a limited lodging rental unit.
MANAGER — A person retained by an owner to be responsible for one
or more limited lodging rental units within the Borough.
OCCUPANT — As defined in Chapter 166, Rental Property, in the
Manheim Borough Code of Ordinances.
OWNER — As defined in Chapter 166, Rental Property, in the Manheim
Borough Code of Ordinances.
PREMISES — As defined in Chapter 166, Rental Property, in the
Manheim Borough Code of Ordinances.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT — As defined in Chapter 166, Rental
Property, in the Manheim Borough Code of Ordinances.
§ 220-96.1 MANHEIM CODE § 220-96.1
1:600
ROOMING UNIT — As defined in Chapter 166, Rental Property, in the
Manheim Borough Code of Ordinances.
B. Permit required.
(1) No owner of any property in Manheim Borough shall operate a
limited lodging rental unit in Manheim Borough without first
obtaining a limited lodging occupancy permit from the Borough.
Operation of any type of limited lodging rental unit without a
permit is a violation of this section. A cease and desist order will
become effective immediately.
(2) A limited lodging rental occupancy permit shall only be issued to
the owner of the limited lodging rental unit property. Occupants of
a residential rental unit are not permitted to sublet a rooming unit
or a dwelling unit as a limited lodging rental unit.
(3) The current annual permit or a copy of the current permit shall be
posted on-site.
(4) A separate limited lodging rental occupancy permit is required for
each dwelling unit and shall be renewed and issued annually on a
calendar year basis.
(5) A limited lodging rental occupancy permit is effective for a period
of one annual term, or until any of the conditions of the limited
lodging rental unit which are governed by this chapter are
changed, whichever shall occur first.
(6) Permits are not transferable. If ownership of the limited lodging
rental unit changes, the new owner(s) must complete a new permit
application form before renting out any part of the dwelling unit
and have an inspection conducted by the Codes Official. The fee,
which shall be established by Council by resolution from time to
time, for permitting and inspection shall be submitted with the
application.
C. Permit application requirements. Limited lodging rental unit
applications shall be provided by Manheim Borough. Applications shall
contain all of the following information. Failure to provide such
information shall be a violation of this section and a cease and desist
order will be issued and applications shall be returned until all required
information is provided.
(1) The name, address, email and twenty-four-hour telephone number
of the property owner.
(2) The name, address, email and twenty-four-hour telephone number
of the Manager if different from the owner. The Manager shall have
written authorization to accept service and a copy of that
agreement shall be provided with the application.
§ 220-96.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-96.1
1:601
(3) Written approval from the Manheim Area Water and Sewer
Authority that confirms notification and compliance with any
related water and sewer regulated requirements.
(4) Attached copies of the Lancaster County hotel room excise tax
certificate and current PA sales and use tax permit.
(5) Signatures of the owner and manager.
(6) A trespass waiver signed by the owner allowing access to the
property for the enforcement officer for the purpose of inspection
to verify compliance with this chapter.
(7) Copy of the current recorded deed for the property establishing
ownership.
(8) Copy of property/liability insurance for the property in the amount
of $1,000,000.
D. Standards and guidelines.
(1) Limited lodging rental units shall be permitted in any single-family
attached or detached dwellings located in all zoning districts within
the Borough where residential uses are permitted.
(2) Limited lodging rental units are not permitted in any accessory
structure or as part of a multifamily apartment building.
(3) Limited lodging rental units shall be inspected annually and shall
include the entire property and Premises. Inspections will be based
on the International Property Maintenance Code, any related state,
federal or local codes and/or ordinances.
(4) A manager must reside or have an office within 15 miles of the
property and be able to act as the legal agent for the owner. The
Borough must be notified in writing within 14 days if there is a
change in the identity of the manager.
(5) The owner or manager shall respond to the Code Official,
emergency personnel, or Police communication within one hour
after being notified of the existence of a violation of this chapter,
emergency or any disturbance requiring immediate remedy or
abatement. If the manager is not the owner, they shall immediately
advise the owner of any notification of a violation and may be held
liable for failure to do so in a timely manner.
(6) In limited lodging rooming units, the dwelling unit shall remain as a
household living unit with housekeeping facilities in common but
not to allow for occupancy by more than three persons (including
the owner and occupants) who are unrelated by blood, marriage,
adoption, or foster-child status.
§ 220-96.1 MANHEIM CODE § 220-96.1
1:602
(7) No meals may be provided or served on-site by the owner to the
occupants as a service or included as part of the lodging
agreement. Occupants, depending upon their agreement, may have
use of the kitchen and appliances during their limited lodging stay.
(8) Limited lodging rooming unit owners shall prove residency if
requested to do so by the Code Official. Failure to do so will result
in a revocation of the issued permit and all current and/or future
occupancy shall cease and desist.
(9) Occupancy limitations shall be posted and is based on the size of
bedroom and living room size(s) per the International Property
Maintenance Code (IPMC) and determined by the Code Official at
the time of the initial inspection. An inspection of the entire
property shall be conducted prior to the issuance of the initial and
annual limited lodging rental occupancy permit. A bedroom shall
contain a minimum of 70 square feet of habitable floor area for one
person; for each additional person(s) permitted to stay in the room
you add an additional 50 square feet of habitable floor area. For
example, if the bedroom is 100 square feet; only one occupant is
permitted. A 160 square foot bedroom is limited to a two-person
occupancy. Living rooms must be a minimum of 120 square feet.
(10) A limited lodging rooming unit must be accessory and secondary to
the use of a dwelling unit for residential household living purposes.
Adequate space based on the IPMC shall be available for both the
occupants and owner.
(11) A limited lodging rooming unit shall not have any outside
appearance indicating a change of use from the surrounding
residential uses; no sign or private entrances shall be provided for
the sole use of the occupants.
(12)No new additions or related area improvements shall be
implemented to any dwelling to accommodate an increased
occupancy to an existing limited lodging rooming unit property.
(13) Overnight occupancy or hookup of recreational vehicles, campers,
trailers and tents placed on the premises or on public property
where a limited lodging rental unit is located is prohibited. Outdoor
sleeping of occupants or guests of the limited lodging rental unit is
prohibited.
(14) The limited lodging rental unit shall not adversely affect the
residential character of the neighborhood. Occupants may not
generate noise, vibration, glare, odors or other effects that
unreasonably interfere with any person's enjoyment of his or her
residences. Occupants may not engage in, nor tolerate, nor permit
any other person, including but not limited to each guest on the
premises and within his or her limited lodging rental unit with his
or her consent, to cause damage to the limited lodging rental unit
or engage in disruptive conduct, or other violation of this section,
§ 220-96.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-96.1
1:603
any code, any Borough ordinance, or any applicable federal, state
and local law or regulation. With the issuance of three written
police warnings and or reports within a year, a cease and desist
order will be issued by the Code Official to the owner or manager
of the limited lodging dwelling unit and the limited lodging rental
occupancy permit shall be revoked for 365 days from the date of
the last written police warning or report.
(15) All owners shall be responsible for compliance with the
requirements of Chapter 184, Solid Waste. of the Borough Code.
(16) All occupants shall be responsible for compliance with the
requirements of Chapter 145, Noise, of the Borough Code.
(17) A list of legibly written house rules, relevant contact information,
including the property owner and/or manager and all local
emergency numbers shall be posted in all limited lodging rental
units at a clearly visible location.
(18) Parking.
(a) No parking of vehicles is permitted in any grass/lawn areas by
the owner, occupants or guests.
(b) A maximum of one vehicle shall transport occupants to a
limited lodging rooming unit property. A minimum of one
improved (macadam/paver/concrete) off-street parking space
must be provided in addition to the zoning requirements of two
off-street spaces per dwelling unit. All newly created off-street
space(s) shall meet current zoning regulations, stormwater
management provisions and lot coverage. Approval shall be
granted by the Zoning Officer through the zoning permit
process prior to implementing a limited lodging rental unit.
(c) A maximum of two vehicles shall transport occupants to a
limited lodging dwelling unit property. A minimum of two
improved (macadam/pavers/concrete) off-street parking
spaces must be provided for each limited lodging dwelling unit.
All newly created off-street spaces shall meet current zoning
regulations, stormwater management provisions and lot
coverage. Approval shall be granted by the Zoning Officer
through the zoning permit process prior to implementing a
limited lodging rental unit.
(d) Any limited lodging rental unit contract or advertisement must
specify that there is a motor vehicle limit of one for limited
lodging rooming units and two for limited lodging dwelling
units, and a maximum number of permitted occupants.
(19) A limited lodging rental unit may only be rented to a person at least
21 years of age.
§ 220-96.1 MANHEIM CODE § 220-96.1
1:604
(20) Limited lodging rental unit owners shall keep a record of occupant
names, addresses, phone numbers and dates of occupancy on a
monthly basis. This information shall be made available upon
request to the Manheim Borough Codes Official or any police
officer.
(21) A limited lodging stay may be extended past 15 days at the
discretion of Borough staff.
§ 220-96.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-96.1
1:605

ARTICLE V
Nonconformities
§ 220-97. Continuation.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, any use, building or structure
lawfully existing at the time of enactment of this chapter may be continued,
although it is not in conformity with the regulations specified by this
chapter.
§ 220-98. Abandonment.
If a nonconforming use of land or of a building or structure ceases or is
discontinued for a continuous period of one year or more, subsequent use
of such building, structure or land shall be in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 220-99. Extension of a nonconforming use of land.
Any lawful nonconforming use of land, exclusive of buildings and structures
and the use contained therein, may be extended upon the lot upon which
it exists at the time of the effective date of this chapter, but such extension
shall conform to area and lot regulations and to the design standards of this
chapter. The extension of a nonconforming use on a lot shall be limited to
the lot which was in existence on the effective date of this chapter.
§ 220-100. Expansion or alteration.
A. Any nonconforming use may be expanded or altered through the
obtainment of a special exception and subject to the following criteria
and those contained in § 220-111C:
(1) Expansion of the nonconformity shall be confined to the lot on
which it was located on the effective date of this chapter or any
amendment thereto creating the nonconformity.
(2) The total of all such expansions or alterations of use shall not
exceed an additional 25% of the actual area of those buildings or
structures devoted to the nonconforming use as they existed on the
date on which such buildings or structures first became
nonconformities. The applicant shall furnish conclusive evidence as
to the extent of the nonconformity when it was created. [Amended
7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 622]
(3) Provision for vehicular access, off-street parking and off-street
loading shall be consistent with standards required by this chapter.
(4) Provision for yards, building height and building area shall be
consistent with the standards required for permitted uses in the
zone in which the nonconformity in question is located.
§ 220-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-100
1:607
§ 220-101. Substitution or replacement.
Any nonconforming use may be replaced or substituted by another
nonconforming use by special exception, if the Zoning Hearing Board
determines that the proposed use is at least as equally compatible with
the surrounding area as the original nonconforming use. In addition, the
proposed nonconforming use shall not increase any dimensional
nonconformities. The Zoning Hearing Board may attach reasonable
conditions to the special exception to keep the use compatible within its
surroundings.
§ 220-102. Restoration.
Any lawful nonconforming building or other structure which has been
involuntarily damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, windstorm, or other
similar active cause may be reconstructed in the same location, provided
that:
(5) Appearance should be harmonious with surrounding properties;
this feature includes, but is not limited to, landscaping, enclosure
of principal and accessory uses, height control, sign control,
architectural control and maintenance of all improvements and
open spaces.
(6) Buffers and screens shall be provided as necessary to adequately
protect neighboring properties. This includes, but is not limited to,
fences, walls, plantings and open spaces.
(7) The expansion shall not create new dimensional nonconformities or
further increase existing dimensional nonconformities.
(8) No expansion of a nonconforming structure or a nonconforming use
located outside of a structure existing on the effective date of this
chapter shall be permitted in any floodplain.
(9) Excluding expansion, any modification, alteration, repair,
reconstruction or improvement of any kind to a nonconforming use
or structure located in a floodplain shall be permitted when either
elevated above the base flood elevation or floodproofed. In no case
shall any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction or
improvement cause unacceptable increases in flood height,
velocities or frequencies.
B. Any dimensional nonconformity may be reduced by permitted use. No
extension or enlargement of a dimensional nonconformity shall be
permitted.
A. The reconstructed building or structure shall not exceed the height,
area or volume of the damaged or destroyed building or structure, and
such reconstructed building or structure shall not increase any
dimensional nonconformities.
§ 220-100 MANHEIM CODE § 220-102
1:608
§ 220-103. Previously expanded nonconforming uses and
structures.
It is the express intent and purpose of this chapter that if a building,
structure, sign or land was expanded or extended to the limits of expansion
for a nonconforming building, structure, sign or use of land, as authorized
by a prior zoning regulation or ordinance, no further expansion of said
building, structure, sign or land shall be authorized. In the event a
nonconforming building, structure, sign or use of land was expanded to a
portion of the limits of expansion authorized by a prior zoning regulation or
ordinance, additional expansion, if permitted by this chapter, shall only be
authorized to the amount of expansion not previously utilized pursuant to
said prior zoning regulation or ordinance.
§ 220-104. Nonconforming lots of record.
In any zone in which single-family houses are permitted, a single-family
house and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any lot of
record in existence at the effective date of the chapter. For purposes of
this section, when two or more nonconforming lots for which a subdivision
plan had not been recorded are contiguous and are in single ownership,
they become held in common as one parcel and require a variance from the
Zoning Hearing Board to resubdivide the parcel. This shall apply regardless
of the number of deeds held by the owner. This provision shall apply even
though such lot fails to meet requirements of side, front or rear yards or the
minimum lot area requirements applicable in the district in which the lot is
located.
§ 220-105. Amortization of nonconforming signs.
Any sign that was legally existing as of the effective date of this chapter
that does not comply with the provisions listed in § 220-36 of this chapter
shall be considered a nonconforming sign. All nonconforming signs may
continue for a period up to five years from the effective date of this chapter.
After the five-year continuance period, all nonconforming signs shall be
removed, reconstructed and/or altered so that they comply with all of the
provisions contained within § 220-36 of this chapter. Any improvements,
repairs, reconstructions or any other alterations made to the
nonconforming sign during the five-year continuance period shall not waive
the requirements for elimination of the nonconforming signs at the end of
the continuance period. This section shall not apply to any legally existing
nonconforming billboards.
§ 220-106. Amortization of the storage of junk in residential zones.
Any external storage of junk (as defined herein) within a residential zone
that was legally existing as of the effective date of this chapter shall be
B. Reconstruction shall begin within one year from the date of damage or
destruction and shall be carried on without interruption.
§ 220-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-106
1:609
considered nonconforming. All such storage may continue for a period of
up to six months from the effective date of this chapter. After the six-month
continuance period, all such storage shall be removed. Failure to remove
such junk shall constitute a zoning violation. Any improvements, repairs,
reconstructions, or any other alterations made to the area used to store
junk during the continuance period shall not waive the requirements for
elimination of the use at the end of the continuance period.
§ 220-106 MANHEIM CODE § 220-106
1:610
ARTICLE VI
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 220-107. Establishment and membership.
§ 220-108. Organization of Board.
The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve
annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any
hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than a
majority of all members of the Board, but the Board may appoint a hearing
officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf, and
the parties may waive further action by the Board as provided in § 220-110.
If by reason of absence or disqualification of a member a quorum is not
reached, the Chairman of the Board shall designate as many alternate
members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be needed to provide a
A. When used hereafter in this article, the word "Board" shall mean the
Zoning Hearing Board.
B. There shall be a Zoning Hearing Board, which shall consist of five
members who shall be appointed by resolution by the Borough Council.
The membership of the Board shall consist of residents of the Borough.
Their terms of office shall be five years and shall be so fixed that the
term of office of one member shall expire each year. The Board shall
promptly notify the Borough Council of any vacancies which occur.
Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of
the term. Members of the Board shall hold no other office in the
Borough. Any member of the Board may be removed for malfeasance,
misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a
majority vote of the Borough Council taken after the member has
received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A
hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall
request it in writing.
C. The Borough Council may appoint by resolution at least one, but no
more than three, residents of the Borough to serve as alternate
members of the Board. The term of office of an alternate member shall
be three years. When seated pursuant to the provisions of § 220-108, an
alternate shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and
discussions of the Board to the same and full extent as provided by law
for Board members, including specifically the right to cast a vote as a
voting member during the proceedings, and shall have all the powers
and duties set forth in this chapter and as otherwise provided by law.
Alternates shall hold no other office in the Borough, including
membership on the Planning Commission or Codes Compliance Officer.
Any alternate may participate in any proceeding or discussion of the
Board but shall not be entitled to vote as a member of the Board nor be
compensated pursuant to § 220-109 unless designated as a voting
alternate member pursuant to § 220-108 of this chapter.
§ 220-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-108
1:611
quorum. Any alternate member of the Board shall continue to serve on the
Board in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the alternate
was initially appointed until the Board has made a final determination of
the matter or case. Designation of an alternate pursuant to this section
shall be made on a case-by-case basis in rotation according to declining
seniority among all alternates. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules
and forms for its procedure consistent with ordinances of the Borough and
laws of the commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its
business, which records shall be the property of the Borough, and shall
submit a report of its activities to the Borough Council upon request.
§ 220-109. Expenditures for services.
Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Borough Council, the Board
may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants
and other technical and clerical services. Members of the Board may
receive compensation for the performance of their duties as may be fixed
by the Borough Council. Alternate members of the Board may receive
compensation as may be fixed by the Borough Council for the performance
of their duties when designated as alternate members pursuant to
§ 220-108, but in neither case shall such compensation exceed the rate
of compensation authorized to be paid to the members by the Borough
Council.
§ 220-110. Hearings.
A. The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance
with the following requirements:
(1) Public notice, as defined herein, and written notice shall be given to
the applicant, the Codes Compliance Officer, such other persons as
the Borough Council shall designate by ordinance, and to any
person who has made timely request for the same. Written notices
shall be given at such time and in such manner as shall be
prescribed by ordinance or, in the absence of ordinance provision,
by rules of the Board. In addition to the written notice provided
herein, written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted
on the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing.
(2) The Borough Council may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said hearings
may include compensation for the Secretary and members of the
Zoning Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs, and necessary
administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs,
however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing
Board, expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical
consultants, or expert witness costs.
(3) The hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date of the
applicant's request, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time.
§ 220-108 MANHEIM CODE § 220-110
1:612
B. The hearings shall be conducted by the Board, or the Board may
appoint any member as a hearing officer. The decision or, where no
decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Board; however,
the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the
Borough may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or
findings by the Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing
officer as final.
C. The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person affected by
the application who has made timely appearance of record before the
Board, and any other person, including civic or community
organizations permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have
power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for that
purpose.
D. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board, or the hearing officer
presiding, shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested
by the parties.
E. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
F. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
G. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing officer or shall be paid by
the person appealing the decision of the Board if such appeal is made,
and in either event, the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the
person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
H. The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any
issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate; shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda, or other materials, except advice from its solicitor, unless
the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so
noticed; and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless
all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
I. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before
§ 220-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-110
1:613
the Board or hearing officer. Where the application is contested or
denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon together with the reasons therefor.
Conclusions based on any provisions of the Act or of this chapter, rule
or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and
the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of
the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, and
there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings are final,
the Board shall make his report and recommendations available to the
parties within 45 days, and the parties shall be entitled to make written
representations thereon to the Board prior to final decision or entry
of findings, and the Board's decision shall be entered no later than 30
days after the report of the hearing officer. Where the Board fails to
render the decision within the period required by this subsection, or
fails to hold the required hearing within 60 days from the date of the
applicant's request for hearing, the decision shall be deemed to have
been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed
in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision
has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of
the Board to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the
Board shall give public notice of said decision within 10 days from the
last day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner as
provided in § 220-110A of this chapter. If the Board shall fail to provide
such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall
prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal the
decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
J. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him
not later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have
filed their name and address with the Board not later than the last day
of the hearing, the Board shall provide by mail or otherwise brief notice
of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full
decision or findings may be examined.
K. Approval time limit.
(1) If the variance or special exception is granted, or the issuance of a
permit is approved, or other action by the appellant is authorized,
the necessary permit shall be secured within six months. Then the
applicant shall commence construction or some other authorized
action within six months of permit issuance. All construction or
other authorized actions shall be completed within 12 months of
permit issuance; however, the Board may, upon written application
for good cause, grant an additional six-month extension from the
date of permit issuance.
(2) Should the appellant or applicant fail to obtain the necessary
permits within said six months' period, or having obtained the
permit should he fail to commence work thereunder within such six
months' period, it shall be conclusively presumed that the appellant
§ 220-110 MANHEIM CODE § 220-110
1:614
§ 220-111. Board's functions.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render decisions in the following matters:
or applicant has waived, withdrawn or abandoned his appeal or his
application, and all provisions, variances and permits granted to
him shall be deemed automatically rescinded by the Board.
(3) Should the appellant or applicant commence construction or
alteration within said six-month period but should he fail to
complete such construction or alteration within said twelve-month
period, the Board may, upon 10 days' notice, in writing, rescind or
revoke the granted variance or special exception or the issuance of
the permit or permits or the other action authorized to the
appellant or applicant, if the Board finds that no good cause
appears for the failure to complete within such twelve-month
period and if the Board further finds that conditions have so altered
or changed in the interval since the granting of the variance,
permit or action that revocation or rescission of the action is
justified.77
A. Substantive challenges to the validity of this chapter, except those
brought before the Borough Council pursuant to § 220-121F of this
chapter.
(1) If a challenge heard by the Zoning Hearing Board is found to have
merit, the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board shall include
recommended amendments to the challenged ordinance which will
cure the defects found. In reaching its decision, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall consider the amendments, plans and explanatory
material submitted by the landowner and shall also consider:
(a) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities.
(b) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the
proposal upon regional housing needs, and the effectiveness of
the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually
available to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise
unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions of the
Ordinance or Map.
(c) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by
the site's soils, slopes, woodland, wetlands, floodplains,
aquifers, natural resources and other natural features.
(d) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and
natural features, the degree to which these are protected or
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-111
1:615
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development, and
any adverse environmental impacts.
(e) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture
and other land uses which are essential to public health and
welfare.
(2) The Zoning Hearing Board shall render its decision within 45 days
after the conclusion of the last hearing. If the Board fails to act on
the landowner's request within this time limit, a denial of the
request is deemed to have occurred on the 46th day after the close
of the last hearing.
(3) The Zoning Hearing Board shall commence its hearings within 60
days after the request is filed, unless the landowner requests or
consents to an extension of time.
(4) Public notice of the hearing shall be provided as specified in
§ 220-121B(2) of this chapter.
B. Challenges to the validity of this chapter, raising procedural questions
or alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption, which
challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken within 30 days after the
effective date of the chapter.
C. Application for special exceptions pursuant to the expressed following
requirements:
(1) Filing requirements. In addition to the required zoning permit
information (see § 220-117), each special exception application
shall include the following:
(a) Ground floor plans and elevations of proposed structures.
(b) Names and address of adjoining property owners, including
properties directly across a public right-of-way.
(c) A scaled drawing (site plan) of the site with sufficient detail
and accuracy to demonstrate compliance with all applicable
provisions of this chapter.
(d) A written description of the proposed use in sufficient detail to
demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
(2) General criteria. Each applicant must demonstrate by credible
evidence compliance with the following:
(a) The proposed use shall be consistent with the purpose and
intent of this chapter.
(b) The proposed use shall not detract from the use and enjoyment
of adjoining or nearby properties.
§ 220-111 MANHEIM CODE § 220-111
1:616
(c) The proposed use will not substantially change the character of
the subject property's neighborhood.
(d) Adequate public facilities are available to serve the proposed
use (e.g., schools, fire, police and ambulance protection, sewer,
water and other utilities, parks, solid waste disposal, vehicular
access, etc.).
(e) The proposed use shall comply with those criteria specifically
attached to it. In addition, the proposed use must comply with
all other applicable regulations contained in this chapter.
(f) The traffic generated by the proposed use shall be safely and
adequately accommodated during peak and nonpeak periods,
or that improvements made by the applicant shall be made in
order to effect the same.
(g) The proposed use shall be in and of itself properly designed
with regard to internal circulation, parking, buffering,
screening and all other elements of proper design as required
by this chapter and any other federal, state or local ordinance,
law or regulation.
(h) That the proposed use will not have deleterious impact on
adjoining properties or the neighborhood due to impacts and/
or by-products of the proposed use, such as noise, dust, odor,
smoke, litter, glare, heat, radiation, electromagnetic
interference, etc.
(i) The proposed use will not substantially impair the integrity of
the Borough's Comprehensive Plan.
(3) Conditions. The Zoning Hearing Board, in approving special
exception applications, may attach conditions considered
necessary to protect the public welfare and the purposes listed
above, including conditions which are more restrictive than those
established for other uses in the same zone. These conditions shall
be enforceable by the Codes Compliance Officer, and failure to
comply with such conditions shall constitute a violation of this
chapter and be subject to the penalties described in Article VII.
(4) Site plan approval. Any site plan presented in support of the special
exception pursuant to § 220-111C shall become an official part of
the record for said special exception. Approval of any special
exception will also bind the use in accordance with the submitted
site plan; therefore, should a change in the site plan be required as
part of the approval of the use, the applicant shall revise the site
plan prior to the issuance of a zoning permit. Any subsequent
change to the use on the subject property not reflected on the
originally approved site plan shall require the obtainment of
another special exception approval.
§ 220-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-111
1:617
D. Variances. The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship
upon the applicant. The Board may, by rule, prescribe the form of
application to the Codes Compliance Officer, which shall at least
include the following:
(1) Filing requirements. In addition to the required zoning permit
information (§ 220-117A), each variance application shall include
the following:
(a) Names and addresses of adjoining property owners, including
properties directly across a public right-of-way.
(b) A scaled drawing (site plan) of the site with sufficient detail
and accuracy so as to present the nature of the request and the
unique site conditions that create hardship to strict compliance
with this chapter.
(c) A written description of the requested variance, along with a
description of the hardship that is being alleged, and all
reasons why the variance should be granted.
(2) The Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the following
findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or zone in which
the property is located.
(b) That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that
the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable
reasonable use of the property.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the zone or neighborhood in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulations in issue.
§ 220-111 MANHEIM CODE § 220-111
1:618
§ 220-112. Parties appellant before the board.
Appeals under § 220-111E, F, G and H and proceedings to challenge this
chapter under § 220-111A and B may be filed with the Board in writing
by the landowner affected, any officer or agency of the Borough or any
person aggrieved. Requests for a variance under § 220-111D and for special
exception under § 220-111C may be filed with the Board by any landowner
or any tenant with the permission of such landowner. Any appeal shall state:
(3) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of this chapter. These conditions shall be enforceable
by the Codes Compliance Officer, and failure to comply with such
conditions shall constitute a violation of this chapter and be subject
to the penalties described in Article VII.
E. Appeals from the determination of the Codes Compliance Officer,
including, but not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit or
failure to act on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease and
desist order, or the registration or refusal to register any
nonconforming use, structure or lot.
F. Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged with
the administration of any transfers of development rights or
performance density provisions of this chapter.
G. Appeals from the Codes Compliance Officer's determination under
§ 916.2 (and any subsequent amendments) of the Act.78
H. Appeals from the determination of the Codes Compliance Officer or
Borough Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance with
reference to sedimentation and erosion control and/or stormwater
management for applications not involving a subdivision/land
development, nor a planned residential development as regulated in
Articles V and VII of the Act, respectively.
A. The name and address of the appellant and applicant.
B. The name and address of the landowner of the real estate to be
affected.
C. A brief description and location of the real estate to be affected by such
proposed change, together with a plot plan drawn to scale with
sufficient clarity to show the nature and character of the request.
D. A statement of the present zoning classification of the real estate in
question, the improvements thereon, and the present use thereof.
E. A statement of the section of this chapter under which the request may
be allowed and reasons why it should or should not be granted.
78.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10916.2.
§ 220-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-113
1:619
§ 220-113. Time limitations.
§ 220-114. Stay of proceeding.
A. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Board later
than 30 days after an application for development, preliminary or final,
has been approved by the Codes Compliance Officer or the agency
responsible for granting such approval, if such proceeding is designed
to secure reversal or to limit the approval in any manner, unless such
person alleges and proves that he had no notice or knowledge or reason
to believe that such approval had been given. If such person has
succeeded to his interest after such approval, he shall be bound by the
knowledge of his predecessor in interest.
B. The failure of anyone other than the landowner to appeal an adverse
decision by the Codes Compliance Officer on a challenge to the validity
of this chapter or the Official Zoning Map pursuant to § 916.2 of the Act,
as amended,79 shall preclude an appeal from a final approval except in
the case where the final submission substantially deviates from the
approved tentative approval.
A. Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in § 220-112, and during its
pendency before the Board, all land development pursuant to any
challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Codes Compliance
Officer or of any agency or body, and all official action thereunder, shall
be stayed unless the Codes Compliance Officer or any other appropriate
agency or body certifies to the Board facts indicating that such stay
would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case, the
development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order, which may be granted by the Board or by the court
having jurisdiction of zoning appeals on petition after notice to the
Codes Compliance Officer or other appropriate agency or body. When
an application for development, preliminary or final, has been duly
approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the approval are
filed with the Board by persons other than the applicant, the applicant
may petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order
such persons to post bond as a condition to continuing the proceedings
before the Board. After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a
hearing to determine if the filing of the appeal is frivolous. At the
hearing, evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It shall
be the burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is
frivolous. After consideration of all evidence presented, if the court
determines that the appeal is frivolous, it shall grant the petition for a
bond. The right to petition the court to order the appellants to post
bond may be waived by the appellee, but such waiver may be revoked
by him if an appeal is taken from a final decision of the court. The
question whether or not such petition should be granted, and the
amount of the bond, shall be within the sound discretion of the court.
79.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 220-113 MANHEIM CODE § 220-114
1:620
§ 220-115. Appeal.
Any person, taxpayer or the Borough aggrieved by any decision of the Board
may, within 30 days after such decision of the Board, seek review by the
Court of Common Pleas of such decision in the manner provided by the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and Article X-A of the Act, as
amended.80
An order denying a petition for bond shall be interlocutory. An order
directing the responding party to post a bond shall be interlocutory.
B. If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from an
order of the court dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond,
and the appellate court sustains the order of the court below to post a
bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon motion of the
petitioner and after hearing in the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals, shall be liable for all reasonable costs, expenses and attorney's
fees incurred by the petitioner.
80.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11001-A et seq.
§ 220-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-115
1:621

ARTICLE VII
Administration
§ 220-116. Administration and government.
A. Administration.
(1) Codes Compliance Officer. The provisions of this chapter shall be
enforced by an agent to be appointed by the Borough Council, who
shall be known as the "Codes Compliance Officer." The Codes
Compliance Officer shall meet qualifications established by
Borough Council and shall be able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Borough Council a working knowledge of
municipal zoning. The Codes Compliance Officer shall administer
this chapter in accordance with its literal terms and shall not have
the power to permit any construction or any use or change of use
which does not conform to this chapter. The Codes Compliance
Officer shall be appointed at the first meeting of the Borough
Council in January to serve until the first day of January next
following and shall thereafter be appointed annually to serve for a
term of one year and/or until his successor is appointed. The Codes
Compliance Officer may succeed himself. He/she shall receive such
fees or compensation as the Borough Council may, by resolution,
provide. The Codes Compliance Officer shall not hold any elective
office within the Borough. The Codes Compliance Officer may
designate an employee of the Borough as his Deputy, subject to the
approval of the Borough Council, who shall exercise all the powers
of the Codes Compliance Officer during the temporary absence or
disability of the Codes Compliance Officer.
(2) Duties. The duties of the Codes Compliance Officer shall be:
(a) To receive, examine and process all applications as provided by
the terms of this chapter.
(b) To record and file all applications for permits or certificates of
use and occupancy, and accompanying plans and documents,
and keep them for public record.
(c) To inspect properties to determine compliance with all
provisions of this chapter, as well as conditions attached to the
approval of variances, special exceptions, conditional uses and
curative amendments. He/she shall have the right to enter
upon private land at any reasonable hour in order to gain
permission to enter any building or structure or other lands in
the course of his/her duty.
(d) To keep a record of all properties which have been determined
to be nonconforming uses and structures, together with the
reasons why he/she has identified them as nonconformities, as
a public record and to examine them periodically to determine
§ 220-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-116
1:623
the current status. The record shall be modified upon such date
that the property becomes in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
(e) Upon the request of the Borough Council or the Zoning
Hearing Board, present to such bodies facts, records and any
similar information on specific requests to assist such bodies in
reaching their decisions.
(f) Keep an official record of all business and activities, including
complaints of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
and the subsequent action taken on each such complaint. All
such records shall be open to public inspection. File copies of
all applications received, permits issued, and reports and
inspections made in connection with any structure, building,
sign and/or land shall be retained as long as the structures,
etc., remain in existence.
(g) Issue certificates of use and occupancy and stop orders in
accordance with the terms of this chapter.
(h) To be responsible for keeping this chapter and the Official
Zoning Map up-to-date, including any amendments thereto.
(i) To render a preliminary opinion regarding a proposed land use
in accordance with § 916.2 of the Act.81
B. Enforcement. This chapter shall be enforced by the Codes Compliance
Officer of the Borough. No permit or certificate of use and occupancy
shall be granted by him/her for any purpose except in compliance with
the literal provisions of this chapter. The Codes Compliance Officer may
be authorized by Borough Council to institute civil enforcement
proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting within his/her
scope of employment.
C. Violations.
(1) Failure to secure a permit prior to a change in use of land or
structure, or the demolition, erection, construction or alteration of
any structure or portion thereof, shall be a violation of this chapter.
It shall also be a violation of this chapter to undertake other
deliberate actions which are contrary to the terms of the chapter
and any conditions placed upon the approval of special exceptions,
variances and conditional uses. Each day that a violation is
continued shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) If it appears to the Borough that a violation of this chapter enacted
under the Act or prior enabling laws has occurred, the Borough
shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement
notice, as provided in the following:
81.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 220-116 MANHEIM CODE § 220-116
1:624
(a) The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of
the parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person
who has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices
regarding that parcel, and to any other person requested in
writing by the owner of record.
(b) An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
[1] The name of the owner of record and any other person
against whom the Borough intends to take action.
[2] The location of the property in violation.
[3] The specific violation with a description of the
requirements which have not been met, citing in each
instance the applicable provisions of the chapter.
[4] The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
[5] That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to
the Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of
time in accordance with procedures set forth in the
chapter.
[6] That failure to comply with the notice within the time
specified, unless extended by appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board, constitutes a violation, with possible
sanctions clearly described.
D. Enforcement remedies. Any person, partnership or corporation who or
which has violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of this
chapter enacted under the Act or prior enabling laws shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the Borough as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant
to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the Magisterial
District Judge determining that there has been a violation further
determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership
or corporation violating the chapter to have believed that there was no
such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only
one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge, and
thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney's fees
§ 220-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-116
1:625
§ 220-117. Permits.
collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the
Borough.
E. Causes of action. In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is,
or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
converted, maintained or used in violation of any ordinance enacted
under the Act or prior enabling laws, the Borough Council or, with the
approval of the Borough Council, an officer of the Borough or any
aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that his property
or person will be substantially affected by the alleged violation, in
addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building,
structure, landscaping or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises,
any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When any
such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action
shall be served upon the Borough at least 30 days prior to the time the
action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the Borough
Council. No such action may be maintained until such notice has been
given.
A. General requirements for zoning permits. No building, structure or sign
shall be erected, constructed, extended, replaced, demolished,
converted, moved, added to or structurally altered, nor shall land,
buildings and structures be put to any use or have the use for which
they are used changed without a zoning permit therefor issued by the
Codes Compliance Officer. No such permit shall be issued except in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter or upon written order
from the Zoning Hearing Board in the form of a special exception or
variance, or as otherwise provided for by this chapter, any applicable
laws, or any court of competent jurisdiction.
B. Application procedures. The application for a zoning permit shall be
submitted to the Codes Compliance Officer in writing on a form
prescribed by the Codes Compliance Officer. The application shall be
submitted by the owner or lessee of any building, structure or land or
the agent of either; provided, however, that if the application is made by
a person other than the owner or lessee, it shall be accompanied by a
written authorization from the owner or lessee authorizing the work
and designating the agent. The full names and addresses of the owner,
lessee, applicant and of the responsible officers, if the owner or lessee
is a corporate body, shall be stated in the application. The application
shall be accompanied by two sets of the following information:
(1) A map of the lot in question drawn to scale, indicating the lot size
and showing all dimensions of lot lines and the exact location(s) on
the lot of all existing and proposed buildings, fences, signs,
structures and alterations to buildings or structures.
§ 220-116 MANHEIM CODE § 220-117
1:626
(2) The use, height, length, width and proportion of the total lot area
covered of all proposed and existing buildings, structures, signs
and additions or alterations to buildings, structures and signs.
(3) A statement indicating the number of dwelling units and/or
commercial establishments to be accommodated within existing
and proposed buildings on the lot. In the case of apartment
buildings, a breakdown of units by number of bedrooms shall be
given.
(4) The number, location, dimensions and design of parking and
loading areas, recreation areas, signs, buffer yards and
landscaping, means of egress from and ingress to the lot, routes for
pedestrian and vehicular traffic and outdoor lighting.
(5) A copy of the deed for the property in question, including all deed
restrictions applicable to the property.
(6) All other information necessary for the Codes Compliance Officer
to determine conformance with and provide for enforcement of this
chapter.
(7) Information demonstrating compliance with the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry or, as an alternative, information
that confirms the lack of need for Department of Labor and
Industry approval.
C. Approval or disapproval. Upon receipt of the application and all
accompanying information, the Codes Compliance Officer shall
examine same to determine compliance with this chapter and all other
Borough ordinances and/or state requirements. The Codes Compliance
Officer may call upon other Borough staff and/or Borough-appointed
consultants in the review of submitted materials for applications.
Within 90 days from the day he receives the application, the Codes
Compliance Officer shall either approve or disapprove the application
and return one copy of the application and accompanying information
containing the Codes Compliance Officer's decision and signature to
the applicant. The other copy shall be retained by the Codes
Compliance Officer. If disapproved, the Codes Compliance Officer shall
attach a statement to the application explaining the reasons therefor
and informing the applicant of his rights to appeal. An applicant whose
request for a permit has been denied by the Codes Compliance Officer
may make a later application for a permit, provided all deficiencies
which were the basis for the prior denial of the permit have been
eliminated. The Codes Compliance Officer shall not be required to make
a new inspection of the application if this condition is not met.
D. Issuance and posting of permit. Upon approval of the application by the
Codes Compliance Officer and the payment of the fees established from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council, the Codes
Compliance Officer shall issue a zoning permit placard, which shall be
visibly posted on the site of operations during the entire time of
§ 220-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-117
1:627
§ 220-118. Certificate of use and occupancy.
construction. The permit shall expire one year from the date of approval
of the application by the Codes Compliance Officer; provided that it may
be extended, at the discretion of the Codes Compliance Officer, for sixmonth
periods not exceeding a total of two years.
E. Rights of permit holders. The permit shall be a license to proceed with
the work described on the approved application in accordance with all
Borough ordinances. The Codes Compliance Officer shall revoke a
permit or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in case of
any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application on
which the permit or approval was based or for any other cause set forth
in this chapter.
A. Requirements. It shall be unlawful to use and/or occupy any building,
structure or land or portion thereof for which a zoning permit is
required until a certificate of use and occupancy has been issued by the
Codes Compliance Officer. The Codes Compliance Officer shall not issue
a certificate of use and occupancy unless he has inspected such
building, structure or land and has determined that all provisions of this
chapter and other rules, regulations and ordinances of the Borough
have been complied with.
B. Issuance. Upon the receipt of written notification that the work for
which a zoning permit has been issued has been completed, the Codes
Compliance Officer shall inspect the premises within 14 days to
determine that the work has been performed in accordance with the
approved application and other ordinances of the Borough. If he/she is
satisfied that the work has been completed in accordance with the
approved application, he/she shall issue a certificate of use and
occupancy to the permit holder for the use indicated on the approved
application. A copy of the certificate of use and occupancy shall be
retained by the Codes Compliance Officer as part of the Borough
records. If he finds that the work has not been performed in accordance
with the approved application, the Codes Compliance Officer shall
refuse to issue the certificate of use and occupancy and, in writing, give
the reasons therefor and inform the permit holder of his rights of
appeal.
C. Temporary certificate of use and occupancy.
(1) Upon request of the holder of a permit, the Codes Compliance
Officer may issue a temporary certificate of use and occupancy for
a building, structure, sign and/or land or portion thereof before the
entire work covered by the permit shall have been completed. Such
portion or portions may be used and/or occupied prior to full
completion of the work, provided life and/or the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the Borough and its citizens
are not endangered.
§ 220-117 MANHEIM CODE § 220-118
1:628
§ 220-119. Stop order.
§ 220-120. Schedule of fees, charges and expenses.
(2) The Codes Compliance Officer shall also issue a temporary
certificate of use and occupancy for such temporary uses as tents,
trailers and buildings on construction sites, use of land for religious
and other public and semipublic purposes, or other temporary use
and/or occupancy upon order of the Borough Council. Such
temporary certificates shall be for the period of time to be
determined by the Borough Council, but in no case shall any
certificates be issued for more than six months.
A. A stop order shall be issued in the following instances:
(1) If activities regulated by this chapter are undertaken without a
zoning permit or certificate of use and occupancy being granted by
the Borough.
(2) If an activity undertaken under a zoning permit deviates from the
application either during or after completion of the work.
(3) If a use is conducted in a way which is in violation of the use
requirements, area, yard and height regulations, performance
standards or general regulations of this chapter.
(4) If an activity permitted by special exception, conditional use, or
variance is not conducted in accordance with the terms of the
granting of the special exception, conditional use or variance.
B. Notice to owner. A stop order shall be issued by the Codes Compliance
Officer and delivered to the owner of any property or his agent. Delivery
shall be construed to include certified mail or posting on the property.
C. Contents. The stop order shall be in writing and state the nature of the
violation and under which conditions work or use may continue. A
reasonable period of time may be permitted to allow for the required
corrections.
D. Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue in violation of any
stop order shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the
penalties provided within this chapter.
A. The Borough Council shall establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees
and charges for requests for zoning permits, certificates of use and
occupancy, special exceptions, conditional uses, variances,
amendments to this chapter and other matters pertaining to this
chapter. A collection procedure shall also be established.
B. The schedule of fees shall be available for inspection in the office of the
Codes Compliance Officer and may be altered or amended by the
Borough Council by resolution.
§ 220-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-120
1:629
§ 220-121. Amendments. [Amended 1-30-1996 by Ord. No. 539]
C. Until all application fees and charges have been paid in full, no action
shall be taken on any application or appeal.
A. Power of amendment. The Borough Council may, from time to time,
amend, supplement, change or repeal this chapter, including the
Official Zoning Map. Any amendment, supplement, change or repeal
may be initiated by the Borough Planning Commission, the Borough
Council or by a petition to the Borough Council by an interested party.
B. Hearing and enactment procedures for zoning amendments.
(1) Public hearing. Before hearing and enacting Zoning Ordinance
and/or Zoning Map amendments, the Borough Council shall
conduct a public hearing to inform the general public of the nature
of the amendment and to obtain public comment. Such public
hearing shall be conducted after public notice (as defined herein
and listed below) has been given.
(2) Public notice. Before conducting a public hearing, the Borough
Council shall provide public notice as follows:
(a) Notice shall be published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough.
Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and
the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the
hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days
and the second publication shall not be less than seven days
from the date of the hearing. Publication of the proposed
amendment shall include either the full text thereof or the title
and brief summary prepared by the Borough Solicitor and
setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail. If the full
text is not included:
[1] A copy of the full text shall be supplied to a newspaper of
general circulation in the Borough at the time the public
notice is published.
[2] An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in
the county law library or other county office designated by
the County Commissioners, who may impose a fee no
greater than that necessary to cover the actual costs of
storing said ordinances.
(b) For Zoning Map amendments, public notice shall also include
the posting of a sign at conspicuous locations along the
perimeter of the subject property; these sign(s) shall be posted
at least one week prior to the hearing and will exhibit the
nature, date, time and location of the hearing.
§ 220-120 MANHEIM CODE § 220-121
1:630
(c) For curative amendments, public notice shall also indicate that
the validity of the chapter and/or map is in question and shall
give the place where and the times when a copy of the request,
including any plans, explanatory material or proposed
amendments, may be examined by the public.
(d) If after any public hearing held upon an amendment the
proposed amendment is changed substantially or is revised to
include land previously not affected by it, the Borough Council
shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice,
before proceeding to vote on the amendment.
(3) Enactment notice. In addition to the public notice requirements
defined herein, the Borough Council must publish a reference to
the time and place of the meeting at which passage of this chapter
or amendment will be considered, and a reference to a place within
the Borough where copies of the proposed chapter or amendment
may be examined without charge, or obtained for a charge not
greater than the cost thereof. Enactment notice shall be published
at least once in one newspaper of general circulation in the
Borough not more than 60 days nor less than seven days prior to
passage. The published content of the enactment notice shall be
the same as that required for public notice described in the
preceding Subsection B(2)(b). In the event substantial amendments
are made in the proposed ordinance or amendment, before voting
upon enactment the Borough Council shall, at least 10 days prior to
enactment, readvertise in one newspaper of general circulation in
the Borough a brief summary setting forth all the provisions in
reasonable detail, together with a summary of the amendments.
(4) Borough Planning Commission referrals. For amendments
proposed by parties other than the Borough Planning Commission,
the Borough Council shall submit each amendment at least 30 days
prior to public hearing to the Borough Planning Commission for
review and comment. The Borough Planning Commission shall
submit a report of its review, together with any recommendations,
to the Borough Council within 45 days from the date of said
referral. The recommendation of the Borough Planning
Commission shall include a specific statement as to whether or not
the proposed amendment is in accordance with the intent of this
chapter and any official adopted Comprehensive Plan of the
Borough.
(5) Lancaster County Planning Commission referrals. All proposed
amendments shall be submitted to the Lancaster County Planning
Commission at least 30 days prior to public hearing on such
amendments. The Lancaster County Planning Commission may
submit recommendations to the Borough Council within 45 days of
such referral. The Borough Council cannot act upon the
amendment until it has received a recommendation from the
Lancaster County Planning Commission; however, should the
§ 220-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-121
1:631
Lancaster County Planning Commission fail to submit its
recommendation within 45 days, the Borough Council may proceed
without its recommendation.
(6) Adjournment of public hearing. If during the public hearing process
the Borough Council needs additional time to understand the
proposal, inform the public, receive public comment and/or render
a decision, it may adjourn the public hearing to a time and place
certain.
(7) Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this
chapter shall be forwarded to the Lancaster County Planning
Commission.
C. Amendment initiated by the Borough Planning Commission. When an
amendment, supplement, change or repeal is initiated by the Borough
Planning Commission, the proposal shall be presented to the Borough
Council, which shall then proceed in the same manner as with a petition
to the Borough Council which has already been reviewed by the
Borough Planning Commission.
D. Amendment initiated by the Borough Council. When an amendment,
supplement, change or repeal is initiated by the Borough Council, such
amendment, supplement, change or repeal shall follow the procedure
prescribed for a petition under § 220-121B.
E. Amendment initiated by a petition from an interested party. A petition
for amendment, supplement, change or repeal for a portion of this
chapter shall include an accurate legal description and surveyed plan of
any land to be rezoned and all of the reasons supporting the petition to
be considered. The petition shall also be signed by at least one record
owner of the property in question, whose signature shall be notarized
attesting to the truth and correctness of all the facts and information
presented in the petition. A fee to be established by the Borough
Council shall be paid upon the filing of such petition for change and for
the purpose of defraying the costs of the proceedings prescribed
herein. The Borough Council may require duplicate sets of petition
materials. Such amendment shall follow the procedures listed in
§ 220-121B of this chapter.
F. Curative amendment by a landowner. A landowner who desires to
challenge on substantive grounds the validity of the chapter or the
Official Zoning Map, or any provision thereof which prohibits or
restricts the use or development of land in which he has an interest,
may submit a curative amendment to the Borough Council (including all
of the reasons supporting the request to be considered) with a written
request that his challenge and proposed amendment be heard and
decided as provided in §§ 609.1 and 916.1 of the Act, as amended. The
Borough Council shall commence a hearing thereon within 60 days of
the request. The curative amendment shall be referred to the Borough
and Lancaster County Planning Commissions, as provided for in
§ 220-121 MANHEIM CODE § 220-121
1:632
§ 220-121B, and public notice of the hearing shall be provided as
defined herein.
(1) In reviewing the curative amendment, the Borough Council may
deny the request, accept the request as submitted, or may adopt an
alternative amendment which will cure the challenged defects. The
Borough Council shall consider the curative amendments, plans
and explanatory material submitted by the landowner and shall
also consider:
(a) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities.
(b) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the
proposal upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of
the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually
available to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise
unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions of the
chapter or map.
(c) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by
the site's soils, slopes, woodland, wetlands, floodplains,
aquifers, natural resources and other natural features.
(d) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and
natural features, the degree to which these are protected or
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and
any adverse environmental impacts.
(e) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture
and other land uses which are essential to public health and
welfare.
(2) The Borough Council shall render its decision within 45 days after
the conclusion of the last hearing.
(3) If the Borough Council fails to act on the landowner's request
within the time limits referred to in Subsection F(2), a denial of the
request is deemed to have occurred on the 46th day after the close
of the last hearing.
(4) Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of
the ordinance or map is in question and shall give the place where
and the times when a copy of the request, including any plans,
explanatory material or proposed amendments, may be examined
by the public.
(5) The challenge shall be deemed denied when:
(a) The Borough Council fails to commence the hearing within 60
days.
§ 220-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-121
1:633
(b) The Borough Council notifies the landowner that it will not
adopt the curative amendment.
(c) The Borough Council adopts another curative amendment
which is unacceptable to the landowner.
(d) The Borough Council fails to act on the request 45 days after
the close of the last hearing on the request, unless the time is
extended by mutual consent by the landowner and Borough.
(6) Where after the effective date of the Act a curative amendment
proposal is approved by the grant of a curative amendment
application by the Borough Council pursuant to this section or a
validity challenge is sustained by the Zoning Hearing Board
pursuant to § 220-111B) or the court acts finally on appeal from
denial of a curative amendment proposal or a validity challenge,
and the proposal or challenge so approved requires a further
application for subdivision or land development, the developer
shall have two years from the date of such approval to file an
application for preliminary or tentative approval for a subdivision,
land development or planned residential development. Within the
two-year period, no subsequent change or amendment in the
zoning, subdivision or other governing chapter or plan shall be
applied in any manner which adversely affects the rights of the
applicant as granted in the curative amendment or the sustained
validity challenge. Upon the filing of the preliminary or tentative
plan, the provisions of § 508(4) of the Act shall apply.82
(7) Where the proposal appended to the curative amendment
application or the validity challenge is approved but does not
require further application under any subdivision or land
development ordinance, the developer shall have one year within
which to file for a building permit. Within the one-year period, no
subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or
other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any manner
which adversely affects the rights of the applicant as granted in the
curative amendment or the sustained validity challenge. During
these protected periods, the court shall retain or assume
jurisdiction for the purpose of awarding such supplemental relief as
may be necessary.
G. Curative amendment by the Borough Council.
(1) The Borough Council, by formal action, may declare this chapter or
portions thereof substantively invalid and propose to prepare a
curative amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days
following such declaration and proposal, the Borough Council shall:
82.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10508(4).
§ 220-121 MANHEIM CODE § 220-121
1:634
(a) By resolution, make specific findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of the chapter or portions thereof, which may
include:
[1] References to specific uses which are either not permitted
or not permitted in sufficient quantity.
[2] References to a class of use or uses which requires
revision.
[3] References to the entire chapter which requires revisions.
(b) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to the
chapter to correct the declared invalidity.
(2) Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the
Borough Council shall enact a curative amendment to validate or
reaffirm the validity of this chapter pursuant to the provisions
required by § 609 of the Act83 in order to cure the declared
invalidity of the chapter.
(3) Upon the date of the declaration and proposal, the Borough Council
shall not be required to entertain or consider any curative
amendment filed by a landowner. Nor shall the Zoning Hearing
Board be required to give a report, upon request, for a challenge to
the validity of the chapter under § 220-111A subsequent to the
declaration and proposal based upon the grounds identical to or
substantially similar to those specified in the resolution required by
this section. Upon the enactment of a curative amendment to or the
reaffirmation of the validity of this chapter, no rights to a cure by
amendment or challenge shall, from the date of the declaration and
proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis of the substantive
invalidity of the unamended Zoning Ordinance for which the
Borough Council proposes to prepare a curative amendment.
(4) The Borough Council, having utilized the procedures as set forth in
this section, may not again utilize said procedures for a thirty-sixmonth
period following the date of the enactment of a curative
amendment or reaffirmation of the validity of the chapter;
provided, however, that if after the date of declaration and proposal
there is a substantially new duty or obligation imposed upon the
Borough by virtue of a Pennsylvania appellate court decision, the
Borough Council may utilize the provisions of this section to
prepare a curative amendment to the chapter to fulfill this duty or
obligation.
H. Authentication of Official Zoning Map. Whenever there has been a
change in the boundary of a zone or a reclassification of the zone
adopted in accordance with the above, the change on the Official
Zoning Map shall be made and shall be duly certified by the Borough
83.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10609.
§ 220-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-121
1:635
§ 220-122. Conditional uses. [Amended 1-30-1996 by Ord. No. 539]
Secretary and shall thereafter be refiled as part of the permanent
records of the Borough.
A. Filing of conditional use. For any use permitted by conditional use, a
conditional use must be obtained from the Borough Council. In addition
to the information required on the building permit application, the
conditional use application must show:
(1) Ground floor plans and elevations of proposed structures.
(2) Names and addresses of adjoining property owners, including
properties directly across a public right-of-way.
(3) A scaled drawing (site plan) of the site with sufficient detail and
accuracy to demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) A written description of the proposed use in sufficient detail to
demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
B. General standards for Borough Council review of conditional use
applications. In the consideration of a conditional use application, each
the applicant must shall demonstrate to Borough Council, by credible
evidence, compliance with the following: [Amended 7-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 622]
(1) That the proposed use shall comply with those criteria specifically
attached to it. In addition, the proposed use must comply with all
other applicable regulations. Applicant shall provide the Borough
Council sufficient plans, studies or other data to demonstrate
compliance with all applicable regulations.
(2) The suitability of the property for the use desired and that the
proposed use is consistent with the spirit, purpose and intent of the
Zoning Ordinance, the Comprehensive Plan, and other relevant
plans adopted by the Borough Council.
(3) That the proposed use will not substantially injure or detract from
the use of neighboring property or from the character of the
neighborhood, and that the use of the adjacent property is
adequately safeguarded.
(4) Adequate public facilities are available to serve the proposed use,
including, but not limited to, public water, sewers, other utilities,
police and fire protection, parks, recreation and public schools, and
that there is no substantial adverse effect on these public facilities.
(5) That the proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect on
the congestion of streets and highways or upon traffic levels of
service or any hazards arising therefrom. The Borough Council may
§ 220-121 MANHEIM CODE § 220-122
1:636
require the applicant to submit a traffic study, prepared by a
qualified traffic engineer, to satisfy this requirement. The Traffic
Report should contain the probable effects upon traffic and
pedestrian movements and assure adequate access and circulation
arrangements in order to protect major roads from undue
congestion and hazard.84
(6) That the proposed conditional use shall be in and of itself properly
designed with regard to internal vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, parking, buffering, and all other elements of proper
design as specified in the Zoning Ordinance and any other
governing law or regulation, study, review and recommendation by
sound standards of zoning and land development practice, where
applicable.
(7) That the proposed use shall be in the best interest of the Borough
and for the convenience of the community and shall not adversely
affect the general welfare of the community.
C. Conditions. The Borough Council, in approving conditional use
applications, may attach conditions considered necessary to protect the
public welfare and the purposes listed above, including conditions
which are more restrictive than those established for other uses in the
same zone. These conditions shall be enforceable by the Codes
Compliance Officer, and failure to comply with such conditions shall
constitute a violation of this chapter and be subject to the penalties
described in this article.
D. Site plan approval. Any site plan presented in support of the conditional
use pursuant to § 220-122A shall become an official part of the record
for said conditional use. Approval of any conditional use will also bind
the use in accordance with the submitted site plan; therefore, should a
change in the site plan be required as part of the approval of the use,
the applicant shall revise the site plan prior to the issuance of a building
permit. Any subsequent change to the use on the subject property not
reflected on the originally approved site plan shall require the
obtainment of another conditional use approval.
E. Hearing procedures.
(1) Before voting on the approval of a conditional use, the Borough
Council shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public
notice. The Borough Council shall submit each such application to
the Borough Planning Commission to provide the Borough Planning
Commission with an opportunity to submit recommendations.
(2) Public notice, as defined herein, and written notice shall be given to
the applicant, the Codes Compliance Officer, such other persons as
the Borough Council shall designate by ordinance, and to any
person who has made timely request for the same. Written notices
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-122
1:637
shall be given at such time and in such manner as shall be
prescribed by ordinance or, in the absence of ordinance provision,
by rules of the Borough Council.
(3) The Borough Council may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearings.
(4) The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of
record before the Borough Council, and any other person, including
civic or community organizations, permitted to appear by the
Borough Council. The Borough Council shall have power to require
that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter
appearances in writing on forms provided by the Borough Council
for that purpose.
(5) The President or Acting President of the Borough Council shall
have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents
and papers, including witnesses and documents requested by the
parties.
(6) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
(7) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
(8) The Borough Council may keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be paid
by the applicant. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by
the Borough Council if the transcript is ordered by the Borough
Council, or shall be paid by the person appealing the decision of the
Borough Council if such appeal is made and, in either event, the
cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting
such copy or copies. In other cases, the party requesting the
original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
F. Time limitation.
(1) If a conditional use is granted, the necessary permit shall be
secured within six months. Then the applicant shall commence
construction or some other authorized action within six months of
permit issuance. All construction or other authorized actions shall
be completed within 12 months of permit issuance; however, the
Board may, upon written application for good cause, grant an
additional six-month extension from the date of permit issuance.
(2) Should the appellant or applicant fail to obtain the necessary
permits within said six-month period or having obtained the permit
§ 220-122 MANHEIM CODE § 220-122
1:638
should he fail to commence work thereunder within such six-month
period, it shall be conclusively presumed that the appellant or
applicant has waived, withdrawn or abandoned his application,
and all approvals and permits granted to him shall be deemed
automatically rescinded by the Borough Council.
(3) Should the appellant commence construction or alteration within
said six-month period but should he fail to complete such
construction or alteration within said twelve-month period, the
Borough Council may, upon 10 days' notice, in writing, rescind or
revoke the granted conditional use if the Borough Council finds
that no good cause appears for the failure to complete within such
twelve-month period and if the Borough Council further finds that
conditions have so altered or changed in the interval since the
granting of the conditional use that revocation or rescission of the
action is justified.85
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-122
1:639

ARTICLE VIII
Zoning Map Amendments
§ 220-123. Amendments. [Added 8-29-2000 by Ord. No. 569]
The Manheim Borough Zoning Map, as adopted and enacted April 13, 1993,
shall be amended, readopted and reenacted as follows:
A. The following tax parcels, presently designated and shown as part of
the Industrial (I) Zone, shall be redesignated and shown as part of the
Planned Industrial/Corporate Center (PC-1) Zone:
(1) Municipality 400, Map 8H, Block 1, Lot 1, containing 17.3 acres +/-
.
(2) Municipality 400, Map 8H, Block 2, Lot 1, containing 2.3 acres +/-.
(3) Municipality 400, Map 8H, Block 2, Lot 6, containing 7.2 acres +/-.
(4) Municipality 400, Map 8H2, Block 7, Lot 15, containing 0.59 acres
+/-.
(5) Municipality 400, Map 8H2, Block 7, Lot 16, containing 0.93 acres
+/-.
(6) Municipality 400, Map 8H2, Block 7, Lot 17, containing 1.40 acres
+/-.
(7) Municipality 400, Map 8H2, Block 7, Lot 19, containing 0.37 acres
+/-.
B. The following tax parcel, presently designated and shown as part of the
Industrial (I) Zone (north of Norfolk-Southern Railroad); and
Residential (R-1) (south of Norfolk-Southern Railroad) shall be
redesignated and shown as part of the Planned Industrial/Corporate
Center (PC-1) Zone:
(1) Municipality 400, Map 8H, Block 3, Lot 4, containing 44.7 acres +/-
.
§ 220-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-123
1:641
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1992 Code to 2012 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1992 Code Location in 2012 Code
Ch. 1, Administration and Government
Part 1, Planning Commission Ch. 49
Part 2, Auditor Ch. 5
Part 3, Elected Officials Ch. 60, Art. I
Part 4, Borough Manager Ch. 40
Part 5, Police Department Ch. 53
Part 6, Manheim Borough Authorities
A. Manheim Borough Authority Ch. 8, Art. I
B. Manheim Borough Water Authority Ch. 8, Art. II
Part 7, Pensions NI, see Ch. 45
Part 8, Firemen's Relief Association Ch. 25
Part 9A, Civil Service Commission Ch. 17
Part 9B, Rules and Regulations for the Civil
Service Commission
NI
Part 10, Shade Tree Commission Ch. 64
Part 11, Historic Commission Ch. 34
Part 12, Uniform Construction Code Board of
Appeals
Ch. 12
Ch. 2, Animals Ch. 84, Part 1
Ch. 3, Bicycles
Part 1, Licensing of Bicycles Ch. 88
Ch. 4, Buildings (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 5, Code Enforcement
Part 1, Uniform Construction Code Ch. 100, Art. II
Part 2, Property Maintenance Code Ch. 100, Art. I
Ch. 6, Conduct
§ 220-123 MANHEIM CODE § DT-1
1:642
Chapter/Title From 1992 Code Location in 2012 Code
Part 1, Unlawful Loitering Ch. 156, Art. II
Part 2, Prohibition of Throwing Objects in
Streets
Ch. 156, Art. I
Part 3, Prohibition of Discharging a Firearm Ch. 116
Part 4, Prohibition of Consumption and
Possession of Intoxicants in Public Places
Ch. 80, Art. I
Part 5, Curfew Ch. 105
Part 6, Noise Ch. 145
Ch. 7, Fire Prevention and Fire Protection
Part 1, Fireworks Display Permits Ch. 120
Ch. 8, Floodplains Ch. 124
Ch. 9, Grading and Excavating (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 10, Health and Safety
Part 1, Health Law Enforcement REP
Ch. 11, Housing (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 12, Libraries (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 13, Licenses, Permits and General Business
Regulations
Part 1, Solicitors Required to be Licensed Ch. 160, Art. I
Ch. 14, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
(Reserved)
Omitted
Ch. 15, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 205
Ch. 16, Parks and Recreation
Part 1, Park Rules and Regulations Ch. 152
Ch. 17, Planned Residential Development
(Reserved)
Omitted
Ch. 18, Sewers
Part 1, Sewer Use Regulations Ch. 172, Art. IV
Part 2, Sewer Connections Required Ch. 172, Art. II
Part 3, Sewer Rules and Regulations Ch. 172, Art. I
Part 4, Sewer Rates and Charges Ch. 172, Art. III
Ch. 19, Signs and Billboards (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 20, Solid Waste
Part 1, Solid Waste Disposal Ch. 184, Art. II
Part 2, Solid Waste Service Charge Ch. 184, Art. I
Ch. 21, Streets and Sidewalks
Part 1, Street Plan Ch. 190, Art. II
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:643
Chapter/Title From 1992 Code Location in 2012 Code
Part 2, Street Openings and Excavations Ch. 190, Art. V
Part 3, Sidewalks and Curbs Ch. 190, Art. III
Part 4, Obstructions Unlawful Ch. 190, Art. I
Part 5, Sledding on Streets and Sidewalks
Prohibited
Ch. 190, Art. IV
Part 6, Breaking Pavement or Surface of
Streets
Ch. 190, Art. VI
Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development
(Reserved)
Omitted
Ch. 23, Swimming Pools (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 24, Taxation, Special
Part 1, Earned Income Tax Repealed by Ord. No.
624; see now Ch. 195,
Art. III
Part 2, Emergency and Municipal Services
Tax
Repealed by Ord. No.
604; see now Ch. 195,
Art. II
Part 3, Per Capita Tax Repealed by Ord. No. 605
Part 4, Realty Transfer Tax Ch. 195, Art. I
Ch. 25, Trees (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 26, Water
Part 1, Regulations Ch. 210, Art. III
Part 2, Water Rates Ch. 210, Art. I
Part 3, Wells Ch. 210, Art. II
Ch. 27, Zoning Ch. 220
Appendix
A. Annexation of Territory Omitted
B. Bond Issues and Loans Omitted
C. Franchises and Services Omitted
D. Governmental and Intergovernmental
Affair
Omitted
E. Plan Approval Omitted
F. Public Property Omitted
G. Sewers Omitted
H. Streets and Sidewalks Omitted
I. Water Omitted
J. Zoning; Prior Ordinances Omitted
§ DT-1 MANHEIM CODE § DT-1
1:644
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
628 6-12-2012 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 45
629 6-12-2012 Peddling and soliciting:
food vendors in Market
Square amendment
Ch. 160, Art. II
630 10-9-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 205
631 11-13-2012 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
632 12-11-2012 Tax rate 2013 NCM
633 1-29-2013 Nonuniformed Employees
Pension Plan amendment
See Ch. 45
634 9-10-2013 Secondhand dealers Ch. 169
635 9-24-2013 Construction codes:
Property Maintenance
Code
Ch. 100, Art. I
636 12-10-2013 Tax rate 2014 NCM
637 1-14-2014 Civil service Ch. 17
638 4-8-2014 Bond NCM
639 5-27-2014 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
640 7-29-2014 Stormwater management Ch. 187
641 8-12-2014 Borough Authority
guarantee of debt
NCM
642 12-9-2014 Snow emergency routes NCM
643 Tax rate 2015 NCM
644 Affirmative vote of Council
members
NCM
645 Tax rate 2016 NCM
646 2-23-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 205
647 2-23-2016 Noise Ch. 145
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:645
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
648 3-29-2016 Subdivision and land
development
Ch. 192
649 3-29-2016 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 124
650 6-28-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
651
652
653 11-29-2016 Solid waste Ch. 184
654 12-13-2016 Establish Tax Rate for
2017
NCM
655 5-9-2017 MAWSA Refinancing NCM
656 12-12-2017 Compensation Amendment
for Non-Uniform Pension
NCM
657 12-12-2017 Tax Rate Reduction NCM
658 12-12-2017 Establish Tax Rate for
2018
NCM
659 7-31-2018 Construction Codes:
Property Maintenance
Code Amendment; Rental
Property: Residential
Rental Units Amendment
Ch. 100, Art. I; Ch.
166, Art. I
660 11-27-2018 Construction Codes:
Property Maintenance
Code Amendment; Streets
and Sidewalks: Unlawful
Obstructions Amendment
Ch. 100, Art. I; Ch.
190, Art. I
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
661 Establish Tax
Rate for 2019
NCM 7
662 Road Vacation NCM 7
663 Joint Purchase
of Equipment
NCM 7
664 7-9-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 205 7
665 Intergovernmental
Agreement
NCM 7
666 Bond NCM 7
§ DL-1 MANHEIM CODE § DL-1
1:646
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
667 11-12-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 220 7
668 11-26-2019 Solid Waste
Amendment
Ch. 184 7
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:647

BOROUGH of MANHEIM
LANCASTER COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
ORDINANCE# (a t/-~
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH of MANHEIM, COUNTY OF LANCASTER,
PENNSYLVANIA ENACTING THE SUBDIVISION AND LANO DEVELOPMENT
ORDINANCE AS CHAPTER 192 OF THE MANHEIM BOROUGH CODE OF
ORDINANCES AND PROVIDING COMPREHENSIVE REGULATIONS FOR
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT IN MANHEJM BOROUGH PURSUANT
TO THE PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE, AS AMENDED,
INCLUDING PROVIDING EXTENSIVE DEFINITIONS, PROVlDlNG A
METHODOLOGY OF ADMINISTRlNG THE ORDINANCE, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, THE COLLECTION OF FEES AND COSTS, ESTABLISHING
PLANNED PROCESSING PROCEDURES ANO INFORMATION TO BE INCLUDED
ON OR WITH PLANS UNDER CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES, PROVIDING FOR
ASSURANCES }'OR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF MUNCIPALITTY
MANDATED IMPROVEMENTS AND THE RELEASE THEREOF, ESTABLISHING
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTS AND STUDIES, PROVIDING
PARTICULAR PROVISTONS SEPARATELY RELATING TO URBAN AREAS AND
RURAL AREAS, PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS, AND PROVIDING A
J\"UMBER OF APPENDICES CONSJSTENT TllEREWITII FOR PURPOSES OF
IMPLEMENTING THE SAME, THEREBY PROVIDING A COMPREHENSIVE
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE UNDRR THE
PROVISIONS OF THE PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE.
I. Pursuant to Section 3 of the Manheim Borough Comprehensive Plan (Comprehensive
Plan) the Borough Council finds that it is in the best interest of its citizens to adopt a
comprehensive Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, under the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code; and
2. This Ordinance is particularly consistent with Section 3.2.3 of rhe Comprehensive Plan in
that it encourages the adoption of a Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance that is
tailored to the specific needs of the Borough.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Borough Council of'
Manheim Borough, and it is hereby enacted and ordained by the authority of the same, after
review and consultation with the Lancaster County Planning Co1n111iss ion and the Manheim
Bornugh Planning Commission, Public Notice and a hearing, that the fo llowing Ordinance be
adopted:
Manheim Borough
Suhdivisinn und Land Development Ordinnncc
Article I : Genernl Provisions
5
Lnncnster County, Pcnnsyl~onia
updated Janu:ir) 4, 2016
-
BOROUGH OF MANHEIM DRAFT
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
PART I: GENERAL
ARTICLE I
Section I. I
Section 1.2
Section 1.3
Section 1.4
Section 1.5
Section 1.6
Section 1.7
Section 1.8
Section 1.9
Section l . I 0
Section 1.11
ARTICLE2
Section 2. l
Section 2.2
ARTICLE 3
Section 3. 1
Section 3.2
Section 3.3
Section 3.4
ARTICLE. 4
Section 4.1
Section 4.2
Section 4.3
ARTICLES
Section 5.0
ection 5.1
Secti on 5.2
Section 5.3
ARTICLE 6
Section 6.1
Section 6.2
Section 6.3
Section 6.4
Section 6.S
Section 6.6
Section 6.7
ARTICLE 7
Section 7.1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
0 EN ERA L PR 0 VIS IONS ---------------------------------------------------------6
Tit I e ------------------------···--------------------------------------------------6
PL1rpose and Intent ------------------------------------------------------------6
Statutory Authority -----------------------------------------------------?
Appl icabi Ii ty ---------------····--·-··--------------------------------------------7
Enactment----------------------------···-------------------------------------···-8
I ntcrpretation, Conflict and Separabi I ity-----------------------------------------8
Saving Provis ion ---------------------------------------------------------9
Re pea I of Previous Ordinance --------------------------------------------------9
Ordinance Amend men ts ---------------------------------------------------------9
Enforcement and Penalties---------------------------------------------------------- l 0
Reappointment of the Planning Commission----------------------------------------- 11
LANGUAGE AND DEFINITIONS---------------------------------- 12
General Rules of Constrnction------------------------------------------------ 12
Definitions ----------------------------------------------·---------------------- 13
ADM IN lSTRA TI.ON--------------------------------------------------------- 28
Modifications ------------------------------------------------------------- 28
Acceptance or Conditions of Plan A pprova.1------------------------------------ 30
Chai lcnges and /\ ppeals------------------------------------------------------ 30
Pees --------------------------------------------------------------------- ---- 3 0
PLAN PROCESSING PROCEDURES ------------------------------------32
Sketch Plan---------------------------------------------------------------- 32
Pre I itn inary Plan-----------------------·---------------------------------------· 3 3
Final Pl an ------------------------------------------------------------------ ----------- 3 7
INFORMATION TO BE INCLUDED ON OR WITH PLANS------------- 43
General ----------------------------------------------------------------- 4 3
Sketch r I an -------------------------------------------------------------- 4 3
Pre Ii mi nary Plan--------------------------·----------------------------··-- 46
Fina I Pl an ------------------------------------------------------------------ 52
ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION f MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS -----57
Im prove men ls Required------------------------------------------------------------- 57
Plan Im prove men ts - ------------------------------------------------------------ 5 7
Improvement Construction Guarantee-------------------------------------- 58
Inspection of 1 m prove me nts -------------------------------------------------- S 9
Release of Funds--------------------------------------------------------- 62
Dedication of Improvements----------------------------------------------------- 63
Mai ntenancc Guarantee----------------------------------------------------------- 63
SUPPLEMP.NTAL REQUIREMENTS, TESTS, AND STUDIES ---------------64
Traffic Impact Study----·--------------------------------------------- 64
Section 7.2
Section 7.3
Section 7.4
Historic and Cullural Resources---------------------------------------- 65
Parks and Open Space--------------------------------------------------- 68
H yd rogeo logic Report--------------------------------------------------- 73
PART II: URBAN AREAS
ARTICLE 8
Section 8.1
Section 8.2
Section 8.3
Section 8.4
St!ction 8.5
Section 8.6
Section 8.7
Section 8.8
Section 8.9
Section 8. 10
Section 8.1 1
ARTICLE 9
Section 9.1
Section 9.2
Seclion 9.3
Section 9.4
Section 9.5
Section 9.6
Section 9.7
Section 9.8
Section 9.9
Section 9. 10
Section 9.11
Section 9. 12
Section 9 .13
Section 9. 14
Section 9 .15
ARTICL8 10
Sec tion 10.1
ARTICLE 11
Section 11 . I
APPENDICES
Appendix J\
Appendix B
Appendix C
Appendix D
Append ix D-1
Appendix E
Appendix F
DES IGN STANDARDS FOR URBAN GROWTH AREAS------------------ 75
General---------------------------------------------------------------------- 75
Streets, Access Drives, and Driveways----------------------------------- 76
Parking F aci Ii ties-------------------·---------·----------------------------- 88
13 locks and Lots-------------------------------------------------------------- 92
Easements---------------------------------------------------------------- 94
Survey Monuments and Markers------------------------------------------- 95
Sanitary Wastewater Disposal ---------------------------------------------- 96
Water Su pp 1 y----------·------------------------------------------------------------ 96
I lazards Associated with Carbonate Rocks --------·---------------------------- 97
l .. andscapi ng-------------------------------------------------------------------- 97
Lighting -----------------------------------------------------------------102
Dl3SIGN STANDARDS FOR INF'ILL/REDEVE.LOPMENT AREAS------·--- 106
General -------·------------------·---------------------------------------------------1 06
Site Layout/Development Pattern------------------------------------------------ I 07
Streets. Access Drives and Driveways----------------------------------------1 11
Traffic Signs-----------------------------------------------------------------119
Dwell ing Un it Identification ------------------------------------------------ I 19
Parking. raci 1 ities------------------------------------------------------------ I 19
Pedestrian Access and Circulation-------------------------------------124
Preservation of Natural, Historic, and Cultural Features ------------------125
Landscaping ------·----------------------------------------------------126
Lighting -·---------------------------------------------------------------------- 126
Easen1ents-------------------------------------------------------------------- 129
Survey Monuments and Markcrs-----------------------------------------------130
Sanitary Sewage Disposal -------------------------------------------------131
Water Supply----------------------------------------------------------------- 131
Hazards Associated with Carbonate Rocks --------------------------------·----131
CONSERVATION SUBD!YISIONS---------------------------------------132
Reserved for future Use ---------------------------------------------------- 132
MOBILE 1 IOME PARKS ----------------------------------------------------- 133
General Standards-------------------------------------------------------------13 3
Certi tic al ions--------------------------------------------------------------- 134
Application for Consideration of a Subdivision and/or Land Development Plan------- 139
Application ror Consideration or a Modification ------------------------------ 141
Memorandum of Understanding --------------------------------------------- 142
Memorandum or Understanding and f inancial Security ---------------------144
Notice of Approval of New Street Name(s)-------------------------------148
General Design Guidelines with llistoric Features------------------------------ 149
Manheim Borough 2
Subdivision and IA1nd Development Ordinance
rnble of Contents
Lancaster County, Pennsylva11ia
updolcd fanuary 4, 20t5
Appendix 0
Appendix 1-1
Checklist for Street & Access Drive Design--------------------------------- 150
Street I Right-of-Way Matrix --------------------------------------------1 SI
Manheim Boroush
ubdivision and Land Development Ordinance
roble of Contents
3
Lancustcr Coun ty, Pennsylvania
updated January 4. 20 15
1. l TITLE
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
This Ordinance shall be known. cited and referred to as the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance of Manheim Borough (hereinafter ''Ordinance·').
12 PURPOSEANDINTENT
This Chapter is adopted for the fol lowing purposes:
A. To promote and protect the public health, safety. morals and welfare.
B. To promote orderly. efficient, integrated and harmonious development in the
Township.
C. To require Sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation in keeping
with the standards of quality existing in the Township and to alleviate peril from
fire, flood, soi I erosion, excessive noise, smoke or other menace.
0. To coordinate proposed Streets and other Improvements with existing or proposed
Streets, parks or other reatures of any applicable Township Comprehensive Plan
and to prov ide for Storm Water management facili ties, water supply, Sewage
disposal and other appropriate utility serv ices.
E. To encourage excellence in the design and maintenance of open spaces for
recreation. light and air, and the preservation and conservation of the natural
amenities characteristic or the Township and its residential, commercial, industrial
and public areas.
F. To ecure the protection of water resources and Watercourses.
C. ro ensure that developments are environmentally sound, by requiring preservation
of the natural and hi stori cal ly significant features of the areas to be developed to
the greatest exLent practicable, to maintain the economic well-being of the
Township, and to prevent blight. Runoff and pollution.
H. To ensure conformance of Subdivision and Land Development plans with the
Manheim Central Region Comprehensive Plan 20 I 0, with the Borough Zoning
Ordinance [Chapter 27), and with public improvement plans, and to ensure
coordination of intergovernmental improvement plans and programs.
I. To promote excellence in the plann ing and design of Buildings, strectscapes,
parks, and other components of the public realm.
J. To secure equitable treatment or al l Subdivision and Land Development Plans by
prov iding uni form procedures and standards.
K. To establish provisions governing the standards by which Streets shall be
designed and improved, and walkways, curbs. street lights, fire hydrants. water
and Sewage facilities and other Improvements shall be installed as a condition
precedent to final approval of plans.
Manheim Borough
Subdivision and Lnnd Developmen1 Ordinance
Article I: General Provisions
6
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
updated Januttry 4. 2016
1.3 STATUTORY AUTHORJTY
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247 as reenacted and amended, (hereinafter the
PMPC).
l.4 APPLICABILITY
1.4.1. Territorial Application.
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all Subdivisions and Land Developments within
the corporate limits of Manheim Borough.
1.4.2 General Application.
No Subdivision or Land Development of any Lot, Tract or Parcel of land located within Manheim
Borough shall be effected and no Street. sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other
facilities in connection therewith shall be laid oul, constructed, opened, or dedicated for travel or
public use, or for the common use of occupants of Buildings thereon. unless and until in strict
accordance with this Ordinance. Furthermore, no property shall be developed, no Building shall
bt:: ercctt::d and no Site lmprovemenlS shall be completed except in strict accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance. Compliance with this Ordinance may only be achieved if such
Subdivision and/or Land development is also consistent with the municipal SWMO and any and
all other applicable Ordinances, laws. and regulations of the Borough, County. Commonwealth.
and United States of America.
1.4.3 General Prohibition.
No Lot in a Subdivision may be sold or transferred; no permit to erect, alter or repair any
Building upon land in a Subdivision or Land Development may be issued; and no Building may
be erected in a Subdivision or Land Development, unless, in strict accordance with this
Ordinance, and until construction of any required Site Improvements in connection therewith has
been completed or guaranteed in the manner prescribed herein.
1.4.4 Pending Applications.
rhis Ordinance shall not affect an Application for approval of a Subdivision and/or Land
Development Plan which is pending action at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance and
is covered by Section 508 of the PMPC, in which case the Applicant shall be entitled to a decision
in accordance with the governing ordinances as they stood at the time when the Application for
such Plan was duly filed. AJditionally. this Ordinance shall not affect any suit or prosecution,
pending or lo be instituted, to enforce any provision of the Manheim Borough Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance, as amended, or any Hpplicablc predecessor regulations on an act
done, contract executed, or liability incurred prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
1.4.5 Previously Approved Plans.
If an Applicant has received approval of a Preliminary or Final Plan prior to the effective date of
this Ordinance, no provision of this Ordinance shall be applied to adversely affect the right of the
Applicant to commence and complete any aspect of the approved Preliminary or Final Plan in
Manheim Borough
Subdivision and Land Dcvclf\pment Ordinance
Article I : General Provisions
7
Lancaster County, Pennsylvanin
updated Jnnunry 4, 2016
accordance with the terms of such approval within five (5) years of the date of such application,
nor shall any provision of this Ordinance be construed to waive the obligations imposed upon an
Appl icant to complete a previously approved Preliminary or Final Plan, including the installation
of all Improvements, in strict compliance with the requirements of such approval. When approval
of a Final Plan has been preceded by approval of a Prel iminary Plan, the five (S) years shall be
counted from the date of Preliminary Plan approval. rr there is any doubt as to the terms of
approval, the terms shall be construed in light of the provisions of the governing ordinances as
they stood at the time when the Application for such approval was duly filed.
1.4.6 Existing lmproveme11ts.
lf existing Improvements. including Storm Water Management Facilities, on the Subj ect T ract clo
not meet the tequircments of this Ordinance and/or not functioning properly, then such
Improvements must be designed and upgraded to meet the requirements of this Ordinance in
conjunction with an Application for Development.
1.5 ENACTMENT
This Ordinance is hereby adopted and made effective as of April 1, 20 16.
1.6 INTERPUETATION, CONFLICT AND SEPARABILITY
t.6.1 Inter pretation.
In their interpretation and appl icat ion, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promolion of the public health. safety and geneidl welfare, and
shall be construed to achieve the purposes for which this Ordinance was adopted.
1.6.2 Connict with Public and Pr ivutc Provisions.
A. Public Provisions.
This Ordinance is not intended lo interfere with. abrogate, or annul any other ordinance.
rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except as provided in this Ordinance.
Where any provision of this Ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed
by any other provision of this Ordinance or any other ordinance, rule or regulation,
statute, or other provision of law, the provision that is more restr ict ive or imposes higher
standards shall control.
B. Private Provisions.
Manheim Borough
This Ordinance is not intended to abrogate tiny Easement. covenant. or other private
agreement or restriction, provided that where the provisions of this Ordinance are more
restri ctive or impose higher slandards or regulations than such Easement, covenant, or
other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of this Ordinance shall govern.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no Easement, covenant. or other private agreement or
restrictions shall be approved or recorded unless it is consistent with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
8
Subdivision nnd Land Development Orclint1nco:: Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
Article I: General Provi~ions updated Jilnuary -1 , 2016
1.6.3 Separability.
If any patt or provision of this Ordinance or the appl ication of this Ordinance to any person or
circumstances is adjudged invalid by any courl of competent jurisdiction, such j udgmenl shall be
con fined in its operation to the part, provision or application directly involved in the controversy
in which the judgment shall be rendered. It shall not affect or impair the validity and continued
enforcement of any other parts or provisions of this Ordinance or the appl ication of them to other
persons or circumstances. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Borough Council of Manheim
Borough that this Ordinance would have been adopted if such provision has not been included
herein.
1.7 SAVING PROVISION
This Ordinance shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of,
prior existing Subdivision or Land Develop1m:n1 regulations, or as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penally accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any
person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the Borough under any section or provision
existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained
by any person, firm or corporation by lawful action of the Borough, except as shall be expressly
provided for in this Ordinance.
1.8 REPEAL OF PREVlOUS OROTNANCE
Upon the adoption of this Ordinance, all provisions of the Lancaster County Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance of 1991, as amended, are expressly repealed in their entirety lo
land within lhe corporate limits of Manheim Borough.
1.9 ORDINANCE AMENDMENT
1.9.1 Purpose.
For the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general wel fa re, amendments lo this
Ordinance may. from time lo time. be proposed pursuant to lhe provisions of the PMPC.
l.9.2 Procedure.
A II proposals for amendments shall be made in accordance with the following procedure:
A. Proposal.
Amendments to this Ordinance may. from time to time, be proposed by the Borough
Council on itf; own motion, or by the Planning Commission. In addition. any Landowner
may propose an amendment to this Ordi11ance, in which event the Borough Council. at its
sole option, may ini tiate procedures for amendment by referring the proposed amendment
to the Planning Commission.
B. Review by Planning Commission.
In the case of an amendment other than that proposed by the Planning Commission, the
Borough Council shall submit each such amendment to the Planning Cotn111ission for
Manheim Borough
Subdivision ond Land Ol:velopmcnl Ordinance
Article I : General Provisio n ~
9
Lancaster County, l>cnns)•lvania
updated January 4, 2016
recommendations at least forty-five (45) days prior to the date or the Public Hearing on
the proposed amendment. Tbc Borough CoLtncil shall also submit the proposed
amendment to the Lancaster County Planning Commiss ion for recommendations at least
forty- five (45) days prior to the date of the Public Hearing.
C. Action by Borough Council.
Amendments shal l be approved or disapproved by the Borough Council after a Public
I !earing held pursuant to Pub I ic Notice, as delined in Section 2.2 in accordance with the
procedural reqlliremen ts of Section 505 and 506 of Act 247 as amended.
D. Notification of Municipal Action.
Within thirty (30) days of said approval, the Borough Council shall forward a certified
copy of any amendment to this Ordinance the Lancaster County Planning Commission.
1.10 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
1.10.l Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the l301·ough Council, Borough Solicitor, and the Borough Zoning Officer to
enforce this Ordinance and to bring any violations of these regulations to the attention of the
Borough SolicitOr. formal enforcement proceedings may be initiated by the Borough Ma11agcr in
the name of the Borough after authorization by the Borough.
I. 10.2 Penalties.
A. Preventive Remedies.
Manheim Borough
J. In addition to other remedies, the Dorough may insti tute and maintain appropriate
actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abale violations, to prevent
unlawful construction, to recover damages, a11d to prevent illegal occupancy of a
Building. Structure or premises. The description by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of sel ling or
transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from
the remedies herein provided.
2. The Borough may refuse lo Lsue any permit or grant any approval necessary to
further improve or develop any real property which has been developed or which
has resulted from a Subdivision of real property in violation of this Ordinance.
This authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any of the
following:
(a) The owner/owners of record at the time of violation;
(b) The vcndec or lessee of the owner of record al any Lime of such violation
without regard as to whether such vendcc or lessee had actual or
constn1ctive knowledge of the violation;
lO
Subdivision and Land Dcvclop111cn1 Ordinance
Article I : General Provisions
Lancaster County, Pcnnsy tvonin
updnred Janunry 4. 2016
(c) T he current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the
time of violation without regard as to whether such current owner had
actual or constructive knowledge of the action; or
(d) The vendee or Jessee of the current owner of record who acquired the
property subsequent 10 1he time of violation without regard as to whether
such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the
violation.
3, As an additional condition for issi1ance of an approval to any such owner. current
owner, vendee or lessee for the development of any such real property, the
township may require compliance with the conditions that would have been
applicable to the property at the lime the Applicant acquired an interest in such
real property.
Jl. Enforcement Remedies.
1. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the provisions
of this ordinance shall, upon being found liable thereof in a civi l enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment of not more than ftve
hundred dollars ($500) plus all court costs including reasonable attorney's fees
incurred by the Borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the determination of a violation by
the Magisterial District Judge. Ir the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment. the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedures. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge determining
that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good fai th basis
for the person, partnership or corporation violating the Ordinance to have been
believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to
have been only one such violation until the fiflh day fol lowing the date of the
determination or a violation by the Magisterial District Judge and therea~cr each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
2. The Lancaster County Cou11 of Common Pleas. upon petition, may grant an order
of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and j udgment.
J. Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any
person or entity other than the Borough the right to commence any action for
enforcement pursuant to this SecLion.
I.I I REAPPOINTMENT OF rLANNING COMMISSION
Pursuant to Section 20 I of the PMPC, the Borough Council hereby delegates to the current
Manheim Borough Planning Commission the duty to exercise the duties of review, pursuant to
the provisions of this Ordinance and as may be otherwise applicable llnder I he PMPC and other
statutes and regulations. To the extent necessary, the existing Manheim Borough Planning
Commission membership is preserved and is hereby reappointed for the terms remaining of their
current appointmtints.
Manheim Borough
Subdivision and 1...ind Dewlopmem Ordinance
Article I: General Provi:;ion~
11
Loncosler County, Pennsylvania
up(Jat..:d January 4. 2016
ARTICLE 2
LANGUAGE AND DEFINITIONS
2.1 GENERAL RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
The language set forth in the text of this Ordinance shall be interprcled in accordance with the
fo llowing ru les of construction:
2.l.1 Tense and Form.
Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses or derivative forms.
2.1.2 Number.
Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and words in the plural number
shall include the singular number.
2.1.3 Gender.
The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. The feminine gender shall include the
masculine and neuter. The neuter gender shall include the masculine and remininc.
2. l.4 Person.
The word ''person" includes an individual, firm. assoc1at1011, organization, partnership, trust.
estate, company, corporation or any other similar entity.
2.1.5 Building.
The word "Building'' includes the word "Structure" and shall be construed as if followed by the
words "or a part thercofl'.
2.1.6 Lot.
The word "Loi" includes the words "plot". '·Plat". "Tract", and "Parcel".
2.1. 7 Watercourse.
The word "Watercourse'' includes the words "drain," "ditch" and "Stream".
2.1.8 Sha ll nn<l May.
The words ''shall," "must" and ·'will" are mandatory in nature and establish an obligation or duty
to comply with the particular provision. The words "may'' and "should,. are pennissive.
Manheim Borough
Subdivision :Ind Lond l)cvelopment Ordinance
Article 2: Longuagc and Definitions
12
Lancost~r Counly, Pcnn~ylvania
updMcd January 4, 2016
2.l.9 Time.
The time, within which any act required by this Ordinance is to be performed, shall be cornpuled
by excluding the first day and including the last day. However, if the last day is a Saturday or
Sunday or a holiday declared by the United States Congress or the Pennsylvania General
Assembly. it shall also be excluded. ·n1e word "day'' shal l mean a calendar day. unless otherwise
indicated.
2. t.10 Undefined Terms.
Any words not defined in this Ordinance or in Section 107 of the MPC shall be construed as
defined in standard dictionary usage.
2.1. t 1 lllustrations and Tables.
In case or any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Ordinance and any
caption. illustration or table, the text shall control. No caption, illustration or table shall be
construed to limit the scope or intent of the text of this Ordinance.
2.2 DEFlNlTlONS
Por the purposes of this Ordinance, the followi11g terms shall have the following meanings:
Abutting. Having a common border with. or being separnted from such common border by a
Right-of-Way. Alley or Easement.
Accessory. Customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal object located on the same
Lot.
Acces.s' Drive. J\ n improved cartway designed and constructed to provide for vehicular movement
between a public road and a Tract of land containing any use other than one single-family
dwelling unit or farm.
At(i<Jining lot. A Lot that shares nl l or part of a common point or line with another Lot.
Agricultural 1.-aml!Areas. Land used exclusively for the cultivation of the soil, the produclion of
crops or livestock, or the science of forestry; also, land diverted from agriculturnl use by an active
Federal farm program, provided the diverted land has a conservation cover of grass, legume, trees
or wi ldlife shrubs. Agricultural Land may include, to a minor degree, farmsteads inhabited by the
cultivat0r of the land, housing for farm employees, and land used ror preparation of agricultural
pmducts by the cultivator of the land.
Average Daily Tm/fie (ADT). Computed by application of a day of the week by month factor to
an average twenty-four (24) hour lraflic count. Such in formation is available in the latest volume
of the Pennsy lvania Department of Transportation Tr-affic Data Collect ion and Factor
Development Report.
Applicant. A Landowner or Developer who has tiled an Application for approval to engage in any
regulated activities as defined in this Ordinance.
Manheim Borough
' ubdi vis ion nnd Land Development Ordinance
Article 2: Language nnd Definitions
13
L.1ncostcr County, Pennsylvania
updnred January 4. 2016
Application for Development. Every application, whether Preliminary or fina l, required to be
liled and approved prior to start of construction or development, including, but not limitod to, an
Application for a Building permit, for the approval of a Subdivision Plal or Plan, or for the
approval of a Development Plan.
Block. Land surrounded on all sides by Streets (measured at the Right-of-Way) or other
transportation or utility Rights-of-Way, or by physical barriers such as bodies of water or
Common Open Spaces.
BMP's (Be.«I Mmurgement Practices). Activities, faci lities, designs, measures, or procedures
used to manage Storm Water impacts from regulated activities, lo meet state water quality
requirements, to promote groundwater recharge, and lo otherwise meet the purposes of this
Ordinance.
Borough. Oorough of Manheim, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
Borough Co1111ci/. The Council of the Borough of Manheim.
Borough Engineer. A professional Engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, duly appointed a the G:ngineer for the Borough.
1Joro11glt Manager. The duly appointed Manager for the Borough.
Borough Solicitor. The licensed attorney designated by the Borough Counci l to furnish legal
assistance for the administration of this Ordinance.
Borough Zoning Officer. The duly constituted Borough official designated to administer and
enforce the Borough Zoning Ordinance.
Buffer. A strip of land with Landscaping, fences and/or walls located between two (2) uses, or
between one (I) use and a public Right-of-Way, that is intended to mitigate negative impacts,
such as visual and noise, of the more imense use on the less intense use or on the public Right-ofWay.
Buffer Area. A strip of land wi thin a public Right-of-Way which may include Sig.nage, Street
trees, and curbs, gutters, or Swales.
1Juildi11g. Any enclosed or open Structure, other than a boundary wall or fence, occupying more
than four ( 4) square feet of area and/or having a roof supported by columns, piers, or walls.
Manufactured Homes and Mobile I Jomes shall be considered as Buildings.
B11if<li11g, Accessory. A dutached, subordinate Building, the use of which is customarily incidental
and subordinate to that of the Principal Building. which is located on the same Lot as that
occupied by the Principal Building. Parm Buildings not intended for habitation are considered to
be Accessory Buildings.
Buildi11g, Principal. A Building that is enclosed within cxtctior walls or firewalls, and is built,
erected and framed of component structural pa1is. The Principal Ouilding is also designed for
housing. shel ter, enclosure and support of individuals. animals or property of any kind, and is a
main Structure on a given Lot.
Mnnheim Borough
Subdivision and Land Ocvctopm<ml Ordinonce
A11icle 2: Language and Definitions
14
Lancnsler County. Pennsylvania
updated January 4. 2016
Building Setback l ine. The actual l ine of that face of the f3uilding nearest an adjacent Right-ofWay
or Street L ine. This face includes sun parlors and covered porches. whether enclosed or
unenclosed, but does not incluuc stairs.
Cttpacity. The ma.ximum number of vehicles that can be expected to pass over a given section of
roadway or on a specific lane.
CarlWay. The pot1ion of a Street Right-of-Way, paved or unpaved, customarily used by motorized
and non-motorized vehicles in the regular course or travel over the Street.
Clear Sight Triangle. J\n area of unobstructed vision at Street intersections defined by I ines of
sight between points at a given distance from the intersection of the Street centerlines.
Common Open Space. Any area of land or water, or a combination of land and water, within a
tfovelopment Site, designed and intended for use by all residents of the development or the
general public. Land included within the Right-of-Way Lines of Streets shall not be classified as
Common Open Spac~. Common Open Spaces shall 1101 include required open areas nor setbacks
between Buildings and between Buildings and Street rights-of-way. Driveways, access drives,
parking areas and property lines of the development. No dwelling unit, residential accessory
Buildings or parking or loading areas may be located within Common Open Spaces.
Com111011111ealtl1. Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C()m1111111ity Water Supply. A uti lity opernted by a Borough or a company, regulated by the
Public Utility Commission, which supplies potable, domestic water for use by more than one ( 1)
household, business or institution.
Compre'1e11sive Plan. The official public document prepared and adopted in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, consisting of maps. charts and textual material, that
constitutes a policy guide to decisions about the physical and social development of the Rorough.
Comlomi11ittm. A form of ownership of real property, as defined in the Pennsy lvania Uniform
Condominium Act of 1980, A form of property ownership providing for individual ownership of
a specific dwelling unit or other space not necessari ly on ground level, together with un undivided
interest in the land or other parts of the Structure in common with other owners.
Co11tig11ous. Lots are Contiguous when al least one ( I) boundary I inc of one Lot touches a
boundary line or lines of another Lot.
County. Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
Dedicatio11. The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for general public use.
Deed. A written instrument whereby an estate in real property is conveyed.
Density, Gross. T he number or dwelling units or units of occupancy per gross Lot Area acre (i.e.,
the total area within the Deeded property lines without exception).
Manheim Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
Aniclc 2: Language and 11efinitions
15
L:lncaster County. Pennsylvania
updmed January 4, 2016
Densi(v, Net. The number of dwelling units in relation to the area or land of a. Parcel in use or
proposed to be used for residential purposes, exclusive of public rights-of-way.
DEP. The Pennsyl vania Department of Environmental Protection. or any agency successor
thereto.
Designated Growth Area (DGA). A region within a County or countit:s described in a Municipal
or Multi-Municipal Plan that preferably includes and surrounds a city, borough or village, and
within which residential and mixed-use development is permitted or planned for at densities of
one ( I) unit to the acre or more. commercial, industrial and institu tional uses arc permitted and
planned for, and publ ic infrastruccure services are provided or planned.
Detention Basin. An impoundment structure designed to manage Storm Water Runoff by
temporarily storing the Runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate.
Developer. A person, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity, or any responsible
person therein or agent thereof that undertakes any regulated activity of this Ordinance.
Development Plan. The provisions for development, including a Planned Residential
Development., a Subdivision Plat or Plan and/or a Land Development Plat or Plan. all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk or Buildings and other Structures. intensity of use or density or
development, Streets, ways and parking facilities, Common Open Space and public fac il ities. T he
phrase "provisions of the Development Plan" when used in thi s Ordinance shall mean the written
and graphic materials referred to in this definition.
Dr(fi11age Easeme11t. /\ right granted by a Landowner to a grantee, allowing the use of private
land for Storm Water management, drainage, or conveyance purposes.
Drlpli11e. A line marking the outer edges of the branches of the tree.
Driveivay. An improved, private cartway designed and constructed to provide vehicular
movement between a public road and a Tract of land serving up to four (4) single family dwelling
unit or a farm.
Easeme11t. A strip of land granted for limited use of property by the Landowner for a public or
quasi-public or private purpose. and within which the owner of the property shall not have the
right to make use of the land in a manner that violates the right of t he grantee.
Elevatio11. T l1e ve11ica l alignment of a surface. as it exists or as it is made by cut and/or Iii l.
Eugi11eer. A professional Engineer licensed as such in tile Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E11viro11menlal Cove11a11t. A servitude ar ising under an environmental response proj ect which
imposes activity and use limitation. (On December 18, 2007, Governor Ridge signed the Uniform
Environmental Covt:nants Act (UECA) into law as Act 68 of 2007. Section 65 l?(a)( 1) of UECA
requires the use of Environmental Covt:nants whenever engineering controls or institutional
controls are necessary to demonstrate attainment of an Act 2 remediation standard for any
cleanup conducted under any applicable Pennsylvania environmental law. The covenant provides
a tool to ensure that the conditions allowing for a risk-based cleanup will continue i11 the future.)
Manheim Borough
Subdivision and Lend Di:vclopmcnt Or<linonce
Art icle 2: Language and L>cfiniliuns
16
Lancnster Count), Pennsylvania
updated January 4. 20 16
E11viro11me11tal~y Sem·itive Areas. Slopes greater than 15%, shallow bedrock (located within 6
feet of ground surface), Wetlands, natural heritage areas and other areas designated as
Conservation or Preservation areas in Greenscapes. the Green I nfrastructure clement of the
County Comprehensive Plan. where encroachment by Land Development or land disturbance
results in degradation of the natural resource.
Existing Wooded Area. A biolog,ical community dominated by trees and other woody plants
covering a land area of 'It acre or more. Existing Wooded Areas includes areas that have at least
25 trees per ~ acre with at least n fly (50%) percent of those trees having a two-inch or greater
caliper at 4.5 feet above the ground and larger.
Flagpole. A narrow extension of property on a Lot or Parcel from the bui ldable area of a Lot to
the public Right-of-Way, and which is not part of the Lot Area, but serves as access to the Lot or
Parcel. Sec also Lot definition.
Floodplain. Any land are susceptible to inundation by water from any natural source or
delineated by applicable Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance
Administration Flood I lazard Boundary - Mapped as being a special nood hazard area. Also, the
area of inundation which functions as a storage or holding area for floodwater to a width required
to contain a base flood of which there is a one percent (1 %) chance: of occu1Ting in any given
year. The Ploodplain contains both the noodway and the flood fringe.
Floor Elevatiofl. rhe Elevation of the lowest level of a particular Building, including the
basement.
Foorcnndle. A unit of light intensity stated in lumens per square foot and measurable with an
II luminance meter or light meter.
Frontage. The horizontal or curvilinear distance along the Street Line upon which a Lot abuts.
Fully Sllielded. A light constructed in such a manner that all light emitted by the fixture, either
directly from the lamp or a diffusing clement, or indirectly by renection or refraction from any
part of the tum inaire. is projected below the horizontal.
Future Access Strip. A Right-of-Way rcscrveu for the future Improvement of a Street.
GeoffJ11ist. A professional Geologist registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Glare. The sensation produced by lighting that causes an annoyance. discomfort. or loss in visual
performance and visibility to the eye.
Governing Body. The Council of the Borough of Manheim wilh the final decision-making,
budgeting and appointing authority of a general pLirposc unit of government.
Historic Feature. Any district, Site, Building Structure, or object that meets one or more of the
following criteria:
A. Is listed or may be determined to be eligible to be listed on the National Register of
Historic Places either individually or as a contributing resource.
Mnnhcim l~ornugh
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
Art icle 2: Language and Definitions
17
Lancast1:r Cou111y. Pcnnsylvunia
updated January 4, 20 16
B. ls listed on the LancasLer County Historic Sites Survey or on any officially adopted
Municipal inventory or historic resources and is determined by a qualified historic
preservation professional to retain the historic characteristics that qua Ii fied it for said list.
C. Is determined by a qualified historic preservation professional to be historically or
architecturally significant.
Hodum Year. The anticipated opening year of a development, assuming full buildoltt and
occupancy.
lllumi11a11ce. 1'he quantity of light measured in rootcandles or Lux.
lmperviou:i Surface. A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious
surfaces (or areas) shall include. but are not limited to, roofs, additional indoor living spaces,
patios, garages. storage sheds and similar Structures, and any new Streets and sidewalks. Any
surface area proposed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious,
unless designed and maintained as an infiltration !3M P. Decks, parking areas, and Driveway areas
are not counted as Impervious Surfaces if they do not prevent infiltration.
Improvement. Physical changes to the land, including. but not limited to, Buildings, Streets,
curbs, gutters, Streetlights and signs, water mains, hydrants, sanitary sewer mains, including
Laterals to the Street Right-of-Way Lines, storm drainage lines, Storm Water management
Structures, walkways, recreational facil ities, Common Open Space Improvements, shade trees,
Buffer or screen plantings, and all other additions to the Tract which arc required by ordinance or
arc deemed necessary to result in a complete Subdivision or Land Development in the fullest
sense of the term.
Improvement, Public. Improvements for which the Borough may ultimately assume the
responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may effect an Improvement for which
Municipal responsibility is established.
lmlige1to11s Species. Plants which have not been introduced by man and thrive in an area where
it is considered native.
fl~fill. Development of land accessible to infrastructure that is within a Designated Growth Area
or Rural Center and is generally surrounded by development and has been bypassed, remained
vacant, and/or is underused.
lnj111e11ce Area. An area that contains eighty percent (80%) or more of the Trips that wi ll be
attracted to a development Site.
fm!(tsive Species. Plants which grow quickly and aggressively, spreading, and displacing other
plants. lnvasivcs typically are introduced into a region far from their native habitat.
Land Developmem. The development of property as specified below:
A. T he lmprove111cnt of one (I) Lot or two (2) or more Contiguou!'I Lots, Tracts or Parcels of
land for any purpose involving:
Manheim Bcirough
Subdivision and Lnnd Development Ordinance
Aniclc 2: Langu11ge and Definitions
18
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
updated January 4, 20 16
I. A group of two (2) or more residential or non-residential Buildings, whether
proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single non-residential Building on a Lot
or Lots, regardless oft he number of occupants or tenure; or
2. The division or allocation of land or space. whether initially or cumulatively,
between or among two (2) or more existing or prospective occupants by means
of, or for the purpose of, Slrct!ls, common areas, leaseholds, Condominiums,
Building groups or other features.
8. A Subdivision of land.
C. Development in accordance with Section 503 (1.1) or the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
D. "Land Development" shall not include:
I. The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or single-ramily
semi-detached dwelling into not more than t11ree (3) residential units, unless such
units are intended to be a Condominium.
2. The addition of an Accessory Building on a Lot or Lots subordinate to an existing
Principal Building not to cumulatively exceed 1,000 square feet.
3. The addition or conversion of Buildings or rides within the confines of an
enterprise that would be considered an amusement park. For pllrposcs of this sub
clause, an amusement park is defined as a Tract or area used principally as a
location for permanent amusement Structures or rides. This exclusion shall not
apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial Plans for the
expanded area have been approved.
La11r/011111er. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including Lhe holder of an option or
contrnct to purchase, (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition) a lessee,
i f he is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the Landowner, or other person having
a proprieta ry interest in land.
Landscape Arcltitect. A Landscape Architect registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
lr111dscnpi11g. Act ing with the purpose of meeting speci fie criteria regarding uses of outside
space, including ground cover, 13uffers and shade trees.
Level-of-Service. /\. measure of the effect or trarfic on the Capacity of a road.
Ligltt Trespass. L ight emitted by a lighting installation which extends beyond the boundaries of
the property on which the installation i s sited.
Lot. A designated Parcel. Tract or area of land established by a Plat or otherwise as permitted by
law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
Manheim Borough
Subd iv i ~ion and I and Development Ordinance
Mticlc 2; t~nguogc and Delinilions
19
Luncustcr County, Pennsy lvania
upd::i11?d January 4. 20 16
Stroel
CO.f\Of
Loi i i
L.<ll ~..
lnlonoo Loi Flag LOI ~ ,_,_ { All av
Lot i f I (
Corno1 i !a l l i Lot
~ ~
St roe!
Lots
Lot, Corner. A Lot at the point or intersection of and Abutting two or more intersecting Streets,
and which has an interior angle of less than 135° at the intersection of the two Street Lines.
Corner Lots shall have two Pront Yards and two Side Yards.
Lot, Double Fro11tage. A n Interior Lot with front and rear Street Frontage, where vehicular
access occurs on either Street (See Section 8.4.3. F).
Loi, Flag. A Lot whose Frontage docs not satisry the minimum width requirements for the
respective zone but that does have sufficient Lot width away from the Lot's Prontage.
Lot, Interior. A Lot other than a Corner Lot, the sides of which do not abut a Street.
Lot, Reverse Frontage. An Interior Lot with front and rear Street Frontage, where vehicular
access occurs on only the Street or lesser intensity (Sec Section 8.4.3.f).
Lot Area. The area contained within the property lines of individual Parcels of land, excluding
any area within a Street Right-of-Way. but including the area of any Easement.
Lot Frontage. That portion of a Lot Abutting on the Street Right-of -Way and regarded as the
front of the Lot.
Lot Li11e. A property boundary line or any Lot held in single or separate ownership. except that
where any po11ion or the Lot extends into the Abutting Street or Alley. the Lot Line shall be
deemed the Street or A lley line.
Lot line Marker. A metal plate, pin. permanent stone or concrete Monument used to identify Lot
Line intersections.
Lot of Record. A Lot which is a part of a Subdivision. the Plan of which was recorded, or a Parcel
of land, the Deed of which was recorded in the office of the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds
prior to the adoption of this Ordinance.
Manheim Borough
Subdivision and Land Developmcnl Ordinance
/\rticlc 2: l.unguuge and Definitions
20
l,rinc:istcr County. Pennsylvania
updated January 4, 20 16
luminance. The physical and measurable quantity of light t llat corresponds to the brightness of a
surface (e.g., a lamp, luminaire. reflecting material) in a specific area and measurable with a
Lu111 i nance meter or I ight meter.
Lux. A unit of light intensity stated in lumens per square meter. There is approximately l 0.7 Lux
per Footcandle.
Manufactured Home or Mobile Home. Any Structure intended for or capable of permanent
human habitation, with our without wheels, and capable of being transported or towed from one
place to the next, in one or more pieces, by whatsoever name or li le it is colloquially or
commercially known, but excluding transport trucks or vans equipped wi th sleeping space for a
driver or drivers. and travel trailers. Mobile homes shall be considered "dwellings" and be bound
by the requirements there imposed.
Modljicatio11. A process for al leviating specific requi rements imposed by this Ordinance, as
described in Section 3. 1.
Mfm11me11f. A concrete or stone Monument used to identify Street Line intersections.
Multimod"I. Accommodating various modes of power assisted surface transportation including
but not limited to bicycles, non-motori<::ed scooters, Segways, and horse drawn buggies.
M11lti-Municipal Plan. A Plan developed and adopted by any number of Contiguous
municipalities, including a joint Municipal Plan as al1 thorized by the Pennsylvania Municipalilics
Planning Code or a regional Plan.
Municipality. Borough of Manheim, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
Native P/0111. A plant which grew in a defined region prior to EuropcaJ1 settlement. Indigenous
Species and naturalized non-Native Plants may be included as a Native Plant if it has been
brought into the region and has become establ ishcd into the wild and is not considered invasive or
displaces Native Plants. Nt1turally occurring hybrids and cult ivars (cultivated varieties) of native
genetic parent species which may or may not have been present prior to European settlement are
considered Native Plants.
New Deve/opmelll. A project involving the constru ction, reconstruction. Redevelopment,
conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any Structure, or any use or
extension or land. New Developments have the potential of increasing the requirements for
capital Improvements, requiring either approval of a Plan pursuant to this Ordinance, the issuance
or a Building permit, or connection to the Municipal water or sanitary sewer system.
Nn11-Native I lt11rod1tcetl Pltmt. A ny plant species that has been introduced by humans and now
grows i ndcpendcntly of cultivation. A subset of Non-Native/ Introduced species are the Invasive
Species.
No11-Site Traffic. Vehicle T rips passing within the study area as defined in the traffic impact
study that do not enter or exit the Site and are generally the result or through traffic and traffic
generated by other developments.
Mnnheim florough
Subdivision ond Land Deve lopment Ordinance
Arlicle 2: Language and Definilions
21
Lancaster Cqunl"y, Pcnnsylvani11
updated January 4, 20 16
Off-Site. Any premises not located within the area of the property to be subdivided or developed,
whether or not in the common ownership of the Applicant fof' Subdivision or Land Development
approval.
Official Map. A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code and recorded in the office of the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds.
Parcel. Sec Lot.
Peak Hour. The hour during which the heaviest volume or traffic occurs on a road.
Pedestrian Way. A Right-of-Way, publicly or privately owned, intended for human movement by
walking.
Pe1111sylvr111ia Municipalities Pla1111i11g Code (MPC). Adopted as Act 247 of 1968, as reenacted
and amended. This act enables municipalities to Plan for, and regulate community development
with Subdivision and Land Development ordinances. T he code also contains guidelines for
Subdivision and Land Development ordinance content. For the purpose or this Ordinance, the
Code may be referred to as ''Act 247" and is intended to include the current code and any further
amendments thereto.
Per11io11s Materia//Pervious Surface. Any surface that allows water lo pass through at a rate
equal to or greater than natural ground cover.
Phase. As defined under the PM PC, Arlicle V, as a stage or section of development.
Plan. A drawing, together with supplementary data, that describes a Subdivision or Land
Development.
A. As-Built Pluu. Engineering documents drawn to scale showing the constructed
dimensions and materials of a Structure or other land Improvement. An as-built drawing
differs from design drawings and construction drawings, which are design-oriented
documents prepared prior to construction rather than a depiction of what has been
constructed.
B. Prelimi11'1ry Plan. A Subdivision ancl/or Land Development Plan which is designed in
accordance with the requirements of Sections 4.2 and 5.2, and is prepared for
consideration prior to submission of a Final Plan.
C. Fi1tfll Pla11. A Final Plan which includes both Preliminary and Final Plan requirements
and is designed in accordance with Section 4.3 and 5.3.
D. Record Plan. A Final Plan that contains the original endorsement of the Borough, which
is recorded with the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds.
E. Sketch Pla11. An in fonnal Plan, not necessari ly to exact scale, indicating salient existing
features of a Tract and its surroundings, with the general layout of proposal prepared in
accordance with the rcquit·ements of Sections 4.1 and 5. 1.
Manheim Oorough
ubdivision and Land Developmcul Ordinance
Article 2: Language and Definitions
22
l .ancaster County, PennsylvMia
updated January 4, 20 16
Pla1111i1tg Commission. T he Planning Commission of Manheim Borough, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
Pf{(nning Commission, County. T he Lancaster County Planning Commission.
Plat. The map or Plan of a Subd ivision or Land Development, whether pJ·e liininary or final.
Public Hearing. A formal meeting held pursuant LO Public Notice, intended to inform and obtain
public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this Ordinance and/or the Pennsylvania
Municipali ties Planning Code.
Public Meeting. A forum held pursuant to noticeknown as the Sunshine Act, 65 Pa. C.S.A. § 70 I
et. seq.
Public Notice. A notice publ ished once each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice shal I state the time and place of the hearing and
the pa11icular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The fi rst publication shall not
be more than three (3) days and the second publication shall not be less than seven (7) days from
the date o f the hearing.
Redevelopment. Public and/or private investment made to re-create the fabric of an area by
renovating previously developed land. Replacing, remodeling, or reusing ex.isl ing Buildings and
Structures to accommodate New Development.
Retention Basi11. /\n impoundment in which Stom1 Water is stored and not released during the
storm event. Stored water may be released from Lhe basin at some time after the end of the storm.
Rigltt-of-Way. A corr idor of publicly owned land for purposes of maintai ni ng primary vehicular
and pedestrian access to Abutting properties, including, but not limited to, roads, Streets.
highways and sidewalks. Abutting properly owners are prohibited from encroaching across the
Right-of-Way line.
Runoff. Any part of precipitation that nows over the land surface.
Scree11i11g. Planted (or having equivalent natural growth) shrubs or trees, earthen mounds, or
fencing.
Sedimentation. The process by which mineral or organic matier is accumulated or deposited by
the movement of water.
Setbac/, Line. A line within a property and parallel to a property or Street Line which delineates
the required minimum distance between some particular use of propc1ty and that property or
Street Line. Such minimum distance shall be measured horizontally between the Street and/or
property line and a ve11ical plane that coincides with the closest face or proj ection or the Structure
at or above grade (except for overhanging eaves, gutters and cornices) to the Street and/or
property line.
Sewage. A substance that contains the waste products or excrement or other di scharge from the
bodies of human beings or animals and noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or
inimical to the public health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for domestic water
Manheim Buruugh
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
Article 2: Lunguagc and Definitions
23
Lancaster County. Pennsylvania
updated January 4, 20 I G
supply or for recreation. The term includes any substance which constitutes pollution under The
Clean Streams Law.
Sewuge Facilities. A system of Sewage collect ion. conveyance, treatment, and disposal which
will prevent the discharge of untreated or inadequately treated Sewage or other waste into waters
of this Commonwealth or otherwise provide for the safe and sanitary treatment and disposal of
Sewage or other waste as recognized by the Department of Environmental Protection.
A. Public Sewage System. A publicly owned system or piping, tanks, or other facilities
serv ing two or more Lots, which uses a method of Sewage collection, conveyance,
treatment, and disposal other than renovation in a soil absorption area, or retention in a
retaining tank.
B. ludividual On-Lot Sewage System. An individual sewage system which uses a system of
piping, tanks or other facilities for collecting, trcaring or disposing of sewage into a soil
absorption area or spray field or by retention in a retaining tank.
Shared Trips. Vehicl e Trips entering and exiling the Site 1hat were using the faci lity on the
adjacent Streets and therefore did not generate new Trips on the road.
Sight Distance. The length of road visible to the driver of a vehicle at any given point in the road
when viewing is unobstructed by traffic.
Sig11ifica11t Tree. Non Invasive trees with eighteen (1 8) inch minimum caliper measured five (S)
feel above grade located outside an l ~xisting, Wooded Are<1.
Site. The existing Lot of Record proposed for Land Development, including Subdivision.
Steep Slope. An area having a slope greater than l5%.
Storm Water. Drainage Runoff fro111 the surface of the land resulting from precipitation or snow
or ice melt.
Storm Water Ma11ageme11t Faclli(11. Any Structure. natural or man-made, that, due to its
condition design, or construction, conveys, stores. or otherwise affects Storm Water Runoff.
Typical Storm Water management faci lities include, but are not limited to, Detention and
Retention basins, open channels, road gutters, Swales, storm sewers, pipes, BM Ps, and infiltration
St ructures.
Stream. A body of water flowing in a channel within a defined bed and banks.
Street.
Dedicated and adopted Right-of-Way used or intended to be used by vehicular lrarlic and/or
pedestrians.
Streets shall conform to one of the following categories:
A. Alley (Service Street). A service road that provides secondary means of access to Lots.
Manheim Borough
Alleys are on the same level as a Local Street, and are used in cases of narrow Lot
Frontages. Alleys shall be designed to discourage through traffic. A lleys may be designed
as one-lane Streets.
24
Subdivision and Land lJcvcloprncnt Ordini111ce
Article 2: Language and Uefi11ili11ns
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
updutcd Junuary 4, 20 16
B. A rterlnl. An interregional road in the Street hierarchy system that carries vehicle traffic to
and from the region as well as any through traffic. This Street :ihould be a controlled
access Street (designed to the Capacity analysis of the intersection (LOS) Level or
Service).
C. Collector. A Street that provides connections with Local and Arterial Streets. They may
serve a traffic corridor connecting villages, small boroughs, shopping points, and mining
and Agricultural Areas on an intra-County or municipal basis.
D. Cul-de-sac. A Street with a single means of ingress and egress and having a turnaround.
The design of the turnaround may vary.
E. Local. This classi lieation provides direct access to adj acent land and includes
connections to farms, indiv idual residences and commercial properties, and to higher
classes or highway systems.
Street line (Rig/It-of-Way U11e). A line detining the edge of a Street Right-of-Way and
separating the Street from /\butting properly or Lots. The Street Lincshall be the same as the
legal Right~of-Way L i necurrently in existence.
Street. Privme. A Street nor accepted for Dedication by the Borough.
Structure. J\ny man-made object. including Buildings, having an ascertainable stationary location
on or in land or water, whether or not affixed lo the land. Stru ctures shall not include such things
as fences, sandboxes. decorative fountains, swing sets. birdhouses, bird feeders. mailboxes and
any other simi lar nonpermanent Improvements.
A. Structure, Accessory. A Structure associated with an Accessory use which is separated
from and in addition to the principal Structure or use located on the property.
n. Structure. Pri11cipal. A Structure associated with a primary use.
S11bdivisio11. The division or redivision of a Lot, Tract, or Parcel of land by any means into two
(2) or more Lots, Tracts, Parcels. or other divisions or land inclutling changes in exist ing Lot lines
for the purpose Whether immediate or future, or lease, pa1ti tion by the COUit for distri bution to
heirs or devisees, transfer or ownership, or 13ui lding or Lot development.
Subject Tract. The Site proposed for Land Development, including Subdivision.
S11b~ta11finlly Completed. Where, in the judgment of the Borough Engineer, at least ninety
percent (90%) (based on the cost of the required Improvements for which linancial security was
posted) of those Improvements required as a condition for final approval have been completed in
accordance with the approved Plan, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or
operated for its intended use.
Sttperelevatio11. The distance in height (Elevation) between the inside anti outside edge of a
banked Cartway.
Manheim Borough
Subdivision and Lnnd Development Ordinun~
Article 2: Laniuagc and Definitions
25
Lancasler County. Pennsylvania
updal¢c.I January 4. 20 I G
Surveyor. An individual registered with the Commonweal th of Pennsylvania as authori zed lo
measure the boundaries of Tracts or land. establish locations, and perform the requirements of a
survey.
Swale. A low lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water Runoff.
Tie Bar. The symbol on a survey, Plan, or Plat show11 as "Z" indicating common ownership of
two adjacent Lots or Tracts.
Topography. The relief features or surface configurations of an area of land.
Tract. The term "Tract" is used interchangeably with the term " Lot,'' particularly in the context or
Subdivision, where a "Tract" is subdi vided into several Lots, Parcels, units. plots, Condominiums,
Tracts or interests.
Tree Protection Zone. An area that is radial to the trunk of a tree in which no construction
activity shall occur. The Tree Protection Zone shall be the di stance from the trunk to the Dripline
(a line marking the outer edges of the branches of the tree).
Trip. A single or one-directional motorized and/or non-motorized vehicle movement.
Unit of Occupancy. An allocation of space within a Building or Structure that is independent of
other such space and that constitutes a separate l lSC. This shall include both fee simple ownership
and leaseholds.
Urban. Lancaster City, all boroughs, and developed land in townships within an Urban Growth
Area.
Urban Growl/I A rea. An area that is designated as appropriate for future development and
includes a city or borough at its center. developed portions of township, and development
capacity to meet future land use needs. Urban Growth Areas are given official standing by their
incorporation on Future L and Use Maps and through the adoption in County and local
Comprchensi ve .Plans.
Watercourse. A Stream of water; river; brook; creek; or a channel or ditch for water, whether
natural or manmade, having a defined bed and banks with perennial or intermittent flow.
Watersfted. The entire region or area drained by a Watercourse.
Wetlands. Those areas that arc inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support, ~nd that under nom1al circumstances do support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for Ii re in saturated soil co11ditions, including swamps, marshes,
bogs. ferns. and similar areas. The term includes, but is not limited to, Welland areas listed in the
State Water Plan, the United States Forest service Wetlands Inventory or Pennsylvania. the
Pennsylvania Coastal Zone Managemenl Plan and a Wetland area designated by a river basin
commission.
Yard. An area between the permitted Structures and the Property Line.
Munhcim llorough
Suhdivision and Land nevelopment Ordinance
A11ictc 2: Lengunge and Defi nitions
26
1.unca~lcr Counly, l'cnnsyt vania
updated .lonuAry 4, 2016
Yard, Fronl The area contained between the Street Right-of-Way Line and the Principal
Structure.
Yard, Renr. The area contained between the rear Property Line and the Principal Structure. On
Corner and Reverse Frontage Lots, the Rear Yard shall be considered that area between the
Principal Structure and the Property I.,inc directly opposite the Street of address. For Flag Lots,
the Rear Yard shall be all areas between the Building and every Lot Line.
Yard, Side. The area(s) between a Principal Structure and a11y Side Lot Line(s). On Corner Lots,
the Side Yard shall be considered those areas between the Principal Structure and the Property
Line directly opposite the Streets.
Manheim Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
Article 2: l.m1gungc and Defin itions
27
L1111coster County, l'cnnsylvnnia
updal!.!d J1mu11ry 4, 2016
ARTICLE 3
ADMINlSTRATION
3.1 MODIFICATIONS
The Subdivision and Land Development ordinance requirements are minimum standards for the
protection and promotion or the public health, safety, and welfare. The regulations preserve public order
and establish interactions among citizens in a way that prevents a conn ict of rights. The regulations
ensure the uninterrupted enjoyment of rights by all of the citi:.r.cnry by guiding development and growth
and ro permit municipalities to minimize such problems as may presently exist or which may be foreseen.
Modifications shall only be granted when consistent with !he provisions or Section 503(8) of the PM PC,
i.e., when the literal compliance with mandatory provisions is shown to the satisfaction of the Borough to
be unreasonable, to cause undue hardship, or where an alternative standard can be demonstrated to
provide equal or better results.
3. t.1 Purpose.
The provisions of these regulations are intended as a minimum standard for the protection of the
public health, safety and general wel fare. lf the li teral compliance with any mandatory provision
of these regulations is demonstrated by the Applicant to be unreasonable and to cause undue
hardship because of peculiar cond itions pertaining to !he particular property, and if the Applicant
demonstrates that an alternative proposal will provide equal or better resul ts, the Borough Council
may grant a Modification from such mandatory provision, so that substantial justice may be do11e
and the public interest secured while permitting the reasonable utiliza tion of the property.
However, the granting of a Modi lication shall not have the effect of making null and void the
purpose and/or intent of this Ordinance.
3.1.2 Procedure.
All requests for Modifications shal l be made in accordance with the following procedure:
A. Applicllti()n Requirements.
Munht:!im Clorough
l. All requests for Modifications shall be made in writing and shall accompany and
be a part of the Application ror Development. The request shall be accompanied
by a Plan prepared at least to the minimum standards of a Sketch Plan (see
Section 5. 1) and by fees for submittal established, from time to time, by
Resolution of the Borough Council. The writlen request shall identify:
(H) The specific section of this Ordinance which is requested to be moJified.
(b) The provisions proposed as an alternate lo the requirements. The
alternate provisions must be equal to or better than the requirements of,
and consistent with, the intents of lhis Ordinance and shall not be
contrary to the general public interest.
28
Subdivision nnd Lllnd Develop111cnt Ortlinoncc
Article 3: Administration
Lancaster County, Pennsylvauia
last updated January 0 I, 2016
(c) Justification for the Modification. The request shall state in full the
grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request
is based.
2. Should a revision to a submitted Plan rcqL1ire a Modification that was nol
apparent at Lhe time of initial Plan submission, the request for a Modification
shall be submitted in accordance with Paragraph A., above, at the time of
resubmission of the Plans.
B. H.evicw by Planning Commission.
At a scheduled Publ ic Meeti ng, the Planning Commission shall review the Modification
request and provide comments to the Borough Council.
C. Action by Borough Council.
At a scheduled Public Meeting, the Borough Council shall review the comments
submitted by the Planning Commission, and the request to determine if the literal
compliance with any mandatory provision of the Ordinance is demonstrated by the
Applicant to exact undue hardship or to be unreasonable, or that an alternative standard
has been demonstrated lo provide equal or better res ulrs. provided that such Modification
will not be contrary to the public interest and that the purpose and intent of this
Ordinance is observed. The Applicant shall demonstrate that the alternative proposal
represents the minimum Modification necessary. If the Borough Counci l determines that
the Applicant has met his burden, it may grant a Modification from the literal compliance
with the terms of this Ordinance.
D. Notification of Municipal Actioo.
Mnnhc11n Borough
1. After the meeting at which the Modification was reviewed, written notice of the
Borough Council's action shall be sent to the fo llowing individuals:
(a) Landowner or his agent.
(b) Applicant.
(c) Firm that prepared the Plan.
(d) Any person who has submitted a raqucst for party status. pursuant to the
PMPC.
2. If the Borough Council denies the rcquesL, it will notify the above individuals, in
writing. of the justification for denial. If the !3orough Council grants the request,
the fo' inal Plan shall include a note that identifies the speci fic Modification as
granted.
29
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
/\rtic: lc 3: Ad01i11 istrntio11
Lancaster County, Pcnnsylvanin
last updated January ()4, 2016
3.J.3 Authority to Impose Conditions.
In granting a Modification. the Borough Council or Planning Commiss ion. as applicable. may
impose such conditions, as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards and requirements of this Ordinance.
3.1.4 T ime Extension Modifications.
In instances where the Applicant requires additional time to resolve outstanding conditions of
approval, a written request shall be submitted for consideration of review for the last Borough
Council or Planning Commission meeting, a~ applicable. prior to lhe deadline for Plan
recordation. The written request must include an explanation necessary to j ustify the time
extension.
3.2 ACCEPTANCE OF CONDITIONS OF PLAN APPROVAL
When a Plan, whether Preliminary or Final, has been approved subject lo conditions, and when
the /\pplicant rejects one or all of the conditions, the Applicant shall so notily the Borough
Council in writing within thi rty (30) days of the date of the Borough Council's action. Sl1ch
notification of rejection of one or more of the conditions of approval shall serve to automatically
rescind the approval of the Plan.
Failure by the Applicant to notify the Borough Council of rejection of one or more of the
conditions of approval within the time so spcci lied shall serve as notice of acceptance of the
conditions of approval and that the Appl icant intends to ful ly comply with the conditions Lmless
such condition is inva lidated by final order of cou1t upon appeal thereto by the Applicant.
3.3 CHALLF,,NCES AND APPEALS
3.3.1 Right to A ppeals.
Any person aggrieved by a finding, or decision of the 13orough Council with respect 10 the
approval. or disapproval of a Plan or request for Modification may appeal as provided for in the
Pennsylvania Municipali ties Planning Code.
3.3.2 Mediation Option.
As an alternative to an adjudicatory appeal proceeding, any party entitled to appeal a decision of
the Oorough CoLJnci l may request the utilization of mediation as an aid in resolving the dispute.
Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary by the parties, and shall be conducted as
prescribed in the Pennsyl vania Municipalities Planning Code.
J.4 FEES
3.4.1 Review Fee.
Each Subdivision or Land Development Plan application shal l be accompanied by the required
application fee as established and adopted reso lution by the 13orough Council. Fees shall be
payable to the Borough al the time of application (unless otherwise noted herein) and Plan
processing, approval and recording shall not be completed until all required fees are paid. There
Manheim Oomugh
Subdivision and Lnnd Development Onlinonee
Article '.l: l\d111inislration
30
I ancaster County. Pennsylvunie
last updated Janual') 04, 20 16
shall be no refund or credit of fees or a portion of any fee should the Applicant withdraw the Plan
during the review process or fail to receive Plan approval.
3.4.2 Reimbursement of Borough Expenses.
In addition to the required application rec, it is antici pated that additional expenses will be
incurred by the Borough in processing the Prel iminary and/or Final Plans which ore submitted or
which may be required to be submitted under this Ordinance, for engineering, legal or other
professional consultant expenses, including inspection of Improvements required to be
constructed by this Ordinance. Each Applicant shall deposit with the Borough an escrow fund at
the time of filing a Subdivision or Land Development Pla11 application, in accordance with the
Borough's fee schedule. The escrow fund shall be used to reimburse the 13orough for all
professional service fees and any other expenses which the Borough may incur with the
processing of the application and development of the property. I f the umount remaining in the
escrow fund has been reduced to one-ha If of the original amount, the Borough may bill the
Appl icant an amount sufficient to restore the fund to the original amount. If the escrow fund is
otherwise insufficient to reimburse the Borough's expenses, the Borough shall bill the t\pplicant
for the actual additional costs. In the event that the escrow fund is in excess of the Borough's
costs, the Borough shall refund excess monies, without interest, to the Applicant upon completion
of the development of the property. A II payment requested by the Borough for engineering, legal
or other professional expense shall be the actual cost of the services incurred by the 13orough.
These services shall be billed at the normal established rate for engineering or legal services
provided to the Borough.
3.4.3 Prol"cssional Service Fee Disputes.
All fee disputes shall be addressed pursuant to Section 503(1) of the PMPC.
3.4.4 Fee Schedule.
The amounts for the fees referenced above sh~ l l be the amounts listed in the Borough's most
recent fee chedule.
Manheim I.3orough
Subdivision and Land Development Ord inance
A11icle J: Administration
31
Lun1:astcr C'ounty, l'ennsylvnnio
last up<l1111.:<l January (J4, 2016
ARTICLE 4
PLAN PROCESSING PROCEDURES
4.J Sl<ETCH PLAN
'I'his Borough places great value on the open exchange of ideas between the Applicant and
Rorough before the Applicant invests considerable time and funds in the preparation and
submittal of the A pplicant's Subdivision and/or Land Development Plan. The Applicant is
encouraged, but not required, to initiate the Subdivision and Land Development process by
initiating and completing the Sketch Plan process. The submission or the Sketch Plan would
enable the Borough to openly discuss the Applicants' Plans and proj ect and to make
recommendations for the Applicant to consider in preparing the formal submission.
4.1.1 General.
/\II Applicants tor Subdivision or Land Development may submit a Sketch Plan to the 13orough
for review prior to submission of a formal application; however, submission of a Sketch Plan is
not mandatory. Submission of a Sketch Plan docs not constitute a formal Subdivision or Land
Development application.
4. 1.2 Plan Jnformation.
Sketch Plan reviews are not required to be consistent with procedures of the Pennsylvania
Municipali ties Planning Code. Sketch Plans prepared for review and discussion should include
those items listed in Section 5. 1.
4.1.3 Submission, Meeting, and Consultant Review.
The Applicant shall submit two (2) paper copies of the Sketch Plan and one (I) digital PDF copy,
along with any required supplemental data and an application form, to the Borough. The
Applicant shall schedule a review meeting with the municipal staff and Oorough Engineer. The
Applicant may request lhat the Borough perform a written review of the Sketch Plan, at the
A pplicant's sole cost and expense. In such case, the written review shall be provided to the
Applicant with copies to municipal staff and the Municipal Planning Commission.
4. 1.4 Review l>y Borough Planning Commission.
The Applicant may, but need not, request further review of the Sketch PIM submission by the
Borough Planning Commission at a regularly scheduled meeting. The Applicant shall provide the
C3orough with seven (7) paper copies of the most current Plan at least five (S) business days
before the Plan is scheduled to be reviewed by the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission shall review the Sketch Plan submission and as applicable, consultant reviews, and
advise the Applicant how the proposed Subdivision or Land Development may conform or fai l to
conform to the- requirements and objectives or this Ordinance and olher applicable Plans and
ordinances. The Borough Planning Commission may then submit its written comments and
recommendations to the t\pplicant. Said comments shall not be deemed to be an approval of any
application or to vest any rights in the Applicant.
Manhciin Borough
Subd i v i~ion and 1,and Development Ordinance
Article 4: PIHn Processing Procedures
32
Lancaster County, Pcnn~ylvania
lost updated Janunl') 04, 2016
4. 1.5 Review by Borough Council.
The Applicant may, but need not, request further review of the Sketch Plan submission by the
Borough Council at a regularly scheduled meeting. The Appl icant shall provide the Bomugh with
seven (7) paper copies of the most current Plan at least tive (5) business days before the Plan is
scheduled to be reviewed by the Council. The Borough Council may provide written comments
to the Applicant. Said comments shall not be dce1ncd to be an approval of any application or lo
vest any rights in the Applicant.
4.2 PRELIMLNARY PLAN
4.2.1 Purpose.
The purpose of the Prel iminary Plan is to require formal preliminary approval in order to, vest the
Plan from changes in Municipal ordinances, Phase development, and provide additional time to
complete conditions of approval.
4.2.2 Plan Requirements.
A II Preliminary Plans shall be prepared in conformance with the provisions of Section 5.2 and
any other applicable requirements of law.
4.2.3 Submission.
Official submission oFthe Prel iminary Plan application to t he Borough shall consist or:
A. Prelimin:1ry Plan.
Two (2) paper copies of the Preliminary Plan.
B. Supplemental Dahl.
Two (2) paper copies of a ll reports, noti ftcations and ce1ti fications that are not provided
on the Preliminary Plan, including Storm Water management Plans and calculations.
C. Application Form.
One ( 1) application form completely and correctly executed, with all information legible,
and bearing all requi red signatures.
I>. Filing Fee.
t\ flling ree (in accordance with the Borough's current fee schedule) consisting of a check
or money order drawn to t he Municipal Treasurer.
E. Digital Copies.
The Applicant shall provide one (I) digital PDF copy of all submitted Plans, reports.
noti ficat ions, certincations and the application form.
F. Application Completeness Review.
Manheim Borough
All required Plans and documents and the required ti ling fee shall accompany a
Preliminary Plan application. The Borough shall have seven (7) days from the date of
sub111iss ion to check lhe Plans and documents to determine i f, on their face, they are in
proper fonn and contain all the information required by this Ordinance.
33
Subdivision and Land Developmi;nl Ordinance
Artii.:te 4: Plan Processing Procedures
L::tncastcr County, Pennsylvania
la~I uf>dnte<J Junu ory 04 , 20 16
If defective, the application shall be returned to the Applicant with a statement explaining
the reason(s) of rejection, within twelve ( 12) business days following the date of
submission by the Applicant; otherwise. it shall be deemed accepted for filing as of the
date of submission. Acceptance for filing shall not, however, constitute a waiver of any
deficiencies or irregularities. Under this Section, the Applicant may appeal a decision by
the Borough staff to the Borough Council.
4.2.4 Notification.
The Borough shall refer the Application to the Borough Engineer for review. The Applicant is
responsible for submitting Plans to any other agencies such as the Lancaster County Planning
Commission (LCPC), the Manheim Arca Sewer and Water Authority (MA WSA), Lanca~ter
County Conservalion District, PennDOT, DEP. etc. as required.
4.2.5 Planning Commission Action.
In general, the Planning Commission will schedule the Prel iminary Plan application for action at
the first Planning Commiss ion meeting that is at least thirty (30) days following the date of fi ling.
The Applicant shall provide the Borough with seven (7) paper copies of the most current Plan at
least live (5) business days before the Plan is scheduled to be reviewed by the Planning
Commission. In considering the Preliminary Plan application. the Planning Commission shall:
A. Review and evaluate the application and all reports received from applicable reviewing
agencies and Oorough consultants.
B. Determine whether the Preliminary Plan meets the requirements and obj ectives of this
Ordinance and other applicable ordinances.
C. If available. review Lancaster County Planning Commission comments.
D. Send meeting minutes or a written rcpo11 recommending approval or disapproval of lhe
Preliminary Plan and the reasons therefore; citing the provisions of the statute or
ordinance relied upon, to the following:
1. Landowner or his agent
2. Applicant.
3. Finn that prepared the Plan.
4. Borough Council.
5. Lancaster County Planning Commission.
4.2.6 llorough Council A ction.
Pol lowing receipt of the Planning Commission's report and within ninety (90) days following the
date of the first regular meeting of the Planning Commission after the date the appl ication is filed,
the Borough Counci l will schedule the Preliminary Plan appl ication for action at a regularly
scheduled Public Meeting. The Applicant shall provide the Borough with seven (7) paper copies
of the most current Plan at least five (5) business days before the Plan is scheduled to be reviewed
by the Council. ln considering the Preliminary Plan appl icati on. the Borough Council shall:
Manheim Borough
ubdivision and Land Deve lopment Ordinance
Artic le 4: Plan Processing Procedures
34
L::mcasler County, Pennsyl\lanin
last updoted January 04, 20 l 6
A. Review and evaluate the application and all reports received from applicable reviewing
agencies and the Borough Engineer for compliance to all Municipal ordinances.
B. Review co1nments from the Lancaster County Planning Commission and Borough
Planning Commission.
C. Communicate the decision to the Applicant and other reviewing agencies as required in
Section 4.2. 7 .
. U.7 Notification of Borough Council Action.
A. Written Notification.
Within fifteen ( 15) days of the meeting at which the Preliminary Plan application is acted
upon by the Borough Counci I, written notice of the Borough Council's action shall be
sent to the fol lowing individuals:
1. Landowner or his agent.
2. l\ppl icani.
3. firm that prepared the Plan.
4. La11caster County Planning Commission.
13. Disapproval of Application.
ff the Preliminary Plan application is disapproved, the Borough Council will notify the
above individuals, in writing, of the defects in the application and wi ll identify the
requirements that have not been met; citing the provisions of the statute or ordinance
relied upo11.
C. Fa ilure o( Borough Council to Act.
Pai lure of the Borough Council to render a decision and communicate it to the Applicant
within the time and manner required shall be deemed an approval of the application in
terms as presented unless the Appl icant has agreed in writing to an extension of tirne or
change in prescribed rnanner or presentation of communication of the decision. in which
case. failure to meet the extended time or change wi ll have a like effect.
4.2.8 Compliance with Borough Council Action.
If the Borough Council conditions i ts Preliminary Plan approval upon receipt of additional
information, changes and/or notifications, such data ·hall be submitted and/or alterations noted on
two (2) copies of the Plan to be submitted to the Borough for approval by the Borough Council at
least tifteen (15) business days before 1he Prt:limi11a1-y Plan is scheduled to be reviewed by the
Council or as part of the Final Plan Application.
Failure to reject the conditions in writing by the Applicant within tl1irty (30) days after written
noti fication by the filing of an appeal shall constitute an acceptance of the cond itions by the
Applicant.
Manheim 13()rough
Subdivision n11d Land Development Ordinance
Article •k Plan Proci:.-ssins Procedures
35
Lancaster Coun·i,y. J>1mn ~yl vHnia
la~t updated Ja nuary 04, 2016
4.'2.9 Borough Council Approval and Certification.
A. Preliminary Plan Approval.
Approval of a Preliminary Plan application shall constitute approval or the proposed
Subdivision and/or Land Development as to the character and intensity of development
and the general arrangement of Streets, LoLc;, Structures and other planned facilities, but
shall not consti tute Pinal Plan approval. The Preliminary Plan may not be recorded in the
office of the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds.
D. Time P,eriod ot' Approval.
Preliminary Plan approval wi II be effective for a five-year period from the dale of the
Borough Council's approval of the Preliminary Plan application.
4.2. to. Improvement Construction from Preliminary Plan.
In accordance with the option as set forth in Section 509 of the MPC authorizing an Applicant to
complete construction of the Subdivision/Land Development Improvements prior co approval and
recording of a Final Plan and, hence, avoiding the requirements for the deposit with the Borough
of financial security to cover the costs of such Improvements an Applicant electing to do so shall
meet the following requirements;
A. Requirements.
I. The Applicant shall indicate in writing the intent to construct the Improvements
prior to f inal Plan approval to the Borough Council as pa1i of the Pre liminary
Plan appl icat ion process.
2. Plans must also receive approval, when applicable, from all authori ties having
jurisdiction including by way of example but not limited to, 1 lighway Occupancy
Permit, Erosion and Sedimentation Control .Approval, NPDES Permit, etc.
J. The Applicant may, after receipt of acknowledgment from the Borough Council
of the satisfactory completion of all cond itions or Preliminary Plan approval,
proceed to construct the Improvements required by this Ordinance and shown on
the approved Preliminary Plan.
4. The Applicant shall complete and enter into the appropriate Developers
agreement. The Applicant shall indicate the timetable for Lhe construction of the
Improvements including a schedule and Plan of the proposed phasing of sect ions
or the Plan.
S. Updated, as-buil! survey information will be required to be provided as the base
ror the Final Plan af1cr constructing Improvements rrom each Phase of a
Preliminary Plan.
B. Limitations.
Munhcim Borough
Construction and completion or the Improvements shall not constitute permission to sell
Lots or occupy proposed Buildings shown on the Plan. Such permission shall occur
concun ently with the recordation of the Final Plan.
36
Subdivision nnd 1..nnd Developmcm Ordinance
Article 4: Plun Processing Procedures
Lancuster County. Pennsylvania
Inst updated January 04. 2016
4.3 FINAL PLAN
4.3.l General.
A. Final Plan Submission.
Applications ror Final Plan approval can be submitted only after the follt'lwing, when
required, have been completed:
l. The Applicant has satisfied any conditions of preliminary approval which the
Rorough Council's Preliminary Plan Approval has required to be completed
prior to the submission of a Final Plan.
2. When a Preliminary Plan has been approved with conditions to be resolved
during the Final Plan review process and the Applicant has chosen not to
construct and complete the Subdivision/Land Development Improvements
pursuant to Section 4. 2. 10.
3. When a waiver of the Preliminary Plan has been granted.
D. Final Plan Submitted in Plrnses.
The Final Plan may be submitted in Phases, each Phase covering a reasonable portion of
the entire proposed ubdi vision or Land Development as shown on the approved
Preliminary Plan; provitled that each Phase. except for the last, shall contain a minimum
of twenty-five percent (25%) or the total number of dwelling units as depicted 011 the
approved Preliminary Plan unless the Borough Counci l specifically approves a lesser
percentage for one or more Phases.
C. Modified Final Plan.
The Borough Council may accept a Final Plan modified to reflect a change to the Site or
its surroundings that occurs a~er the Preliminary Plan review. The Borough Council shal l
determine whether a Modified Final Plan wil l be accepted or whether a new Prel iminary
Plan shall be submitted.
4.3.2 Purpose.
The purpose of the Pi nal Plan is to record the Subdivision and or Land Development according to
state law, ensure formal approval by the Borough Council before Plans are recorded, and to
provide sufficient information so that the Borough Council can ensure construction is completed
according to the requirements of this ordinance.
4.3.3 Plan Requirements.
All Final Plans shall be prepared in conformance with the provisions of Section 5.3 and any other
applicable requirements of law.
Manheim Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
Article 4: Plan Processing Procedure~
37
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
lu ~t undated Janunry 04. 2016
4.3.4 Submission.
Official submission of the Final Plan application to the Borough shall consist of:
A. Final Plan.
Two (2) copies of the Pinal Plan sheet(s) to be recorded, plus one ( I) additional copy if
the subject Site is within one (I) mile ofa Municipal boundary.
B. Supplemental Dahl.
Two (2) copies of all reports, notificatio11s and certificates that are not provideJ on the
Final Plan. including Storm Water management Plans and calculations.
C. Application Form.
One ( 1) application form completely and correctly executed, with all information legible.
and bearing al I required signatures.
D. Filing Fee.
J\ tiling fee (in accordance with the BoroL1gh's current foe schedule) consisting of a check
or money order drawn to the Municipal Treasurer.
E. Oigitul Copies.
The Applicant shall provide one (1) digital PDF copy of all sub111 itted Plans. reports,
noti tications, ce11 ifications and the application form.
F. Application Completeness Review.
J\. 11 required Plans and clocL1ments and the required filing fee shall accompany a Final
Plan application. The Borough shall have seven (7) days from the date of submission of
an application to check the Plans and documents to determine if, on their face, they are in
proper forn1 and contain all the information required by this Ordinance. If defective. the
application shall be returned to the Applicant with a statement explaining the rcason(s) of
rejection, within twelve (12) business days following the date of submission by the
Applicant; otherwise, it shall be deemed accepted for filing as of the date of submission.
Al:ceptance for tiling shall not, however, constitL1te a waiver of any deficiencies or
irregularitks. Under this Section, the Applicant may appeal a decision by the Borough
staff to the 13orough Council.
4.3.5 Notilicalion.
The 13orough shall refer the Application to the Borough Engineer for review. The Applicant is
responsible for submitting Plans to any other agencies such as the Lancaster County Planning
Commission (LCPC), the Manheim Area Sewer and Water Authority (MA WSA), Lancaster
County Conservation District, PennDOT. DEP, etc. as required.
Manheim 8(1roµgh
Subdivision nnd Lan() Development Ordinance
Article 4; Pl<Jn Proc:es:; ing Procedures
38
L1:111cas1cr County, f'>t:nn~yl vimia
la~l uptlated January 04. 20 I 6
4.3.6 Planning Commission Action.
In general, the Planning Commission will schedule the Final Plan applicalion for discussion at the
first Planning Commission meeting that is al least thirty (30) days following the date of fil ing.
The Applicant shall provide the Borough with seven (7) paper copies of the most current Plan at
least five (5) business days before the Plan is scheduled to be reviewed by the Planning
Commission. ln considering the Fina1 Plan application, the Planning Commission s hall :
A. Review and evaluate the application and all reports received from applicable reviewing
agencies and Municipal consultants.
B. Determine whether the Pinal Plan meets the requirements and objectives of this
Ordinance and other applicable ordinances.
C. If available, review Lancaster County Planning Commi ssion Comments.
0. Send meeting minutes or a written report recoin111ending approval or disapprova I of the
Final Plan and the reasons therefore, citing the provisions of the statute or ordinance
relied upon. to the following:
1. Landowner or his agent.
2. Applicant.
3. Firm that prepared the Pla11.
4. Borough Council.
S. Lancaster County Planning Commission.
4.3.7 .Borough Council Action.
r oll owing receipt of the Planning Commission's report and within ninety (90) days fol lowing the
date of the fi rst regular meeting of the Planning Commission after the date the application is filed,
the Borough Counci l will sched ule the final Plan application for action at a regularly scheduled
Pllblic Meeting. The Appl icant shall provide the Borough with seven (7) paper copies of lhe most
current Plan al leasl five (5) business days before the Plan is scheduled co be reviewed by the
Council. In considering the Final Plan application, the Borough Council shall:
A. Review and evaluate the application and all repo1ts received from applicable reviewing
agencies and Borough consultants.
B. Review comments from the Lancaster County Planning Commission and Borough
Planning Commi ssion.
C. Communicate the decision to the Applicant and other reviewing agencies as required in
Section 4.3.8.
Manheim Borougl1
Subdivision and I .and Development Ordinance
Article 4; Plun Processing Procedures
39
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
lasl updalod Janu11ry 04, 2016
4.3.8 Notification of Borough Council Action.
A. Written Notification.
Within fifteen ( 15) days of the meeting at which the Final Plan application is acted upon
by the Borough Council, written notice of the Borough Council's action shall be sent to
the following individuals:
1. Landowner or his age11l.
2. Applicant.
3. Firm that prepared the Plan.
4. Lancaster County Planning Commission.
6. Disapproval of A1>plication.
lf the Final Plan application is disapproved, the Borol1gh Council will notify ihe above
individuals, in writing, of the dcfecli; in the application and will identify the requirements
that have not been met, ching the provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon,
and/or where the Final Plan fails to meel the terms and conditions of the approved
Preliminary Plan.
C. Failure of Borough Council to Act.
Failure of the Rorough Council to render a decision and communicate it to the Applicant
within the time and manner required shall be deemed an approval of the application in
terms as presented unless the Applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of tinie or•
change in prescribed manner of presentation of communication or the decision, in which
case, failure to meet the extended time or change will have a like errect.
4.3.9 Compliance with Borough Council Actioo.
If the Borough Counci l conditions its Pinal Plan approval upon receipt of additional information,
changes and/or notifications. such data shall be submitted and/or alterations noted on two (2)
copies of the Plan to be submitted to the Borough for approval by Borough staff and the Borough
Engineer.
Faitme to rej ect the conditions in writing by the Applicant within 30 days after wri tten
notification by the filing of an appeal shal I constitute an acceptance of the conditions by the
Appl ica11l.
4.3.10 Plan Certification.
A fter the Final Plan has been approved by rhc Oorough Council and the required changes, if uny,
are made, the Applicant shall prepare t.wo (2) record copies and two (2) paper copies of the
approved version of the Final Plan. One ( I) paper copy of the Plan shall be kept in the municipal
files and one (I) paper copy of the Plan shall be kept in the Lancaster County Planning
Commission's Jil es. Both record copies of the Plan shall be certified in accordance w ith the
provisions ofScction 4.3 .1 3.
Manheim Bo rou~h
Subdivision nnd Land ncvclopml!nt OrdinanctJ
Article 4: P l~n Process ing Procec.lures
40
Lancaster Courtly, Pennsy lvania
last updated Jan uary 04 . 20 16
4.3.11 Planning Commission a nd Borough Council Signatures Required.
Both record copies and both paper copies of the approved version of the Final Plan shall be
presented to the Planni11g Commission and/or the Borough Council for signalure.
4.3.12 Lancaster County Planning Commission Signature Requit·cd.
Aner obtaining the required Municipal signatures, both record copies and both paper copies of the
approved version of the Final Plan shall be presented to the Lancaster County Planning
Commission for signatllt'e.
4.3.13 H.ecordation.
A. Recording of Final Plan.
Upon approval and certification of a Final Plan, the Applicant shall record the Plan in the
office of the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds. No Pinal Plan for any Subdivision
and/or Land Development may be recorded unless it bears the signature of an authorized
representative of the Borough denoting approval of the Plan and the signature of lwo
individuals authorized to sign for the Lancaster County Plnnning Commission per Section
513 of the MPC, as amended. Unless all site lmprovernenls have been constructed and
completed in accordance with Section 4.2. 10 above, the Final Plan shall not be released
for recordi ng until the Applicant has provided an Improvement construction guarantee in
accordance with Section 6.3 hereof.
B. Deeds.
A copy of the Deeds to be recorded ror the Subject Tract or receiving and conveying
Tracts shall be submitted prior to recording of the Plan.
Recon.lation of such Pl<m docs not serve to j oin the receiving Tract with the acreage to be
conveyed. To reflect the descriptions as provided on the recorded Plan, Deeds must be
recorded for the receiving and conveying Tracts.
C. Time Period of Approval.
The Developer shall within 90 days of such final approval or 90 days after the date of
delivery or an approved Plat signed by the Borough, following completion of conditions
imposed for such approval, whichever is later, reco1·d such Plat in the office of the
recorder of Deeds per Section 5 13 of thee M PC, as ame11ded.
In the event the Plat is not recorded as stated above, the governing bodies· action is nul l
and void unless the Boroug,h Council has granted a waiver by extending lhc effective
time period of the approval.
D. Recording Number Required.
A recording number and a complete set of Plans with all signatures, stamps and seals
must be provided to the Borough before any permits arc issued.
Manheim Borough
ubdlvisi<Jn and Lund IJcvelopmcnt Ordinonce
II rticlc 4: Pion Processing Procedures
41
Lancnsti:r Cuunty, PennsylvuniH
lust updated Jonuury 011, 20 16
E. Digital Copies.
A compact disc with the approved final Plan in AutoCAD and PDF format shall be
provided to the Borough and Lancaster County at the time of Plan recording.
4.3.14 Prior Conveyance of Lots Prohibited.
The Final Plan shall be fi led with the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds bel'ore proceeding
with the conveyance of Lots. Lots may be placed under agreement of sa le prior to Plan recording
but not conveyed.
4.3.15 Dedication by Recording the Final Plan.
After approval of the Final Plan by the Borough Council, the act of recording the Pinal Plan sha ll
have the effect of an irrevocable offer to dedicate all Streets and other areas designated for public
use, unless reserved by the Landowner as provided in Section 4.3.16. However, the approval of
the Borough Council shall not impose any duty upon the Commonwealth, County, or Oorough
concerning acceptance, maintenance or Improvement of any such dedicated areas or portion of
same until proper authorities of the Commonwealth, County, or Borough actually accept same by
ordinance or resolution. or by entry, use or Improvement.
4.3.16 Notice of Reservation from Public Dcdicntion.
The Landowner sha ll place a notation on the Pinal Plan when there is no offe1· of Dedication to
the public of ce11ain designated areas, in which event the title to such areas shal l remain with the
owner, and the Commonwealth, Cotmty and local authorities shall assume no right to accept
ownership or Right-of-Way.
Manheim IJorough
. ubdiv ision and Lund De11elopmenl Ordinance
Article 4: Plan Processing Proced ures
42
Lancasttr County. 11cnm1ylvania
last updated Jnnu11ry 04, 2016
ARTICLE 5
INFORMATION TO BE INCLUDED ON OR WITH PLANS
5.0 CENERAL
Al l Plans shall be prepared by an Engineer, a Surveyor or a Landscape Archi tect. The Plans shall
show. be accompanied by, and be prepared in accordance, with this Article and shall provide
sufficient design inrorrnation to demonstrate conformance with the requirements of A.1iicle 8,
Article 9, and Article 10.
5.1 SKETCH PLAN
5.1.1 Drafting Standards.
A. Scale.
The Plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a standard scale of 20 to 200 feet to the
inch.
B. Sheets.
If the Plan is prepared in two (2) or more drawing sheets, a key map showing the location
of the sheets and a match line shall be placed on each sheet. If more than one ( l) sheet is
necessary, each sheet shall be the same size and numbered to show the relationship to the
total number of sheers in the Pla11 (e.g .. Sheet 1 of 5).
C. Presentation.
Plans shall be presented in a clear, legible, coherent, and organized manner.
5.1.2 Plan Information.
A. Location, Jdcntification and Site Onta.
Manheim l3orough
t. The name and address of the owner(s) orthe Tract, the Developer/subdivider and
the firm that prepared the Plan.
2. The n1e or project number assigned by the firm that prepared the Plan, the Plan
date, and the dale(s) of all Plan revisions.
3. A north arrow and a graphic scale.
4. A location map. drawn to a scale of a minimum of one inch equals two thousand
feet ( l "=2,000') relating the Subdivision lo al least two (2) intersections of road
ccn terl i ncs.
5. lf the Tract of land is located within 200 feet of a ML111icipal or zoning district
boundary line(s), the location of such boundary shall be shown and labeled
accordingly.
43
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance L1111caster County. Pennsylvania
l\tlic:lc S, lnfbrmnlion to l>e Included On or With Plans updated January 4. 2016
6. The source of title (including the Deed Instrument Number, Lot, and Plan Book
reference, if avai lable) to the Su bject Tract.
7. T he (tax) Parcel identification nu111ber(s) ror the Subject 'T'racl.
8. The total acreage of the entire existing Tract.
9. The zoning district and Lot size and/or density requirements of the applicable
zoning regulations.
10. The total number of Lots, units of occupancy, density and proposed land use (if
multiple land uses are proposed. the location of each land use shall be indicated).
11. A copy of any applicable zoning decisions.
12. If applicable, a Plan note indicating the subject property is enrolled in the Clean
and Green preferential assessment program.
13. In the case of a Plan for which the Subject Tract has an Environmental Covenant,
the Plan shall include a Plan note indicating the recording information of the
Environmental Covenant executed pursuant to the Pennsylvania Uniform
Environmental Covenants Act. Act no. 68 or 2007, 27 Pa. C .S. §§ 6501-651 7
(UECA).
B. Existing Features.
Ma11 hcim Borough
I. Exist ing contours. Lancaster County Geographic Information System (CilS)
Topography is an acceptable source f'o1· the existing Topography.
2. T he following items when located within the Subject Tract:
(a) The location, name and dimensions of existing Streets, Cartways, Access
Drives, Driveways or Service Streets.
(b) The location and size or the following features and related Rights-ofWay
or Easements: Buildings, public utilities, on-lot utilities, on-lot
water supplies, on-lot sewage disposal systems and related recharge
areas, and Storm Water Management Facilities.
(c) Existi ng Building Setback Lines.
(d) The location or existing telecommunication, electric, gas and oil
transmission lines, and railroads.
(c) The size. capacity and condition of the ex1strng Storm Water
management system and any other fac ility that may be used to convey
storm flows within and from the Subject Tract.
44
Subdivision and Lnml Dcvelopmc11t Ordinance Lancaster County, Ponnsylvnnia
Artic le: 5. Jnfonnation to be l11clude<l On or With Plans updated .lan11ary 4, 20 I G
(I) The Sketch Plan shall indicale any pl'Oposed disturbance, encroachment
or alteration to such features including; Floodplains, Wetlands, quarry
sites, woodlands, Significant T rees, habi1ats for threatened and
endangered species, solid waste disposal areas, superfuncl
contaminations, Historic Features, cemetery or burial sites, archcological
sites. and areas with highly erosive soils.
(g) Jn the case of a Plan for which the Subject Tract has an Environmental
Covenant executed pursuant to the Pennsylvania U11ifo1111 Environmental
Covenants Act, Act No. 68 of2007, 27 Pa. C.S. §§ 6501-6517 (UECA),
the Plan s hal ~ include if applicable the specific boundary limits of any
contamination remaining on site. The appl ication shall include a copy of
the Environmental Covenant agreement and any required engineering
and institutional controls.
(h) The location and dimenstions of any Rights-of-Way, Easements or use
restrictions related to any of the above items.
3. When avai.lable. the following items when located within two hundred (200) feet
of the Subject Tract
(a) The name and approximate location and approximate dimensions of
existing Streets. Cartways, Access Drives. Driveways or Service Streets.
public utilities, Storm Waler Management Facilities, , railroads,
Buildings, Floodplains, Wetlands, Historic Peatlll'es and
telecommunications, electric, gas, and oil transmission lines including,
related Rig.hls-of-Way and Easements for all of the above. Lancaster
County G IS data is an acceptable source for these items.
C. Proposed Featu res.
Manheim Borough
l. The approximate layout of St reets, including Cartway and Right-of-Way widths
(Appendix G for reference).
2, The approximate layout of Lots, wi th approximate dimensions.
3. The approximate location and configuration of proposed Buildings, parking
compounds. Streets. Access Drives, Dri veways, and general Storm Water faci li ty
locations.
4. Proposed Building Setback Lines.
5. A note on the Plan indicating the types of sewer or water faci lities to be provided.
Public sewer and water faci li ties shall be provided within the Borough.
6. Identification of any Modi fications intended to be requested.
45
Subdivision and LanJ Devclopmcnl Ordinance
Article$, lnfo rmalion lo be lni.:lucled On or With Plans
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
updated January 4, 2016
5.2 PRELIMINARY PLAN
5.2.l Drafting Standards.
A. Sca le.
The Plan shall be clearly and lcgi bly drnwn at a standa1·d scale of 20 to I 00 feet to the
inch.
B, Dimensions and Bearings.
The Subject Tract boundary dimensions shall be in feet and decimals; bearings shall be in
degrees, minutes and seconds. The descri ption shall read in a clockwise direction.
C. Survey Closure.
The survey shall not have an error of closure greater than one t I) foot in ten thousand
( l 0.000) feet.
0. Sheets.
lfthe Plan is prepared in two (2) or more sheets. a key map showing the location of the
Phases shall be placed on each sheet. If more than one ( I) sheet is necessary, each sheet
shall be the same size and numbered lo show the relationship to the total number of
sheets in the Plan (e.g., Sheet I of 5).
E. Presentation.
Plans shal l be presented in a clear. legible, coherent and orga nized manner
5.2.2 Pl::rn lnformation.
A. Location, Identification and Site Data.
Manheim Borough
l. The proposed project name.
2. The name and address of the owncr(s) of the Tract. the Developer/subdivider and
the fl rm that prepared the Plan.
3. The tile or project number assigned by the firm that prepared the Plan, the Plan
diitc, and the datc(s) of al I Plan revisions.
4. A north arrow, a graphic scale and a written sca le.
5, A location map, drawn to a scale of a minimum of one inch equals two thousand
feet ( J "=2.000') re lating tJ1e Subdivision to at least two (2) intersections of road
centerlines.
46
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance Lancus1cr Cou111y. Pennsylvan ia
Article 5, l nli.>rmalion lo be Included On or With Plan~ u pd med January 4·. 2016
6. If the Tract of land is located within 200 feet of a Municipal or zoning district
boundary line(s), the location of such boundary shall be shown and labeled
accordingly.
7. The entire existing Tract boundary with bearings and distances. (If a Landowner
is to retain a single Lot with a Lot Area in excess of ten (I 0) acres, the boundary
of that Lot may be identified as a Deed plotting and may be drawn at any legible
scale; if the remaining Lot has a Lot Arca of ten (10} or less acres, i1 must be
described to the accuracy requirements ofthis Ordinance.)
8. The source of title (including the Deed Instrument Number, and Plan Book
reference, if available) to the Subject Tract.
9. The (tax) Parcel identi fication number(S) for the Subject Tract.
MAn heim Borough
10. The total acreage of the entire existing 'l'racl.
11. The zoning district and applicable zoning regulations, including but not limited to
Lot size, Lot covernge, Setback requirements, Net and Gross Density, the total
number of Lots. u11its of occupancy, and proposed land use (if multiple land uses
are proposed, the locati on of each land use shall be indicated).
12. In the case of a Plan for which the subject property is enrolled in the Clean and
Green preferential assessment program, the inclusion of the following Plan note:
"NOTICE: According to County records, the subject property may be subject lo
the Pennsylvania Farmland and Forest Land Assessment Act of 1974, (a.k.a. the
Clean and Green Act), Act 3 19 of 1974, P.L. 973; 72 P.S. 5490.1, as amended,
and as fi.irther amended by Act 156 of 1998. as amended. These Acts provide for
preferential property tax assessment and treatment. It is the property owner's
responsibility to be aware of the laws, rules and regul ations applicab le to his or
her property, incl uding the provision that: (a) preferential property tax assessment
and treatment will remain in effect conlitiuously unti l the l,andowner changes the
agricultural use from the approved category, or if a transfer, split-off or
separation of the subj ect land occurs; (b) if a change in use occurs, or if a
conveyance, transfer, separation, split-off or Subdivision of the subject land
occurs, the property owner will be responsible for noti fy ing the County Assessor
within 30-days; (c ) the payment of roll-back tax. plus interest, for the period of
enrollment, or a period not to exceed 7-years, whichever is less, may be required;
(d) if the property owner fai Is to notify the County Assessor within the 30-day
period, prior to the land conveyance, the property owner 111ay be subj ect to a
$ I 00.00 ci vil penalty; (e) if the property ownet· fails to pay the rol 1-back ta,x, a
Municipal lien could be placed on the property under existing delinquent tax
law.''
13. In the case of a Plan for which the Subject Tract has an Environmental
Covenant, the Plan shall include a Plan note indicating the recording information
of the Environmental Covenant executed pursuant to the Pennsyl vania U11iform
Environmental Covenants Act, Act no. 68 of 2007, 27 Pa. C.S. §§ 650 1-65 17
(UECA).
47
Subdivision and Land lkvelopmcnl Ordinance Lancostcr County. P cnn ~-yl van ia
Article 5, Information to be lncludc.:d On or With l'lans updated January 4, 2016
B. Existing Features.
1. The names of all immediately adjacent Landowners, the Deed Instrument
Numbers and Plan Book references, if available, of all pl'eviously recorded Plans
for adjacent projects.
2. T he location of the benchmark and a notation indicating the datum used.
3. Existing contours at a minimum vertical interval of one (1) foot ror land with
slope of fifteen percent (15%) or Jess and at a minimum vertical interval of two
(2) feet for more steeply sloping land. Contours plotted from the United States
Geodetic Survey wil I not be accepted, and Lancaster County Geographic
Information System (GlS) Topography wdl not be accepted in areas where
Improvements are proposed but should be used beginning 50 feet outside the
Improvement bounda1-y.
Manheim f30r(l\lgh
4. The fo llowing items when located within the Subject Tract:
(a) The location, name and dimensions of existing Stree ts, Cartways, Access
Drives, Driveways or Ser vice Streets.
(b) The location and size of lhe following features and related Rights-ofWay
or Easements: Buildings, public uti Ii ties, on-lot uti I ities. on-lot
water supplies. on-lot sewage disposal systems and related recharge
areas, and Storm Water Management Facilities.
(c) The location and material of existing Lot Line Markers along the
perimeter or the entire existing Tract.
(d) Existing Building Setback Lines.
(e) The location of existing te lccommunicatiot\ electri c, gas and oil
transmission lines, and railroads.
(t) The size. capacity and condition of the ex1st1ng Storm Water
management system and any other facility that may be used Lo convey
storm 11ows within and from the Subj ect Tract.
(g) The Preliminary Plan shall indicate any proposed disturbance,
encroachment or alteration to such features i 11clud i.ng; r loodplains,
Wetlands, quany s ites, woodlands, Significant ·rrees, habitats for
threatened and endangered species, solid waste disposal areas, superfund
contam inations, Historic Features. cemetery or burial sites, archeological
sites, and areas with highly erosive soils.
(g) In the case of a Plan for which the Subject Tract has an Environmental
Covenant executed pursuant to the Pennsy lvania Uni form Enviro11men lal
Covenants Act, Act No. 68 or 2007, 27 Pa. C.S. §§ 650 1-65 17 (UECA),
the Plan shal l include if applicable the specific boundary l i111its of any
48
ubdivision and Land Dcvclop1111::nt Ordi nnnce Lancasler County, Pennsylvaniu
l\rticlt 5, Information to he lncludccl On or Wi1h Plans upd:tlcd JMuary 4, 2016
contamination remaining on site. The application shall include a copy of
the Environmental Covenant agreement and any required engineering
and institutional controls.
(h) The location and dimensions of any Rights-of-Way, Basements or use
restrictions related to any of the above items.
5. The fol lowing items when located within two hundred (200) feet of the Subject
Tract:
(a) The location and na111e of existing Streets, Cartways, Access Drives,
Driveways or Service Streets.
(b) As available, the location of Buildings, public uti lities, on-lot util ities,
on-lot water supplies, on-lot sewage disposal systems and related
recharge areas, and Storm Water Management Facllities including the
location and size of related Easements.
(c) The location of exi sting telecommunication, electric. gas and oil
transmission lines, and rai lroads.
(d) As available, the size, capacity, and condition of the existing Storm
Water management system and any other facility that may be used to
convey storm nows from the Subject Tract
(e) The location of woodlands, habitats for endangered and threatened
species, and highly erosive soils.
(f) Any Rights-of-Way, Easements or use restrictions related to any of the
above items.
C. Proposed Features.
Manheim 13orough
l. The layout of Streets, including Cartway and Right-of-Way widths, and the
proposed Street names.
2. The location and configurat ion of proposed Buildings, parking compounds,
Access Drives. Driveways, Landscaping and all other significant facilities
(Appendix G).
3. The layout of Lots, with approximate dimensions and tie Bars indicating Parcels
to be joined-i n-common.
4. Building Setb ack Lines, with distances from the Street centerline or Street Rightof-
Way line, whichever requirement is applicable under the zoning regulations.
5. Proposed Easements.
49
Subdivision and Land OcvclopmcnL Ordinam:e Lancaster County. Pennsylvania
Article 5, Informa tion to be lndu<led On or With Plans updated January 4. 2016
Mn11hei1n Borough
6. A typical Street cross-section for each proposed Street and typical cross-section
fot any existing Street that will be improved as part or the application. Each
cross-section shall include the entire Right-of-Way width.
7. A note on the Plan indicating the types or sewer or water facilities lO be provided.
Public sewer and water faci lities shall be provided within the Borough.
8. Identification of any Modifications granted by the Borough Council, ir
applicable.
9. The final vertical and horizontal alignment for each proposed Street and Access
Drive. All profiles shall show at least the existing (natural) profil e along the
centerline, proposed grade at the centerline, and the length of all proposed
vertical curves.
1 O. T he location of Clear Sight Triangle Easements and safe stopping distance at all
Street and Driveway intersections in accordance with the latest edirion or the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Design Manual.
11. Storm Water management Plans and data designed in accordance with the
mt1nicipal Storm Water ordinance.
12. In the case of a P l at~ which reqLtires access to a highway under the j urisdiction of
PennDOT (Pe11nsylva r1ia Department of Transportation), the inclusion of the
following Plan note:
"A Highway Occupancy Permit is required pursuant to Section 420 of the Act of
June l, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the ''State llighway Law," before
Driveway access to a State highway is permitted. Access to the State highway
shall only be as authorized by a Highway Occ upancy Permit, and the Borough
Council's approval or this Plan in no way implies that such permit can be
acqui 1·cd."
13. In the case for the Phased installation of lmrirovements:
(a) A schedule shall be filed delineating all proposed sections as well as
deadlines within which applications for Final Plan approval of each
section are intended to be Ii led.
(b) Each section in any Subdivision or Land Development, except for the
lasl section, shall contain a minimuln of twenty-five percent (25%) of Lhe
total number of dwelling units unless the Borough Council specit1ca11y
approves a lesser percentage for one or more of the sections.
(c) Sections of the development shall be sequenced in such a manner that
each section (together with the previously approved and completed
section(s)) shall be physically built to be in rull compliance witJ1 the
ordinanco and 11ot be dependent on the construction completed at future
Phases. Including, but not limited to Storm Water Management
Pacilitics, Streets. and uti lities.
50
Subdivision and Land Dcvclopmc11l Qruinance Lancaster County, l'unnsylvoniu
A11iclc 5, Information to be Included On or With Plans updated January 4. 2016
{d} Except for staged construction of Streets intended to be extended in
subsequent Phases, all Improvements for each section shall be installed
in their permj3nenl configuration. The final wearing course shall be
carried in an Improvement guarantee until it is finally installed and
inspected.
(e) It is not necessary for construction in one section to be completed for the
next section to be submitted.
(f) Al l subsequent Phased Final Plans shall be submitted within five years of
the date of Borough Council action on the Preliminary Plan unless
otherwise agreed upon by the Applicant and 13orough. The Developer
shall take the responsibil ity to provide the Borough Council witll
reasonable notice of delays in the filing of Fi11al Plans.
(g) The Applicant shall annually update the 11orough Council regarding the
schedule on or before the anniversary date of the Preliminary Plan
approval.
D. Certificates, Notifications and Repor ts.
Manheim 13orough
1. Certif icate, signature and seal of the Surveyor to the effect that the 8urvey is
correct, and certificate, signature and seal of the Surveyor, Engineer or
Landscape Architect that prepared the Plan that all other information shown on
the Plan is accurate.
2. Provide a note to be placed on the Plan indicating that all zoning approvals,
including zoning variances, special exceptions or conditional uses, have been
obtained, if applicable, and the conditions imposed.
3. Any Improvement tha.t encroaches upon an electric transmission line,
telecommunications line. gas pipeline, petroleum or petroleum products
transmission line, fib~r optics. publlc sewer, public waler. etc, located within the
Tract, the application shall be accompanied by a letter from the owner or lease of
such Righr-of-Way stating any condi tions on the use of the la11d and the
minimum Building Setback and/or Right-of-Way Lines.
4. Where the Subdivision or Land Development proposal will generate fifty (50) or
more additional Trips to or from the Site during the development's anticipated
Peak Hour, or the Borough Counci l indicates a need for one, a traffic impact
study as required by Article 7.1 shall be submitted wi th the Preliminary Plan.
S. Where the land included in the subject application has an agricultural, woodland,
or other nalural resource P.asement located within the Tract, the application shall
be accompanied by a letter from the party holding the Easement stating any
conditions on the use of the land.
51
Subdi vision and La11d Development Ordinance Lancaster County, Pennsylvauin
Artic le 5, Information to be lncl~1ded 011 or With Plans updaled January 11,2016
6. Where areas arc reserved for Future Access Strip usage, provide a Plan note
indicating that Future Access Strip reservati o11s are intended to be used in the
future.
5.2.3 Construction from Preliminary Plan.
A. An appropriately executed Memorandum of UnderStanding (Appe11dix D).
8. Posting of all appropriately executed Fi nancial Securi ties.
C. Written notices of approval by outside agencies. if applicable:
1. Notification from the Pennsylvania Department of Transpo1tatio11 (PennDOT)
t hat approval of the Highway Occupancy Permit (HOP) has been gi-anled.
2. Notitication from LCCD (Lancaster County Conservation District) that an
acceptable Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan/NPDES Plan has been
submitted and approved by that agency:
3. Notification from DEP (Department of Bnvironmental Protection) that either
approval or the Sewer Facility Plan Revision (or Plan Revision Module for L and
Development) or Supplement has been granted or that such approvg) is not
required.
5.3 FINAL PLAN
5.3. l Ora fting Stn nda rds.
The same drafting standards shal l be required for a Final Plan as spcciticd for a Preliminary Plan
in Section 5.2. 1.
5.3.2 Plan Information.
A. Location and Identification.
The same location and identification standards shal l be required for a Final Plan as
specified for a Preliminary Plan in Section 5.2.2.A.
B. Existi1'g Features.
Manheim Borough
1. The names of all immed iately adj acent Landowners, Deed Instrument Number
and the names and Plan Book references for all previously recorded Plans for
adjacent projects, if available.
2. The location of the benchmark and a notation indicating the datu111 used.
Existing contours at a minimum vertic.."'11 interval of one ( I) foot for land with
slope of fifteen percent ( 15%) or less and at a J11inimum vertical interval of two
(2) feet for more steeply sloping land. Co11tours pl otted from the United States
Geodetic Survey wll I not be accepted, and Lancaste1· County Geographic
Information System (G IS) Topography wi II not be accepted in areas where
52
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance Laucastcr County, Pennsylvania
A1t icle 5. lntbnml\ion lo be Included On or With Plm1s updated January 4, 20 16
Improvements are proposed but should be used beginning 50 feet outside the
Improvement boundary.
3. The following items when located within the Subject Tract:
(a) The same items shall be required for a Final Plans as specified for a
Preliminary Plan in Section 5.2.2.B.4.
4. ·r hc following items when located within two hundred (200) feet of the Subj ect
Tract:
(a) The same items shall be required for a Final Plans as specified for a
Preli minary Plan in Section 5.2.2.B.5.
C. Proposed Features.
1. The same items shall be required for a Pinal Plans as speci fied !'or a Preliminary
Plan in Sectio11 5.2.2.C.
2. A complete description of the centerline and the Right·of-Way Line for all new
Streets. This descri ption shall include distances and bearings with curve segments
compri sed of radius, tangent. arc. and chord.
Manheim 13urough
3. The location and material of all proposed permanent Monuments and Lot Line
Markers, including a note that all proposed Monuments nnd Lot Linc Markers are
set or indicating when and by whom they will be set.
4. Loi· Lines, with accurate bearings and distances, and Lot Areas for all Parcels.
Curve segments shall be comprised of arc, chord. bearing and distance. Along
existing Street Rights-of-Way, the description may util ize the existing Deed lines
or road cenl erli nes; along all proposed Street Rights-of-Way, the description shall
be prepared to the Right-of-Way L ines.
5. A grading Pl an, which shall include finished land contours alid grades, directions
of water movement, type of soi 1$, location of water bars or silt fences and ground
Floor Elevations.
6. Identi fication of any l ands to be dedicated or reserved for public, semi-public or
community use.
7. The final Street names as approved by Lancaster CoLtnty-Wide Communications.
8. [n the case for the Phased installation of Improvements:
(a) A schedule shall be 'filed delineating all proposed sections as well as
dates within which applications fot f inal Plan approval of each section
a1·e intended lo be fi led.
(b) Each section in any Subdivision or Land Development, except for the last
section, shall contain a minimum of twenty- five percent (25%) of the
53
Subdivision ancl l.J111cl Development Ordinance Lamms1er Cou11 ty, Pennsylvania
l\rticlt: 5. lnforrnnlion to be Included On or With Pl nns updakcl January 4. 20 16
lotal number of units unless the Borough Council specifically approves a
lesser percentage for one or more of t he sectio11s.
(c) Sections of the development sha ll be sequenced in such a manner that
each section (together with the previously approved and completed
section(s)) shall be physically built to be in full compliance with the
ordinance and not be dependent on the construction completed ut future
Phases. For example, but not limited to, Storm Water Management
l) acilities.
(d) Rxcept for staged construction of Streets intended to be extended in
subsequent Phases, all Improvements for each section shall be installed
to the extent where they provide their intended services. The final
wearing course shall be carried in an Improvement guarantee until it is
finally installed and inspected.
(e) It is not necessary for construction in one section to be completed before
the next section to be submitted or constructed.
0 . Certificates, Notifications and Reports.
l\ihtnhcim Oorough
J. Ccrti licate, signature and seal of the Surveyor to the effect that the survey is
correct. and certificate, signature and seal of the Surveyor, Engineer or
l,andscape Architect that prepared the Plan that all other information shown 011
the Plan is accurate.
2. A statement, duly acknowledged before an oflicer authorized to lake
acknowledgment or Deeds and signed by the Landowner. to the effect that the
Subdi vision or Land Development show11 on the Plan is the act and the Deed of
the owner. that all t hose signing arc all the owners of the property shown on the
survey and Plan, and that they desire the same to be recorded as such. This
statement shall be signed and dated on or a~er the last change or revision to said
Plan.
3. Certiticate for approval by the Borough Council.
4. Certificate of no ti ft cation to be signed by the Lancaster County Planning
Commission.
5. /\ note to be placed on the Plan indicating that all zoning approvals, including
zoning variances, special exceptions or conditional uses. have been obtained, if
applicable, and the conditions imposed.
6. Written notice from Lancaster County-Wide Communications stating that the
proposed Street names arc acceptable (See Appendix E).
7. Cerli ficate of Dedication of Streets and other public property, if applicable.
8. A note lo be placed on the Plan indi cating any area that is not Lo be offered for
Dedication, i r appl icablc.
54
ubdivision and Land Development OnJinancc Lancaster County. Pcnnsy lvuniu
A11iclc 5, lnformelion lo be Included On or With Plans updated January 4. 2016
9. In the case of a Plan which 1·equires access to a highway under the jurisdiction of
the Pennsylvania Depat·tment of Transportation, the inclusion of the fo llowing
Plan note:
" A I lighway Occupancy Permit is required pursuant to Section 420 of the Act or
June I, I 945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the "State I lighway Law," before
Driveway access to a State highway is permitted. Access to the State highway
shall only be as authori zed by a llighway Occupancy Permit, and the Borollgh
Council's approval of this Plan in no way implies that such permit can be
acquired."
10. Any Improvement that encroaches upon an electri c transmission line,
telecommunications line, gas pipeline, petroleum or petroleL1111 products
transmission line, fiber optics, public sewer. public water, etc. located within the
Tract, the appl ication shall be accompanied by a letter from the owner or lessee
of such Right-of-Way staling any conditions on the use of the land, the minimum
Ruilding Setback and/or Right-of-Way Lines, and the centerline of such line.
JI. Where the land included in the subject application has agricultural, woodland, or
other natural resource Easement located within the T ract, the application shall be
accompanied by a copy of the agreeme11t fi·om the pa11y holding the Easement
stating any conditions on the use of the land.
12. Where areas are reserved for Future Access Strip usage. provide a Plan note
indicating that future Access Strip reservations are intended to be used in the
future.
13, When connection to an existing water and/or sanitary sewer systern is proposed,
written notilication from the authority providing sanitary sewer and/or water
service indicating that sufficient capaci.ty 10 service the proposed development
has been reserved shall be provided (in accordance with cur rent authority
standards).
5.3.3 As Conclitioo of Recording a Finni Plan:
A. An appropri ately executed Memorandum of Understanding (Appendix D and D-1 ).
B. Posting of all appropriately executed Financial Securities (Section 6.3 ).
C. Written notices of approval by outside agencies, if applicable:
Manheim Borough
l. When applicable, notification from the Department or Environmental Protection
that either approval of the Sewer Facility Plan Revision (or Plan Revision
Module for Land Development) or Supple111cnt has been granted or that such
approval is not required.
2. When required, notification f'rom the Lancas ter County Conservation District (or
DEP) that an acceptable Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan/NPDBS Plan
has been submi tted and approved by that agency.
55
Subdivision nnd Land Development Orrlinnnce L11ncaster County, Pennsylvania
Arl icle 5, lnlbrmation lo be Included On or Wilh Plans updated Jnnuary 4. 20 16
3. When applicable, notification from the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (Pen11DOT) that approval of the Highway Occupancy Permit
(l lOP) has been granted.
4. When applicable, noti ti cation from the water or sewer supplier that agreements
have been reached concerning all legal matters applicable to the provision of
potable water and sanitary Sewage for the project.
5. When required, notification of approval by the DEP for any permitting that is
required by that agency.
D. A controlling agreement when a11 application proposes to establish a Street which is not
offered for Dedication to the public use.
Manheim Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
/\rticle 5. Information to be Included 0 11 ur With Plans
56
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
updated January 4, 2016
ARTICLE 6
ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION
AND MAINTENANCE OF JMPROVEMENTS
6.1 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED
Equivalent MPC, 181
., addition, Sections 509(a) and 509(1)
No Plat shaJ I be finally approved unless the Stl'ects shown on such Plat have been improved lo a
mud free or otherwise permanently passable condition, or improved as may be required by the
sub-division and Land Development ordinance nnd any walkways1 curbs, gutters, street I ights, fire
hydrants, shade trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, stor111 sewers and other Improvements as may
be required by the Subdivision and Land Development ordinance have been installed in
accordance with such ordinance. In I ieu of the completion of any Improvements required as a
condition for the final approval ofa Plat, including Improvements or fees required to pursuant to
the MPC Section 509(i), the deposit with the Borough of financial security in an amount
sufficient to cover the costs of such Improvements or common amenities includ ing, but not
limited to, roads, Storm Water Detention and/or Retention Basins and other related drainage
facil ities. recreational facilities, Common Open Space Improvements, or Buffer or screen
plantings which may be required.
The Applicant shal l not be required to provide financial security for the costs of any
Improvements for which financial security is required by and provided to the Depat1ment of
Trnnspor1ation in connection with t'hc i ssuance of a highway occupancy permit pursuant to
section 420 of the act of June I, 1945 (p.L. 1242, No. 428) known as the "Stale Highway Law."
If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or facilities related thereto,
arc to be installed under the jurisdiction and pursuant to Lhe rules and regulations of a public
utility or Municipal authority separate and distinct from the Borough, financial security to assure
proper completion and maintenance thereof shall b~ posted in accordance with the regulations or
the controlling public utility or Munici pal authority and shal l not be included within the financial
security as otherwise required by chis section.
6.2 PLAN IMPROVEMENTS
6.2.J Recorded Plan Approval.
Equivalent MPC, l 8111 addition, Sections 509(b)
When requested by the Developer. in order 10 faci litate financing, the Bol'ough Council or the
planning agency, if designated. shall flllrnish the Developer wi th a signed copy of a resolution
indicating approval of the final Plat contingent upon the Developer obtaining a satisfactory
financial security. The linal Plat or Record Plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the
financial Improvements agreement is executed. T he resolution or letter of contingent approval
shall expire and be deemed to be revoked i f the financial security agreement is not executed
within 90 days unless a wriuen extension is granted by the Borough Council; such extension shall
not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in writi11g at the request of the Developer.
Mnrihcim Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
Article 6, Improvement Guarantees
57
Lnncnstcr County. Pennsylvania
updated January 4. 2016
6.2.2 Review Fees.
Equivalent M PC, 18111 addition, Sections 503( I)
Review fees may include reasonable and necessary charges by the Borough's professional
consultants for review and repo1t thereon to the Borough. Such review fees shall be base(.) upon a
schedule established by ordinance or reso lution. Such review fees shall be rca5onablc and in
accordance with the ordinary and customary charges for similar service in the community, but in
no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the professional consultant for
corn parable services to the Borough for services which arc not reimbursed or otherwise imposed
on J\pplicants. Pees charged to the 13orough relating to any appeal of a decision on an appl ication
sha 11 not be considered review fees and may not be charged to an Appl icanl.
6.2.3 Protection of Final Phases.
Equivalent MPC, 181
" addition, Section 509(i)
In the case where development is proj ected over a period of years, the Borough Counci l or the
planning agency may authorire submission of final Plats by section or stages of development
subject to such requirements or guarantees as to Improvements in future sect ions or stages of
development as it finds essential for 1 he protection of any finally approved section of the
development.
6.3 IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION GUARANTEE
6.3.J Form of Financial Security.
Equivalent MPC, 18111 addition, Sections 509(c), 509(d), and 509(e)
Without limitation as lo other types of financial security which the BoroL1gh may upprovc, which
approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, Federal or Commonwealth chartered lending
institution irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such lending
institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security for the purposes of this section.
Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or Federal or Commonwealth
chartered lending institution chosen by the party posting the financial security, provided said
bonding company or lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within the
Com 111011 wea I th.
Such bond or other security shall provide for, and secure to the public. the completion of any
improvements which may be required on or before the date fixed in the formal action of approval
or accompanying agreement for completion of the Improvements.
6.3.2 Amount of Gu11rantce.
A. Amouol of Financial Security Required.
Equivale11t MPC, I 81h addition. Section 509(t)
The amount of financial security Lo be posted for the completion of the required
Improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion estimated as of 90 days
fo llowing the date scheduled for completion by the Developer. Annually. the Borough
Manheim Borough
Subdivision and Land Ocvdopmcnl Ordinance
/\1ticlc 6. lmpruvemcnl Guarantees
58
J ,nncastcr County. Pcnnsylvanin
updntcd Jnnw1ry 4, 2016
may adjust the amount of the financial security by comparing the actual cost of the
Improvements which have been completed and the estimated cost for the completion of
the 1·emaining Improvements as of the expi ration of the 90th day after either the original
date scheduled for completion or a reschedul ed date of completion. Subsequent to said
adjustment, the Borough may require the Developer to post additional security in order to
assure that the financial security equals said 110%. A ny additional security shall be
posted by the Di.:veloper in uc1.:or<la11ce with this subsection.
B. Estimate of the Cost of Completion.
Equivalent M PC, I 81h addition. Section 509(g)
The amount of financial secudty required shall be based upon an estimate oflhe cost of
completion of the required Improvements, submitted by an Applicant or Developer and
prepared by a professional L::ngineer licensed as such in this Commonwealth and ccrti 11ed
by such Engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The Borough, upon
the recommendation of the Borough Engineer, may refuse to accept such estimale for
good cause shown. If the Appl icant or Developer and the Borough are unable to agree
upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be recalculated and recei·ti ficd by another
professional engineer licensed as such in this Commonwealth and chosen mutually by
the Borough and the Applicant or Developer. l he estimate certified by the third Engi neer
shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event that a
third Engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said Engineer shall be paid equally by
the Borough and the Applicant or Developer.
C. Additional Time for Completion.
Equivalent MPC. 18111 addition. Section 509(h)
If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year from the date of'
posting or the linancial security to complete the required Improvements, the amount of
financial security may be increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period
beyond the first anniversary date from posting of fi 11ancial security or to an amount not
exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required Improvements as reestablished on
or about the expiration o f the preceding one-year period by using the above bidding
procedure.
6.4 lNSPECTCON OF IMPROVEMENTS
T he Developer shall contact the inspecting Engineer to coordinate the construction observation
schedule, notification procedures, and other related Improvement gLlarantee administration topics
and to determine the need for an on-Site, pre-construction meeting. The Developer shall contact
the inspecting Engineer prior to the construction of Site lmprnvements.
6.4. l. Inspection of lmproveme11ts.
Equivalent MPC, 18111 addition. Sections 51 O(a) and 51 O(g)( I)
When the Developer has completed all o f the necessary and appropriate Improvements, the
Developer shall noti fy the Borough Cou11cil, in writing. by certified or l'egistered mai I, of the
completion of the af otesaid lmprovements and ~hal I send a copy thereof to the Borough Engineer.
The Borough Council shall, within ten days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the
Borough Engineer to inspect all ofthe aroresaid Improvements. The Borol1gh Engineer shal l,
Ma11l1ci01 Borough 59
Subd ivis ion and Land Development Ordinance
Atiicle 6, l1T1pl'ovcmcnt Guarantees
Lnncaster County. l'cnnsylvnnio
upduted Jammry 4, 20 16
thereupon, file a report, in writing, with the Borough Counci l, and shall promptly mail a copy of
the same to the Developer by ceni fi.ed or registered mai I. The report shall be made and mailed
wi thin 30 days after receipt by the 13orough Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the
Borough Council, said report shall be detai led and shall indicate approval or rejection of said
Improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said Improvements, or any portion thereot: shal l
not be approved or shall be rejected by the Borough Engineer. said report sl1all contain a
statement of reasons for such non approval or rejection.
The BorOLrgh Council shall submit to the Applicant an itemized bi ll showing, the work perfo rmed
in connection with the i nspcction of 1 mprovements perf armed, identifying the person performing
the services and the time and date spent for each task. In the evont the Applicant disputes the
amoum of any such expense in connection with the inspection of Improvements, rhe Applicant
shall, no later than 30 days a ft er the date of transmittal of a bill for inspection ser·vices, notify the
Borough and the. Borough's professional consulta11t that such inspection expenses &re disputed as
unreasonable or unnecessary and shall explain the basis of their objections to the fees charged. in
which case the Borough shull not delay or disapprove a request for release of financial security, a
Subdivision or Land Development application or any approval or permit related to development
due to the Applicant's dispute of inspection expenses. Fai lure of the Applicant to dispute a bill
within 30 days shall be a waiver of the Applicant's right to arbi tration of that bi l l u11der this
section.
6.4.2. Acceptance oflmp1·ovements.
6qiriva1ent MPC. J 8111 addition, Sections SI O(b) and SI O(c)
The Borough Council shall notil'y the Developer, w ithin I 5 days of receipt of the t'.ngineer's
report, in wr·iting by cerli fied or registered mail of the action of said Borough Council with
relation I.hereto.
If the Borough Council or the Borough Engineer fai ls to comply wilh tile time limitation
provisions contained herein, all Improvements will be deemed to have been approved and the
Developer shall be released from all liability, pursuant to its performance guaranty bond or other
security agreement.
6.4.3. Borough Docs Not Accept Improvements.
Equivalent MPC, 18111 addition, Section 510(d)
If any portion of the said Improvements shall not be approved or shall be r ejected by the Borough
Council, the Developer shal l proceed to complete the same and, upon completion, the same
procedure of notification, as outlined herein, sh al I be fo llowed.
6.4.4. Ou plication of Inspections.
Equivalent MPC, l81h addition, Section Sl O(g)
The Borough may prescribe that the Applicant shall reimburse the Borough for the reasonable
and necessary expense i ncurred in connection with the inspection of Improvements. Tho
Applicant shall not be rcqL1i red to rei1nburse the Borough Council for any inspection which is
duplicative of inspections conducted by other govern111ental agencies or public utilities. The
bL1rden of proving that any i11spection is duplicative shal I be upon the objecting Applicant. Such
reimburse111c11t shall be based upon a schedule es ta bl ished by ordinance or resoh.1tlon. Such
expense shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary fees charged by
Manheim Borough 60
ubdivision and Land Development Ordinance
Article 6, lmpl'Ovement Gllarantees
Lancaster C(1\mly, Pcn nsylvnnil!
updated .lanuary 4, 20 16
the Borough's professional consultant for work performed for similar services in the c.:ommunity,
but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the professional co11sultant to the
Borough for comparable services when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on
Applicants.
6.4.S Inspection Expenses Disputed.
A. Disputed Engineer Expenses.
Equivalent MPC, I 8'h addition. Section 510( I)
In the event the Applicant disputes the amount of any such expense in connection w ith
the inspection of Improvements, the A pplicant shall, no later tha11 30 days after the date
oftransmittal ofa bill for inspection services. notify the Borough and the Borough's
professional consultant that such inspection expenses are disputed as unreasonable or
unnecessary and shall explain the basis of their objections to the fees charged, in which
case the Borough shall not delay or disapprove a request for release of financial security,
a Subdivision or Land Developrnent application or any approval or permit re lated to
development due to the A pplicant's dispute of inspection expenses. Failure of 1lle
Applicant lo dispute a bill within 30 days shall be a waiver of the Applicant's right to
arbitration of that bill under this section.
B. Appointment of 'fhir<l-Pnrty P rofessional Engineer by Mutual Agreement.
Equivalent MPC, 18111 addition, Section 5 IO(g)(2)
If, the professional consultant and the Applicant cannot agree on the amount ofcxpcnscs
which 1:1 re reasonable and necessary, then the Applicant shall have the right, within 45
days of the transmittal of the final bill or supplement to the final bi ll to the Applicant, to
request the appointment of another professional consultant to serve as an arbitrator. The
A ppl icant and professional consultant wl1ose fess are being challenged shall by mutual
agreement, appoint another professional consultant to review any bi lls the Applicant has
disputed and which remain unresolved and make a determination as to the amount thereof
which is reasonable and necessa1y The arbitrator shall be of the same profession as the
professional consultant whose fees are bei1ig challenged.
C. Determination of Third-Party Prot'essional Engineer.
Manheim Borough
Equivalent MPC. 18'1' addition, Section 510(g)(3)
T he arbitrator so appointed shall hear such evidence and review such documentation as
the arbitrator in his or l1cr sole opinion deems necessary and shall render a decision no
later than 50 days after the date of appointment. Based on the decision of the arbitrator,
the A pplicant or the professional consultant whose fees were challenged shall be required
to pay any amounts necessary lo implement the decision within 60 days. In the event the
Borough has paid the professional consultant an amount in excess of the amount
determined to be 1·easonable and necessary, the professional consultant shall within 60
days reimburse the excess payment
61
Subuivision end Land Development Ordinance
Adie le 6, Improvement Guarantees
Loncusler County, l"cn11sylvu11ia
updated Ja nuary 4, 2016
D. Appointment of Third-Party Professional Engineer by Court.
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Section 510{g)(4)
In the event that the Borough's professional consultant and Appl icant cannot agree upon
the arbitrator to be appointed within 20 days of the request for appointment of an
arbitrator, then, upon application of either party, the President Judge of the Court of
Common Picas ofthcjudicial district in which lhe Borough is located (or if al the time
there be no President Judge, then the senior active judge then sitting) shall appoint such
arbitrator, who, in that case, shall be neither the Borough's professional consultant nor
any professional consultant who has been retained by, or performed services for, the
Borough or the Applicant within the preceding five yeal's.
E. Payment of Fee for Third-Party Professional Engineer.
Equivalent MPC, I 81h addition, Section 51 O(g)(5)
The fee of the arbitrator shall be paid by the Applicant if the review fee charged is
sustained by the arbitrator, otherwise it shall be divided equally between the parties. If the
disputed fees are found to be excessive by more than $5,000, the arbitrator shall have the
discretion to assess the arbitration fee in whole or in part against either the Applicant or
the professional consultant. Tl1c 13orough Council and the consultant whose fees are the
subject of the dispute shall be parties to the proceed ing.
6.S RELEASE OF FUNDS
6.5.t Partial Release of Funds.
Equivalent MPC, 1811' addition, Section 5090)
As the work of installing the required Improvements proceeds, the party posting the financial
security may request the Oorough Council to release or authorize the release, from time lo time,
such portions of the financial secur ity necessary for payment to the controctor or contractors
performing the work. Any such requests shall be in writing addressed to the Borough Counci l,
and the Borough Council shall have 45 days from receipt of such request within which to allow
the Borough Engineer lo certify, in writing, to the Borough Council that such portion or the work
upon the Improvements has been competed in accordance with the approved Plat. Upon such
certification the Borough Council shall authorize release by the bonding company or lending
insti tution of an amount as cstimat.ed hy the Borough Engineer fairly representing lhe value ot"the
Improvements completed or, if the Borough Council fai ls lo act within said 45-day period, the
Borough Council shall be deemed to have approved the release of funds as requested. The
13orougl1 Council may, prior to final release at the time of completion and certification by its
Engineer, require retention of I 0% or the estimated cost of t he aforesaid Improvements.
6.5.2. Final Release.
Equivalent MPC, 181h addition, Section S IO(g)( l.1)
Subsequent lo the tinal release of financial security for completion of Improvements for a
Subdivision or Land Development. or any Phase thereof, the professional consultant shall submit
to the Rorough Council a bill for inspection services, specifically designated as a rinal bill. The
final bill shall include inspection fees incurred through the release of financial security.
Manheim Oorough
Subdivision and Land Development OrdinanCt!
Article 6, lmprowmenl (iuaranl<:Cs
62
Lnncastcr C~11111 ty, l)cnnsylvania
updated January ti, 2016
6.5.3 Rcm~dics to Effect Completion of Improvements.
Equivalent MPC. 181
" addition. Section SI I)
In the event that any Improvements which may be required have not been installed as provided in
the Subdivision and Land Development ordinance or in accord with the approved final Plat the
Borough Council of the Borough is hereby granted the power to enforce any corporate bond, or
other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. [f proceeds of such bonJ, or other
security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
Improvements covered by said security, the Borough Council of the Borough may, at its option.
install part of such Improvements in all or part of the Subdivision or Land Development and may
institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the moneys necessary to complete the
remainder of the lmprovemenl s. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the sec urity or from
any legal or equitable aclio11 brought against the Developer, or both, shall be used solely for the
installation of the Improvements covered by such security, and not for any other Municipal
purpose.
6.6 DEDlCA TION OF IMPROVEMENTS
Equivalent MPC, I 81h addition, Section 509(111)
Ir linancial security has been provided in l ieu of the completion of Improvements required as a
condition for the final approval of a Plat as set forth in this section, the Borough shall not
condilion the issuance of !3uilding, grading or other permits relating to the erection or placement
of Improvements, i11cluding Buildings, upon the Lots or land as depicted upon the final Plat upon
actual completion of the Improvements depicted upon the approved final Plat. Moreover. if said
linancial securi ty has been provided, occupancy permits for any Building or Buildings to be
erected shall not be withheld fo llowing: the Improvement of the Streets providing access to and
from existing public roads to such 13ui lding or Buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently
passable condition, as well as the co111pletion or all other Improvements as depicted upon the
approved Plat. either upon the Lot or Lots or beyond the Lot or Lots in question if such
Improvements are necessary for the rt:!asonable use of or occupancy of the Building or Buildings.
Any ordinance or statute inconsistent herewith is hereby expressly repealed.
<>.7 MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE
Equivalent MPC, I 81h addition, Section 509(k)
Where the Borough Council accepts Dedication of all or some of the required Improvements
following completion, the l.3orough Council may require the posting of financial security to secure
structural integrity of said Improvements as well as the functioning of said lmprovcmcnls i11
accordance wilh the design and spccilications as depicted on lhe linal Plat for a term not lo
exceed 18 months from 111e date or acceptance of Dedication. Said financial security shall be or
the same type as otherwise required in this section with regard to insta llation of such
Improvements, and the amount of the financial security shall not exceed l 5% of lhe actual cost of
installation of said Improvements.
Manheim Borough
Subdivision and Land Dcvclopm.:nt Ordinance
/\rticle 6, Improvement Gunrnntecs
63
LMcastcr County, Pcnnsylv1mia
updu1cd Januury 4, 20 16
ARTICLE 7
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS, TESTS, & STUDIES
7.1 TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY
7.1.1 Study Required,
A. Abbre,1iatcd Transportation Impact Study.
Whenever a proposed project will generate ti fly to ninety nine (50-99) new vehicle Trips
in the peak direction (inbound or outbound) during the Site Peak I lour, the Applicant
shall perform an itbbreviated transportation impact study. Based on this study, ce11ain
lmprovenients may be identified as necessary to provide safe and efficient access to the
development. T he abbreviated transportation impact study shall include:
1. A Capacity analysis repo11. prepared under the supervision of a quali tied and
experienced transportation E:ngineer.
2. The study area for the CapaciLy analysis repo1i shall only include all proposed
intersections.
B. Comprehensive 'transportation Impact Study.
Wbenever a proposed proj ect will generate one hundred ( 100) or more new vehicle Trips
in the peak direction (inbound or outbound) during the Sile Peak Hour, the Applicant
shall perform a comprehensive transportation impact study. Based on this study. certain
Improvements may be identified as necessary to pr,ovide safe and efficient access to the
development.
Transpo11atio11 demand management 111easures such as staggered start and end work
ti 111es, telecommt!ling, utilization of transi t, g,reenway or trail l inkages, park and ride
Lots, etc. may be used to reduce Trip generation for the proposed development. If such
measures will reduce the new vehicle Trips in lhe peak direction during the Peak Hour to
less than one hundred (100), then an abbreviated transportation impact study may be
performed in lieu of a comprehensive study. When such Trip reduction measures arc
used to justify performance of a11 abbreviated study as permitted by this section, a
Developer and successors shall be bound by a recorded agreement to implement such
measllres. The terms and form or agreement shall be as mutual ly agreed upon by the
Borough and the Developers.
C. In addition, a comprehensive transportation impact study shall be prepared at the
discretion or the Borough whenever either of the rollowing conditions exists within the
impact study area:
Manheim Clorough
I. Current traffic problems exist in the local area, such as a high crash location)
confusing intersection, or a congested intersection that directly affects access to
the development.
2. The ability of the existing roadway system to handle increased traffi c or the
reasibility of improv ing the roadway system to handle increased traffic is limited.
64
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance Luncnstcr County, Pennsylvania
Article 7, Supplemental Rcquire1ncnts, Tests, & Studies updated January 4, 2016
7.1 .2 Transportation Impact Study Requirements
A. Area of Transportation lmp:ict Study.
The transportation impact study area shall be based 0 11 the characleri!itics of the
surrounding area. T he intersections to be included in the study hall be adj acent to the
Site or have direct impact upon the access to the Site. The intersections shall be mutually
agreed upon by the Borough and the transportation Engineer preparing the study.
PennDOT and the Lancaster County Planning Comlllission may consulted on the study
area. as applicable.
B. Pl'eparation by Transportation Engineer Required.
T ransportation impact studies shall be prepared by or under the supervision or qualified
and experienced transportation Engineers with specific training in traffi c and
transportation engineering M d at least two (2) years of experience related lo preparing
transportation studies for existing or proposed developments.
C. Content ll.cquircmcnts.
When required, transportfltion impact studies shall be prepared in accordance with the
l'ennDOT Publication "Policies and Procedures for Transportation Impact Studies".
current version. In addition, all modes of transportation including n on~moLori zed users,
bicycles, pedestrians, and transit shall be considered in the transportation impact study.
7.1.3 Improvements.
A. Respons ibility for Improvements.
The Applicant shall be responsible for the Improvements required to provide safe and
convenient ingress and egress to the development Site. Proposed Improvements shall
consjder all roadway users including motorized and non-motori zed vehicles. bicycles.
pedestrians. and transit.
B. Coordination with Municipal Requirements.
The Applicant shall be responsible for other l111provcmcnts related to the results of the
transportation impact study as may be agreed to with the Borough.
7.2 HISTORIC AND C ULTURAL ltESOURCES
7.2.1 Archaeological lnvestig~1tions
Specinc state and federal guidelines and procedures for review procedures as well as pertinent
legislation may be obtained by contacting the Bureau for I listoric Preservation (BHP) and
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission (PHMC). Specific state and federal guidelines
and procedures are out lined in detail in A Summary of Major Relevant Federal and Stale
Legislation and Regulations Appendix A, and Procedures for Compliance with Federal and
Monhci111 Borough
11bdivision and Land DcveluprncnL Ordinuncc
Article 7. Sllpple rnt:ntal Rcquircmcnls, rests, & S111dics
65
Lancaster County, Penn sylvania
updated January 4, 20 I 6
Commonwealth Preservation Law Appendix H. PHMC administers both the state and federal
regulations.
Projects affecting or potentially affccti11g historical and archaeological properties are subject to
review by the Pennsylvan ia Historical and Museum Commission, Bureau for Historic
Preservation under the provisions of both Section l 06 of the National I l istoric Preservation Act of
1966 a11d Section IO of the 1978 Pennsylvania I listoric Preservation Act. No project shall be
developed on a Site identi fied by the PHMC as containing or likely to contain features of
archaeological or historic significance until procedures for compliance with Federal and State
regulat ions have been realized and the review process has been completed.
A ll Subdivisions and/or Land Development Plans which meet the above mentioned requirements
shal l provide a letter of determination and/or rep0tt from Pl IMC. l3l IP. The BHP letter may
rccornmc11d one or more of the rollowlng activi ties:
l. Phase I Survey
2. Phase II Survey
3. Phase Ill (Mitigation)
7.2.2 Pt·eservation or H istoric Features.
A. Subdivisions aJld Land Developments shall be designed to preserve, adaptively reuse, or
otherwise provide for the Historic Features of Manheim Borough.
l. Historic Peatures that are retained within the project area shall be situated on a
Lot of su fficicnt size to retain its integrity of setting.
2. After the Lot A rea of the Historic Feature is determined, the remaining number
of buildable Lots that would be allowed 011 the Subject Traci may each be
reduced in area, if necessary, to accommodate the same number or buildable Lots
on the Subject Tract, to not smalle1· than the minimum Lot areu of the underlying
zoning distri ct.
B. Modi fications or exterior alterations lo Historic Features or Sites, or new construction in
the immediate vici nity of Historic Features shall be consistent with .. T he Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic Properties·', as published by the
National Park Service. New construction should be visually compatible with the
character of l listoric Features in the vici nity in terms or size, scale, mass. shape,
proport"ion, materials and textures, rhythm and patterns, orientatio11 and location, cornice
and floor to floor heights, arrangement and si:te of windows on the facade, etc. See
Appendix P.
C. A landscape Plan shall be provided that provides Buf feri ng, using vegetative materials,
walls or fencing as appropriate, between new construction and Historic Features to holp
mi tigate adverse visual or auditory impacts and to help the Historic reature retain its
integr ity ofseu ing.
Manhci1n Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ord inance
Article 7. Supplemental Requirements. Tests, & Studies
66
Lancaster County, l'ennsylvnnia
updated Jununry 4. 20 16
7.2.3 Demolition Restricted
A. Prior to the demolition or removal from its original foundation, review and approval by
the Borough Council shall occur. The Applicant must provide the Borough Council with
an evaluation by a qualified historic preservation professional of the historic and/or
architectural signilicance of the l3uilding. In addition, the Applicant must provide
credible evidence in response to each of the following speci tic criteria:
1. That is not feasible to continue the current use.
2. That other uses permitted within the underlying zoning district, either as
permitted uses, special exception uses, or conditional uses, have been denied or
are not feasible due to constrai nts on the Building or Structure.
3. That adaptive use opportunities do not exist dut:: to constraints related to the
Building, St ructure, or property.
4. That the Building, its per111itted uses, and adaptive Lise potential does not provide
a reasonable rate of reLurn, based on a reasonable initial investment.
5. Thal the Applicant has not contributed to the existing conditions, either through
neglect or prior renovation, conversion, alteration, or similar physical action.
6. That the demolition will not adversely affect the character of the nei~hborhood or
community.
7. That a proposed new Building(s), Structure(s), or use or the property will not
adversely affect the character of the neighborhood or community.
8. That the Building is structurnlly unsound.
B. If the application for a permit for demolition, relocation. or removal is approved, said
permit shall oot be issued by lhe Borough until che following additional requirernents
have been satisfied.
1. The recording of an approved Subdivision or Land Development Plan for the Lot
where the demolition, removal, or relocation is proposed;
2. Issuance of any necessary zoning approvals~ and
3. Approval ofthe Land Development Plan by the Borough Council.
C. Applican ts whose applications for demolition, removal, or relocation are approved may
be subject to conditions that include but may not be limited to the fo llowing. (The
Applicant will be informed at the conclusion of the review process regardi ng any
conditions that must be satisfied. Refusal to coinoly with the conditions will be deemed a
violaLion.)
Manheim Borough
Subdivision and Land Di!VClopmenL OnJinonce
Aniclc 7, SupJ)IC111cn1al Rcquii·cmcnts. Tes ts, & $tudit:s
67
l .ancnsler County. Pennsylvanin
updRled fanu11ry 4, 2016
I. A complete set of exterior and interior photographs or the Building for
demolition, removal, or relocation which includes all exterior Elevations, interior
spaces, and all significant architectural features.
2. A historic Structure report which may include any or all of the following;
(a) Physical Description including a Si te Plan with north arrow, showing all
Buildings on the Parcel, nearby roads, landmarks, Streams, etc., a written
description of the general area, a written description of the Lot or Parcel
with relationships of Buildings one lo another, and a wri tten description
of each Building with exterior and interior pictures.
(b) I listoric Narrative telling the story of the property and including a
bibliography.
(c) Chain of Tille including documentation or the source of the information
such as the Deed or will book, volume, page number, etc.
(d) Photo Documentation including general photos of property showing
relationships of Bui ldings and detailed photos (interior and exterior) of
all Buildings.
(e) Measured Drawings labeled and cross-referenced to phOlographs of the
same dctai I.
(f) Appendices including copies of Deeds and wills, maps, anti other
supporting materials
3. A Plan for the salvage of architectural features and/or Building materials.
7.2.4 Retention of Local Names.
Applicants are encouraged lo perpetuate historic names or geographic references that are
traditionally associated with the area, in which a project is located, rather Lha11 proposing project
names Lhal are not consistent with Manheim Borough or Lancaster County traditions or culture.
7.3 PARKS ANO OPEN SPACE
7.3.1 Dedication.
All Plans for residential Subdivision of land or residential land Developments shall provide tor
the Dedication of land for park and Common Open Space uses, and/or, upon agreement by the
Applicant, the construction of recreation faci lities, the payment offccs in lieu thereo r, the private
reservation of land, or any combination thereor. /\ ll Dedications of land for park and Common
Open Space purposes shall be consistent wilh standards contained within the officially adopted
park and recreation Plan or parks and recreation chapter of the Municipal Comprehensive Plan. if
such chapter meets the intent and criteria of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, and
is officially adopted by the Borough Council.
Monhcim 13orou~h
Subdivisi<in and l.t111d Development Ordinance
Article 7, Supplemental Requirements, Tests. & Studies
68
Lancaster County. Pcnnsylvaniu
updatcd Junuury 4. 20 16
7.3.2 General Requirements.
When the Borough has an officially adopted park and recreation Plan or qualifying M~111i cipal
Comprehensive Plan, Applicants shall designate areas of residential Subdivisions or residential
Land Developments for parks, playgrounds, or other Common Open Space and recreational uses
in accordance with the provisions of such Plans. The Applicant shall make an irrevocable offer of
Dedication for such land to the Borough, as required by the Borough Council. Title to such land
shall be good and marketable, free of liens or other defects, and acceptable to the Borough
Solicitor. The Borough Council may, upon agreement of the Applicant, authorize the transfer or
the land to a homcowner's association or to a non-profit corporation whose purpose is the
conservation or preservation of land.
7.3.J Amount of Lancl to be Dedicated.
A. The amount of park and Common Open Space to be dedicated shall be equal lo, and in
conformance with, standards adopted by the BoroL1gh Council as expressed in the
officially adopted park and recreation Plan or qualifying Municipal Comprehensive Plan.
n. rr the applicable Plan specifically designates a future park site within the acreage of the
T ract proposed for development, all Subdivision Plans shall be designed in conformance
with such designation in that all land required to be dedicated shall correspond to the
location of the future park site.
I. Should the amount of land required to be dedicated exceed the acreage of the
future park site as designated within the applicable Plan, the development
proposal shall provide for such additional area to be located in a manner that best
serves future residents of the proposed development.
2. Should the amount of land required to be dedicated fal l short of the acreage of
the future park site as designated within the applicable Plan or if the proposed
development involves only a po1tion of the development rights afforded to the
Tract, the Applicant shall reserve that po1t ion of the future park site which will
best serve the immediate development. In addition, a Sketch Plan shall be
prepared to depict how ru ll bui ld-out of the Site will be accomplished in a
manner that respects the locution of the future park site and ensures its
accessibi lity to all future dwellings on the Tract. As an alternative to such
piecemeal Dedication. the Borough may opt to purchase that portion of the future
park site. In which case, the fu ture Dedication of land associated with the
development of the nact would proceed in accordance with the provisions of
Section 7 .3.9.
7.3.4 Fee in Lieu of Dedication.
The Applicant may, with the consent and approval of 1he Borough Council, elect to pay a fee to
the Borough in lieu of the park and Common Open Space Dedication and so note on the Plans.
A. The amount or any fee to be paid in lieu or Dedication of land shall be equal to the
average fair market value of the land (based on the unimproved land va lue) otherwise
required by this Section or shall be in accordance with any existing, municipally adopted
flat fee-in-lieu sched ule which establishes a fixed price per Lot, unit, or acre. lf no
Manheim Borough
<:iubdivision und Land Developmi:nl Ordinance
Article 7. Suppli:111cn1al Rc4uiremen1s. Tests, & Stud ies
69
Lancost~r Counly. Pcnnsylvoniu
updated Jununry 4, 2016
formula is provided in any other Municipal planning documents, the formula to be used
in computing the fee based upon fair market value shall be:
N x (average PMV of one acre) = fee.
Where; N = the number of acres required to be dedicated for park and Common Open
Space purposed, ca lculated in accordance with Section 7.3.3. and F'MV = fa ir market
value based on the unimproved land value.
B. The Applicant shall provide the Borough Council with all information necessary to
determine the fair market value of the land. including, but not limited to, the following:
1. If the Applicant is the equitable owner, or purchased lhe land in fee simple less
than two (2) years prior to the Preliminary or Final Plan submission, a copy of
the agreement of sale or real eslale transfer tax affidavit of va lue.
2. If the Applicant is the equitable owner, or purchased the land in fee simple more
than two (2) years prior to the Preliminary or Final Plan submission, an opinion
of value of the prope11y by a state certi fied appraiser acceptable to the Borough
Council.
Any Applicant aggrieved by the fee established shall have the right to secure a second
opinion of value of the properly by a state certi fied appraiser acceptable 10 the Borough
Council. The two (2) ~stima ted values shall be averaged. with the result being the amount
upon which the fee will be based.
C. Such fee shall be payable to the Borough Counci l prior to the recording or each final
Phase of the Plan and shall be in an amount equal to the percentage of the total number of
dwelling units in the f>ha e.
7.3.5 Parkland Acquisition ~' u ncl.
All fees paid by the Developer in lieu of Dedication of park and Common Open Space shall be
paid to the Borough and upon its receipt shall be deposited in a separate interest-bearing account.
Fees deposited to this account shall be administered as required by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
7.3.6 General Ocsign Cri teria.
except as provided in Scctio117.3.7 and Section 7 .3 .8, the type of areas to be dedicated for park and
Common Open Space within a Subdivision or Land Development Plan shall principally involve
neighborhood parks which arc tle f111ed as "those parks providing prin1arily active outdoor
recreational opportunities located within one-hal f ( 1/2) mi le radius from a majority of the
residences to be served thereby". Exceptions to this will be when Dedications arc made to a
community park which serves the Subdivision and is located within a two (2) mile radius or the
majority of the residences to be served, or a County park whjch serves re idences located within a
ten (10) mile rad ius.
The land set aside for park and Common Open Space uses shall meet the fo llowing design
criteria:
Manheim l:lorou~h
Subdivision and Lant! Development Ordinnnce
A11iclc 7. Supplcmcnt:1l Requirements, 1 ests. & ludies
70
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
updated January 4. 2016
A. The park and Common Open Space shall be reasonably located so as to serve al l of the
residents of the Subdi vision or Land Development.
B. The park and Common Open Space shall be accessible from a Street either directly or by
pedestrian connection or shall adjoin and become a part of an already existing public park
or Common Open Space area that is accessible from a Street. Where access to the park is
by public road, 1he width or the F'rontage shall be a minimum length deemed necessary
by the Borough for access, visibil ity of the Site, and public safety.
C. No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the park and Common Open Space shall
contain Detention Basins or other Storm Water Management Facilities, or be located
within a Floodplain or Wetland unless such area is part of a linear trail or green way
along an existing Watercourse. In nil cases, land containing Detention Basin or other
Storm Water Management Faci Ii ties, Floodplains, or Well ands. must be suitable for
public recreation use wi thout compromising the function of these areas.
D. The park and Common Open pace shall be compact and Contiguous unless the land is
located adjacent to and combined with existing park and Common Open Space, or
speci (ic topographic features require a different configuration. An example of such
topographic features would be the provision or linear public Common Open Space along
a scenic creek.
E. When public pai·k and Common Open Space exists adjacent lo the Tract lo be subdivided
or developed, the park and Comrnon Open Space shall be localed to adjoin and enlarge
the presently existing park and Common Open Space.
F. The park and Common Open Space shall be accessible to utilities such as sewer, water,
and power that are provided within the Subdivision, and if so. the Developer shall extend
such utilities to the park and Common Open Space.
G. ff the Developer is planning 10 construct facilities for recreation 0 11 the dedicated prope11y
as an amenity for the development, such facil ities shal l be constructed in accordance with
current standards established by the ational Recreation and Park Association. Where
applicable, faci lities cons1ructcd shall also comply with the access ibility guidelines of the
Americans with Disabilities Act or 1990. Playground equipment constructed or placed on
parkland shall be in compliance wi1h guidelines rrom the Consumer Products Safety
Commission.
7.3.7 Existing Trails.
When a Subdivision or Land Development is traversed by or abu ts an existing public trail,
customarily used by pedestrians and/or equestrians, the Applicant shall make provision for the
continued recreational use of the trail, subject to alterations of the course of the trail wi thin the
boundaries or the development under the following conditions:
A. T he points at which lhc trail enters and exits the Tract shall remain unchanged.
B. The proposed alteration exhibits quality trail design according to the generally accepted
principles of landscape architecture.
Mnnheim Boroush
Subdivision and Land Dtwlupm~nt Ordinnnce
l\nicll! 7. upplemcntul Re4uircmc.:111s. fests, & Studies
71
Lancnsler County, Pcnnsyl\anitt
11pdnted January 4. 20 16
C. The proposed alteration docs 11ot run coincidenta lly with the paved road intended for use
by motorized vehicles.
The land set aside for the continuation of such existing trail shall be counted towards the amount of
park and Common Open Space.
7.3.8 Trails and Linear Parks.
The trail 01· l inear park shall conform to any applicable ML111 icipal master park and open space
Plan, any County-wide trail and recreation master Plan, and appropriate Municipal and County
Comprehensive Plans. The Borough Cou11cil may require, as a condition of Final Plan approval,
the Dedication and Improvement of trails and linear park&. which may be credited toward the park
and Common Open Space requirement. Trails and linear parks developed and dedicated for public
use may be credited toward the park and Common Open Space requirement.
7.3.9 Municipal Fund Reimbursement.
The Borough may from time-to-time decide to purchase land for parks in or near the area of
actual or potential development. If the Borough does purchase park and Common Open Space
within a distance of one-half (112) mile, subsequent park and Common Open Space Dedications
within Lhat area may, upon agreement with the Applicant, be in cash only ~nd shall be calculated
on a percentage basis co reimburse the Borough's actual cost of acquisition and/or cost of
development of such land for park and Common Open Space purposes. The cash amount shall be
equal to the sum of the average price per acre of such land plus the actual costs of adjacent St reets
and on-Site util i ties (or an estimate or such actual costs provided by the Borough 811gineer)
divided by the number of Lois or dwelling units in the development.
7.3.10 Additional Recreation lleservations.
The provisions of this Section are minimum standards and shall not be construed as pl'oliibiting a
Developer, with the approval of the Borough Council, from dedicating, or reserving other land for
recreation purposes in addi tion to the requirements of this Ordinance.
7.3.11 Private Reservation of L~ind .
Notwithstanding anything contained in the above Sections, the Applicant may, with the consent
and approval of the Oorough Council, elect lo fulfill the Common Open Space requirements
through the private reservation of a recreation area.
A. Any project that proposes the private reservation of land shall be accompanied by an
agreement, which is acceptable to the Borough Solicitor, and which shall be recorded
prior to or concurrent with the Preliminary Plan approval. Such agreement shall stipulate:
Manheim Borough
l. '!'hat maintenance of the designated Common Open Space is the responsibility of
the Applicant, a homeowners' association, a Condominium unit owners'
association, or other recognized conservation organization.
2. The availability of such private Common Open Space to non-residents or the
development.
72
ubdivision a11d l.nnd Developmenl Ordinance Lonc:ister County, Pennsylvania
l\niclc 7. Supplemt:ntal Requirements. Tests. & Studies updoled January 4, 20 16
3. The method by which the private resei-vation may be offered for public
Dedication.
4. That the land cannot be developed for anything other than Common Open Space
purposes.
S. That the land cannot be sold or disposed of by the association except to another
organization formed to own and maintain said Common Open Space and without
first offering to dedicate the land and Improvements to the Borough.
B. If such lands are to become common elements of a homeowners' or Condominium unit
owners' association of any ty pe, then such association's organizational by-laws must
conform to the requirements of applicable state law.
7.3.12 Construction of Heeren ti on Facilities.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the above Sections, the Applicant may, with the consent
and approval of the Borough Council, elect to fulfill the Common Open Space rcquiremenls
through the construction of recreational facilities. All approved recreation facilities constrncted in
lieu of land Dedication shall be included within the cost estimate for the Improvement guarantee.
7.4 llYOROCEOLOGlC REPORT
When there is a reasonab le probability that a project will affect or be affected by carbonate
geologic hazards the 13orough Council shall require submission of a hydrogeologic report. In
reaching a determination of whether a project wi II affect or be affected by carbonate geologic
hazards, the Borough Council shall consider the presence or absence of carbonate features in the
vicinity of the project, the testimony of qualified expert witnesses, and such other reasonable
information as may be avai lable.
When a lzydrogeologic report is required, an aquifer study (see Section 7.5) shall also be required.
All hydrogeologic reports shall be prepared at the Applicant's expense by a licensed Geologist
qua Ii lied in such matters. Each hydrogeologic report shall contain:
A. A map showing all sinkholes, depressions, lineaments, faults, outcrops. springs. drainage
entering the ground, water table, soil mottling and gllOst lakes, and all features that may
relate lo the quality and availability of groundwater w ithin two hundred (200) feet in all
directions from lhe Subj ect Tract.
R. /\map outlining all private wells within a radius or two hundred (200) feet of the Subject
l'rad and all public walei- supplies, associated pipes. hydrants, and future service areas
within two hundred (200) foet in all directions of the Subject Tract provided such
in formation is available from public sources or docu111ents.
C. A listing of all rel'crcnced data, published and otherwise.
D. /\ topographic Site map with the Site clearly outlined.
t\ lunheim 11orough 73
Subdivision nnd Lnnd Development Ordinance
Article 7. Supplemental Requirements. TcMs. & Studies
t .uneasier County. Pennsylv:111 ia
updated January 4. 20 t 6
E. A map indicating the location and design of all on-Site wastewater disposal systems and
secondary systems.
I<'. A description of anticipated water quality impacts to areas located downgradicnt and
areas located along the geologic strike.
G. A description of on Site mitigation measures that could be applied to minimize impacts of
lhe project or to correct existing problems.
Mnnheim Dorough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
Article 7. Supplemental Requirements, rests. & S tudi~s
74
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
updoted Junuury 4. 2016
ARTICLE 8
DESIGN STANDARDS FOR URBAN GROWTH AHEAS
To establish and maintain compact, mixed use communities that serve as activity centers for the
surrounding area To focus and accommodate future development primarily within Urban
Growth Areas. To ensure the provision of a ful I range of public facilities. services, and
infrastructure (water service, sewer service, transportation, and communications) and allow the
coordinated expansion of such faci lities within Urban Growth Areas. To strengthen the role of
Manheim Borough as the focal point of its respective region.
To attract new manufacturing, commercial, and professional businesses that provide quality j abs.
To suppo11 community-based business development in Urban neighborhooLls. To create a
sustainable economy that connects people with job opportunities.
To improve the transportation system to serve employers and employees. Provide adequate,
affordable, and accessible mass and specialized transit service!). To develop aesthetically
pleasing, interconnected tn:111sportation systems that encourage walking, biking, and public transit,
and discourage high-speed traflic which will protect and improve the quality of our air.
To encourage the preservation, adaptation, re-use, and protection of the integrity of historic
Buildings and Structures, archaeological si tes. and other cultural resources. To design new
Buildings lo complement the architectural character of the surrounding, neighborhood.
To allow for a range of housing types at a range of densities on land sufncient to accommodate
current and projected regional lair share hollsing needs. To increase housing choice,
affordability, diversity in housing types and tenure (rental and ownership options).
To improve the character and form Of New Development in order to enhance the quality of life
for current and new residents. To establish cohesive, safe neighborhoods, and a clean, healthy
physical environment. To design new community segments to accommodate citizens from a wide
range of economic levels, occupations, age groups, backgrounds, and interests. To increase the
proportion, density, and intensity of development within Urban Growth Areas.
To preserve, protect, enhance, and restore the Native Plant and animal diversity and functioning
natural systems. To develop a permanently preserved open space system that provides a diversity
of publicly accessible open space resources in the form of town squares, greenways. and parks.
To protect, conserve, and improve surface and groundwater resources.
8.t GENERAL
8.1.1 Minimum Standards und Requirements.
The standards and requirements cont..iined in this Article shall apply as minimum design
standards for Urban Subdivisions and/or Land Developments, as defined in Section 2.2.
Manhein1 Borough
Subdivision and Lend Development Ordim111ce
Art icle 8: Urban Design S1andards
75
Lnncaster County. Pennsyl vania
updated January 4. 20 16
If Land Development in formation indicates that existing Improvements on the Subject Tract do
not meet the requirements or this Section, then existing Improvements on the Subj ect Tract must
be designed and proposed to meet the requi rements of this Ordinance. When the Land
Development will utilize or be integrated into exi sting infrastructure, the existing infrastructure
on the Subject Tract shall be improved to the standards of this Ordinance.
8.1.2 Complhrncc with Munici1>al Ordina11ccs Required.
All Plans shall be designed in compliance with the municipal zoning ordinance and all other
applicahlc ordinances, regul ations, Plans, studies, and local requirements.
8.1.3 Zoning App rovals Required Prior to Piao Submission.
When a Plan proposal requires the grant of a special exception, conditional use or variance from
the municipal zoning ordinance, the Applicant shall obtain such special except ion, conditional use
or variance approval from the Borough Council and/or zoning hearing board, as applicable, prior
to the submission of the applicable Plan. The Plan shall be designed and developed in accordance
with any conditions that have been imposed upon the grant of such special exception, conditional
use or variance by the l3orough Council and/or zoning hearing board, as appl icable.
8.2 STRF..ETS, ACCESS DRIVES, AND DRIVEWAYS
A. Each Street shal l be designed to meet the design requirements by use of Appendix 0 and
Appendix H.
B. Consideration should be given to where snow placement Easements will be situated on
the Site.
8.2.1 General Arrangement.
T he following criteria shal l be considered in the design of Streets in al l Urban Subdivisions
and/or Land Developments.
A. The alignment of Streets shall conform !o the circulation plan of the municipal
Comprehensive Plan, lo Official Maps, and to such mtmicipal, County and State road and
highway plans as have been duly adopted.
R. For Streets not shown on the circulation plan or Official Map, the arrangement shall Lake
into account existing Topography and other Site constraints when providing for the
appropriate extension of exi sting Stree ts.
C. Local Streets shall be arranged so as to discourage excessive speeds when their function
is to remain local.
D. Streets shall be designed with drainage grates that are safe for crossing by bicycles or
horse~draw n vehicles.
E. Curvilinear Streets and Cul-de-sacs should be uti lized only where Topography and
natural features dictate them on the Site. and where their use will be consistent with
adj oining development patterns. Curvil inear Streets shall not be used immed iately
adjacent to an existing grid Street system without providing a transition that continues
Manheim 13orough
Suhdivision and Land Development Ordimmcc
Article 8: Urban Design Standards
76
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
updated January 4. 20 I 6
and protects the grid. Cul-de--sacs shall not be used where it is possible to provide grid
pattern Streets that provide better access for emergency vehicles, fewer restrictions for
snow removal and improved pedestrian access. New project Street systems, plaited
adjacent to an existing Street system. shall not be merely looped back on Local Streets,
but shall connect with or be designed to connect with, in the future. Streets of a higher
class. Consideration shall be given to the dispersal of traffic from commercial and
employment center:., and to the ultimate functioning of the Street system and regional
transportation network.
F. Streets shall be laid out to provide convenient and sa fe access to the property. Where
appropriate, the 13orough Council may require additional Cartway Improvements and/or
Right-of-Way width along existing Street Frontages to accommodate the anticipated
traftic increases and to facilitate vehicular turning movements to and from individual
Lots.
G. Where a develop111ent abuts an existing or 1Jroposed Arterial Street, the Borough Council
may require access management techniques such as the use of marginal access Streets,
Reverse Frontage Lots, or other such treatment that will provide protection for Abutting
properties, reduce the number of intersections with the Arterial Street, and separate the
local and through traffic.
H. Street lengths shall be minimized as to promote the most efficient Street layout while still
protecting the natural, cultural. and historical environment.
l. The use of permeable pavement is encouraged on sidewalks, plazas, Driveways, parking
Lots, and low-traffic roads. Permeable pavement shall not be located on industrial Sites.
fueling stalions. Sites with expansive so ils or high depth to bedrock, areas draining to the
permeable pavement greater than 5 acres, areas wi th the water table less than two feel
below the bottom of the pavement base, and less than 100 feet from drinki11g wells.
8.2.2 Street Hierarchy.
A. A ll proposed Strocts shall be classified according to the Street hierarchy of the existing
transportation network with design tailored to function and Average Daily Traffic (ADT).
B. The Street hierarchy system shall be de fined by the municipal Comprehensive Plan.
Ol"ficial Map, or other municipal planning documents.
C. T he Applicant shall demonstrate to the Borough Counci l's satisfaction that lhe
distribution of traf1ic to the proposed Sireet system wi ll not exceed the ADT thresholds
for any proposed Street type for a design period of ten ( I 0) yc<irs from the proposed date
of completion of the road.
0. Private Streets may be used provided the Borough Counci l determines that no public
benefit will be served by Dedication. Applications that propose a Private St reet shall be
accompanied by a recorded declaration or an agreement which shall be recorded with the
Lancaster County Recorder o f Deeds as part of the Final Plan. '!'his agreement shall
establish the conditions under which the Street wi ll be constructed and maintained in
accordance with the design approved on the Pinal Plan, and shall stipulate:
l. Ownership interest in the Private St reet.
Munheim Borough
Subdivision 11nd Land Dcvclop111en1 Ordinance
Article 8: Urbun Design Standards
77
Lancu51t:r County, Pennsylvania
updated Junuury 4. 2016
2. No limitations on users unless identified in the private agreement.
J . A statement indicating that civil cour1, not the Borough Council, is responsible
for mitigating differences relating to the agreement.
4. The method of assessing maintenance and repair cosl.
S. Pr ivate Streets shall not be offered for Dedication as a public Street unless they
are restored ro munici pal design standards for Streets. The offer for Dedication
of Lhe Street shall be made only for the Street as a whole.
8.2.3 Determination of Required Street Design Standards.
Newly created Right·of-Way and Cartway width for each interior Street classi fication shall be
determ ined by the proposed use, projected ADT and the i ntensity of development permitted and
existing along each Street. Each Catt way width shall be based on the travel l ane, on-Street
parking, multi-modal lanes, and gutter width.
URBAN*
25 ' 0-8' Oor7' O·S' 9-12' 9- 12" 0·8' Oor7'0-8" 25
side bur purkmg Gicyclc travel 1rnvel 01cyclc pnrkm[I bur. side
w.ilk l&nt lane lune lone lane lune wulk
CAR1WAY
RIG! IT-01 -WAY
* BufTer areas and shoulder:- ore encouraged but not required
A. Travel Lanes.
I. Travel lane width requirements shall vary according to the Average Daily Traffic
(ADT)*.
Miles P..:r Hour Under 400 ADT 40 1lo 1500 ADT
15 9 n. travel lane I 0 fi. travel lane
20 - 40 9 ft. travel lane I 0 ft. trave l lane
45 - 50 10 ft. travel lane I I ft. travel lane
55 11 ft. t ravel lane I I fl. travel lane
* derived from AA ' I rro as amended
Manheim 13orough
Subdivision und Land Development Ordinam:c
Article 8: Urban Design Standards
78
150 I to 2000 ADT Over 2000 ADT
I 0 fl. travel lane 11 ft. travel lane
11 ft. travel lane 12 rt. travel lane
I l ft. travel Jane 12 rt. travel lane
12 ft. travel lane 12 n. travel lane
Lancuster County, Pcnnsylvani:i
updated January 4. 20 16
B. Bicycle Lanes.
t. Bicycle lanes shall be provided for all Streets whe11 identified by lhe municipal
long range plans.
2. Bicycle lane requirements shall vary according to the speed of the Streets.
(a) For a posted speed limit of twenty-six to thirty-five (26 - 35) miles per
hour, four (4) foot Multi modal lanes shall be provided.
(h) For a posted speed limit of thirty-six to forty-five (36 - 45) miles per
hour, six (6) foot Multimodal lanes shall be provided.
3. Grates shall be bicycle and borse drawn safe.
C. Curbs, Cutters, and Swales
Man heim !Jorough
l. Curbing shall be required to meet any of the following:
(a) Stonn WaM rnanag,ement.
(b) Road stabilization.
(c) Ten ( 10) feet on each side of drainage inlets.
(d) Al intersections.
( e) At corners.
(f) At light radii.
2. Drainage Swales in place of curbing may be used when all of the fo llowing can
be shown:
(a) Soil and/or Topography make the use of drainage Swales preferable.
(b) It is in the best interest of the co1111mmity to preserve its existing
character by using drainage Swales instead of curbs.
(c) Curbing would negati vely impact a cohesive Storm Water management
best management design (BMP).
3. Plexibility regarding curb type shall be permitted as long as the curb type
accommodates the system of drainage proposed.
4. Curbing shall be designed to provide a ramp cut at each intersection. at the
principal entrances to Buildings which front on parking lots, and at all
crosswalks.
79
Sub<livis ion un<l 1,on<l lJ<!vclOpment 0 1•dinance
i\rticl~ 8: Urban Des i&n Sttlnc.lanls
Lancaster County. Pcnnsylvuniu
updated January 4. 20 16
D. Buffer Area.
Signage and Street trees shall genera lly be located wi thi11 the Buffer area of the Right-of-Way.
Buffer areas shall be planted with grass. ground cover, or treated with other suitab le Pervious
Material. See Section 8. 10.2 for Street tree standards. When Buffer Areas are provided, they shall
be a minimum of 4 feet wide with 8 feet preferred when plamed with trees. Buffer areas may be
eliminated when a wider Pedestrian Way is provided.
1. Centerline of the Right-of-Way may not always be the centerline of the travel
lanes.
2. Where the Right-of-Way width of the new Street is di fferent than the existing
Street, a transition area shall be provided, the design of which is subject to
Borough Council approval.
3. The Righr-of-Way width shall be designed to meet the design requirements by
use of Appendix 0. Right-of-Way widths may change for each Street, based on
the anticipated future development.
F. Vertical Street Alignments.
Manheim Borough
1. Vertical CLtrVes shall be used in changes in grade exceeding one percent ( I%).
2. A lignment:
(a) V ertica l Street and Access Drive alignments shall be measured along the
center! i ne.
(b) Minimum Rate of Vertical Curvature K shall be as specified below:
Initial Speed (mpl1) Curvature, K' Curvature, K1 (ftfo/o)
(fl/%) Crest Sag
15 3 10
20 7 17
25 12 26
30 19 37
35 29 49
40 44 64
45 61 79
50 84 96
55 114 11 5
1 Rate or vertical curvature, K = length of curve (L) per percent algebraic difference
(A) in the inlerscclion grndcs (K=IJA)
80
ubdivision and Land Development Ordinance
Article 8: Urban Design Standards
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
updated JB11uary 4, 2016
3. Grade:
(a) Where the approaching grade is seven (7%) percent or greater, a leveling
area shall be provided within seventy-five (75) feet of a four-way Street
intersection on the Street of lesser classification, or Access Drives, or lhe
terminating Street at a three-way intersection.
(b) Such leveling area(s) shall have a maximum grade of four percent (4%)
for a minimum length of forty (40) feet measured from the intersection of
the centerlines.
G. Horizontal Street Alignments.
Manheim Borough
1. l iorizontal curves shall be used at al I angle changes in excess of two (2) degrees.
2. The design of horizontal curves shall be based on an appropriate relationship
between design speed and curvature and 011 their joint relationships with
Superelevation ( roadway banking). (The longer the radius of a curve, the higher
the speed through that curve).
3. Single, long radius curves shall be used rather than a series of curves with
varying radii and/or a series of short curves separated by short, straight segments.
4. Access Drives intersections shall be designed to Local Street horizontal
alignment standards.
5. Determination of minimum horizontal centerline radius*
Initial Speed Centerline Radius ' Cen terline Radius 1
(mph) (feet) (feet)
No Superclevntion 4% Supe relevation
(e mnx)
15 50 42
20 107 86
25 198 154
30 333 250
35 510 371
40 762 533
45 1039 711
so 926
55 1190
* deri ved from AASHTO formula R,,,111 =- V2 / 15*(0.0I e + f,n .. )
1 Curve rntlius shall be measured to the centerl ine ofCa1tways and Access D1ives.
6. Superelevation in certain conditions may be amended when using AAS! ITO
Exhi bit 3-16 as llpdated.
81
Subdivision and La11d Development Ordina11cc
Article 8: Urbnn Design Standards
Lancaster CounLy. Pennsylvania
updated January 4, 20 16
H. Street Intersections.
1. Cul-de-sac/ Minor Local/ Major Local Streets
A minimum separation of no less than 150 feet between centerlines shal l be
provided.
2. Collector Streets
(a) Minor Collectors a mi11imum separation distance of 275 feet between
center! i nes shall be provided.
{b) Major Collectors a minimum separation distance of 300 feet between
centerlines shall be provided.
3. Arterial Streets
A minimum separation distance of 600 feel between centerlines shall be
provided.
~. Right angle intersections shall be used. No Street intersection Modification shall
be granted at an angle of less than sixty (60) degrees.
5. The Cart way edge at Street intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with
a minimum radius of five (5) feet and a maxim Lim rad ills of twenty five (25) feet.
The Right-of-Way radii at intersections shall be substantially concentric with the
edge of the Cartway. Curb return radii of I 0 - 15 feet should be used where high
pedestrian volumes are present or the volume or turning vehicles is low. Largt:r
radii should be used when parking or non-motorized lanes are not provided.
6. Where warranted by a trafnc impact study, the Oorough Council may require
additional traffic lanes or additional Right-of-Way to faci litate vehicular turning
movements at existing or proposed Street inter ections within Subdivision or
Land Development Plans.
I. Sight Distance at Intersections.
Mnnheim Oorough
l. Proper Sight Distnnce shall be provided at all new Streets, Access Drives, and all
Driveway intersections in accordance with the latest edition of the Pennsylvania
Depa1tment of Tra11sportatio11 Design Manual - Port 2, I lighway Design
(Pub I ication 13), and Section 2.18. P as amended. Sufficient design and Plan
i11formalio11 shal I be submitted with the Plan application proving that this
minimum standard wi ll be achieved. Such design information shall be sea led by a
professional registered in Pennsylvania to perform such design work.
(a) Access Drive Sight Distance based on 10 foot off of edge of Crutway. an
eye height of 3.5 feet to an object at 3.5 foot height.
(b) Street Sight Distance based on IS foot off of edge of Cart way, an eye
height of 3.5 feet to an object at 3.5 foot height.
82
Subdivision ond I.Ainu Development Ordinance
Art icle 8: UrbrJn Oe:-ign Standards
I .<1ncaster Count), Pennsylvania
updnted Jnnuury 4. 20 16
2. All intersections shall be provided with appropriate stop control devices on the
lesser cl assification Street or Access Drive. No Clear Sight Triangle Easements
are required when slop control devices are used.
3. When stop control devices arc not provided on the lesser Street classification or
Access Dri ve, Clear Sight Triangle Easements shall be provided. Clear Sight
Triangle Easements shall include the area on each Street corner tha1 is bounded
by the line which connects the sight or "connecting" points located on each of the
Right-of-Way Lines of the intersecting Street. The planting of trees, other
plantings, signs, and Structures exceeding thirty (JO) inches in height that w•ould
obstruct the clear sight across the area of the Easements shal I be prohibited.
(a) Arterial Streets shall have a Clear Sight Triangle side of 150 feet.
(b) Collector Streets shall have a Clear Si ght Tr·iangle side of I 00 feet.
(c) Local roads, Cul-de-sacs. and Alleys shall have a Clear Sight Triangle
side of 7 5 feet.
J. Cross Sectional Specific:'ttioos.
A ll new Street paving must conform to the following cross sectional specifications (all
courses are compacted thicknesses) unless superseded by a road ordinance or zoning
ordinance.
1. All new Streets, other than those owned and maintained by PennDOT shall be
designed with the fol lowing cross-sectional specification: Eight (8) inch 2A stone
sub base, four (4) inch 25-mm Superpave asphalt base course, one and one half ( I
Y2") inch 9.5-mm Supcrpave asphalt wearing course. All pavement shall be
Superpave asphalt mixture desig11 1 IMA, PG 64-22, 0.3 to 3 million ESA Ls with
Skid Resistance Level (SRL-H), unless otherwise requested by lhe Borough.
2. All Streets to be owned and maintained by PennDOT shall be designed in
accordance with PennDOT speciflcations.
8.2.4 Pedestrian Way.
A. Trails.
Manh(!im Borough
1. Trail width shall be a mini1m1m of Jive (5) feet.
2. Easements are requi red for trails. Provide a Plan note indicating such Easement
must be live (5) foot on either side of the edge oflhe lrail as constructed.
3. Encroachrnents into the trail shal l not result in less than a 4 foot wide minimum
clearance width from any obstacles.
4. Marked crosswalks shall be provided within the vehicular travel ways
intersecting with trails.
83
Subdivision an<l Lund l)l!VCIOpnii.!nl O rdina n~c
Article 8: Urban Dt!s ii,;.n Stand::trds
Lancaster County. Pennsylvania
uptlat~d January 4. 20 16
B. Sidewalks.
1. Paved sidewalks shAll be provided on both sides of a new Street.
2. Sidewalk widths shall be a minimum of five (5) feet.
J. Where practical, sidewalks should be sloped towards adj acent Pervious Surfaces,
not adjacent Impervious Surfaces.
4. Encmachments into the sidewalk shall not result in less than a 4 foot wide
minimum clearance width from any obstacles.
5. Sidewalks shall not exceed a cross slope of two percent (2%).
6. Ramp cuts shall be located at all sidewalks intersecting with vehicular travel
ways.
7, Marked crosswalks shall be provided within the vehicular travel ways
intersecting with sidewalks.
8.2.5 Lot Access.
A. The Borough Council may require an Applicant lo provide Reverse rrontage Lots on the
Collector and/or Arterial roads and rcdL1ce the number of access points through access
management for the development.
D. The Borough Council may require the Applicant to provide ingress and egress to a
particular Lot or T ract through the remainder of a property or other prope11ies over which
the Applicant has control by the following;
t. A temporary Cul-de-sac designed for access to any adj oining property or for
Phased development.
2. Provision of access to existing nonconforming 1.-ots which have no Frontage on a
pub I ic or Private Street.
C. A I lighway Occupancy Permit is reqL1ired for each access point onto a State road or
highway.
0. A ll Lots shal l front on a public or a private Right-of-Way,
E. Prior to the use and occupancy ofa Lot, each Lot or dwelling unit shall be provided with
a Street ntJmbcr assigned by the Borough Council and approved by the Lancaster CountyWide
Communications. The Street number shall be visible from the Street. Where a Lol
contains multiple 11uilding or dwelling units, each Building and d'vvelling unit shall be
identified so that emergency services cnn easily identi fy the location of every Bui lding
and dwelling L111it in a time of emergency.
Manheim Borough
Subdivision and Land Development 01'd inance
Article 8: Urban Design Standards
84
L:rncastc r• County, l)cnnsylvania
updated January 4. 20 I 6
8.2.6 Street Provisions for Future Developments.
A. Where appropriate, Right-of-Ways shall be reserved for Future Access Strip usage in
cortjunction wiLh the zoning class ification of adjacent Tracts lo allow for future
development. Al'eas reserved for Future Access SLl·ip usage will Ml be required to be
improved; however, these areas shall be reserved for Street Improvements to be provided
by the Developer or the adjacent Tract. Appropriate Plan notes shall be included to note
Future Access Strip expansion.
B. Wl1ercver there exists a dedicated or platted area reserved ror Ft1ture Access Strip usage
along the boundary of a Tract being developed, the proposed Street must be extended
over the area dedicated or pl atted for f uture Access Strip usage. T he Street shall be
designed in conform ance with the design requirements or the proposed Street subject to
the exi sting Right-of-Way.
C. The extension of existing Streets that are presently constructed with a Cartway different
from the standards of this Ordinance shall be provid~c.I with a transition area, the design
of which is subject to Borough Counci l approval.
8.2.7 Driveways.
A ll Driveways shall. at a minimum, be designed in accordance with the fo llowing:
A. Driveways must be designed in conformance with the Sight Distance speci!ied in Section
8.2.8.C.
n. Driveway access to a Street shall not be located less than twenty five (25) feet from the
edge orthe Carl way of the intersecting Street.
C. Driveway access to Lots shal I be provided to the Street of lesser classification.
D. To maintain good access ma11agemc11t in the Street network, when a Driveway inte1·sects
with a Collector or Arterial Street, joint, shared use, or Reverse Pronlage Driveways
should be encouraged when such design would increase traffic safety by decreasing the
potential for vehicular conflicts.
E. Driveways shall be paved within the intersecting Street Right-of-Way.
F. Leveling areas shall be provided a 111inimu111 of 10 reet from the edge or Street Cartway
with a maximum slope of I 0%.
G. Shared or joint Driveways must meet the follow standards:
Manheim Borough
1. Driveways shall be used only for four (4) or fewer dwelling units.
2. To decrease the potential for vehicular conflicts, Driveways may be cente red on
the property line, or entirely on one property.
3. An Easement agreement sha ll be provided and recorded that indicates the rights
of ownership. access, and maintenance. The Borough is not responsible to settle
connict i ssues with joint or shared Driveways.
85
Subdivision and Land Develop111e11t Ordinance
Artic le 8: Urban l>esign Standards
La11caslcr County, Pennsylvania
updBlcd January 4, 2016
8.2.8 Access Drives.
Access Drives shall be designed to meet the l"ol lowing requirements:
A. Any property that utilizes an Access Drive shall have Frontage along a public or private
Right-of-Way.
8. The Plan shall note that the Access Drive does not qualify for Dedication to the Borough
and that the Landowner assumes all responsibility for its maintenance.
C. Access Drives shall be designed for their intended function. A ll travel lanes shall be a
minimum of eight (8) feet wide; however, sufficient design information must be
submitted to indicate that the number or travel lanes and width proposed have been
designed to accommodate the anticipated traffic to and from the development.
0. Parking shall be permitted when sufficient Cartway width is proposed. See Section 8.3,
Parking Standards.
E. Access Drives shall maintain a centerline separation distance of one hundred and twentylive
( 125) feet from all other Access Drives and Streets. Access Drive intersections with
other Access Drives within the Site shall not be subject to such restrictions.
F. Proper Sight Distance shall be providec..I <it Access Drive intersections with existing public
and Private Streets according to this ordimmcc.
8.2.9 Single Access I Cul-de-sac Streets.
A. To the greatest extent possible, through Streeis shall be provided. The feasibi lity of a
through Street will be based on the physical features of the Tract proposed for
development and/or Adjoining Lots, the potential for extension of the Street lo adjoining
lands based on existing developn1c11l patterns, restrictions imposed by other government
regulatlons and other recorded documentation, and the ability of the design to meet all
other requirements of this Ordinance. When single access I Cul-de-sac Streets are
proposed, the application shall be accompanied by a written analysis of the merits of the
design and the reason that a through Street would not be desirable.
8. The length or a Cul-de-sac Street shall be measured from the centerline intersection with
the through Street to the center point of the turnaround.
C. A ll Cul-de-sac Streets shall have a minimum length or two hundred irnd fifty (250) feet.
Temporary Cul -de-sac Streets shall no1 have a minimum length.
D. Permanent Cul -de-sac Streets shall be designed to serve a maximum or two hundred and
fifty (250) /\OT for residenrial development and a maximum of five hundred (500) /\OT
for non-residential development.
Manheim 13oroU@.h
1. Permanent Cul-de-sac's may be extended beyond above refel'enced AOT for the
following justilication provided: I ) the Cul-de-sac is a boulevard construction or
2) the adjacent land is I 00% developed.
86
ubdivision and Land O.:vi.:lupment Ordinance
Article 8: Urban Design Standards
Lancaster Coumy, Pennsylvania
updnted January 4, 20 16
E. Any temporary Cul-de-sac Street designed for access to an adjoining property or for
authorized Phased development and which is greater than one Lot deep shall be prnvided
with a temporary all-weather turnaround. The use of such turnaround shall be guaranteed
to the public until such time as the Street is extended. Sidewalks along temporary Culde-
sacs must be continued at the same t ime that the Street is continued.
F. Cul-de-sacs shall have a circular, 1'T'' shaped or "hammerhead" shaped turnarounds.
T urnarounds shall be constructed completely within the Right-of-Way.
1. T shaped or hammerheads may be used if the Cul-de-sac serves less than I 0
dwelling units. Dimensions of a T shaped or hammerhead are sixty (60) feet by
twenty (20) feet.
60'
~1
~r
G. Restoration to the temporary Cul-de-sac paved areas anll sidewalk system within the
Righ1-of-Way shall be 1he responsibility of the Developer.
H. Permanent Cul-de-sacs With a circular turnaround shall be paved, have a minimum radius
of forty two ( 42) feet without a center island and fo11y five (45) with a center island.
8.2.10 Street Names.
A. Continuations of existing Streets shal I be known by the same name.
B. Written notice that tl)C proposed new Street names are acceptable from the Lancaster
Count)'-Wide Communications ( fax number: 7 17 664-11 26 as amended) shall be
su bmitted.
Manheim Borough
Subdiv ision and Land Development Ordinance
Article 8; Urbnn O..:sign Standards
87
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
updated Ja111111ry 4, 20 16
C. t\t least two (2) Street name signs shall be placed at each four-way Street intersection and
one (l) at each "T" intersection.
D. Signs shall be free of visual obstruction. The design of Street name signs should be
consistent, of a style appropriate to the Borough, of a uni form size and color, and erected
in accordance with municipal standards.
E. Private Streets shal l be provided with Street name signs in conformance with this section.
T he Plan shall note that it is the responsibility or the Developer to pay for the sign and
installation of the Street name signs for Private Streets.
8.2.11 Traffic Signs.
A. Design and placement of traffic signs shall fol low the requirements of lhe Borough and
Penn DOT.
B. Signs shall be free of visual obstruction.
8.2.12 Dwelling Unit Identification
Street numbers for all dwelling units shall be v isible froni the approved Street rrontag.e.
8.2. 13 Uralerground Wiring.
A. A 11 electric, telephone, television, and other communication faci lilies distribution lines
servicing New Developments should be provided by underground wiring wil11in
Basements or dedicated public rights-of-way, installed in accordance with the prevaili11g
standards and practices of the utility or other companies providing such services.
8. Lots which abut existing Easements or public l'ights-of-way where overhead elec tric 01·
telephone distr ibution supply lines and service connections have heretofore been installed
may be supplied with electric and telephone service from those overhead lines, but the
service connections from the uti lities' overhead l ines shall be installed underground.
C. Where overhead lines are pe1'111illcd as the exception, the placement and alignment of
poles shal l be designed to lessen the visual impact of overhead lines. Trees shall be
planted in open areas and at key locations to minimize the view of the poles and the
alignments.
S..3 PARKING FACIL l't'CES
8.3.1 Motorized Vehicle Parking Facilities.
A. Motorized veh icle parking facilities shall be designed lo meet the following
requirements:
1. Parking space size and interior drive widths shall be as required by the Borough
Zoning Ordinance.
Mnnhcltn Borough
Subdivision and Lnnd Developmcnl Ordinance
(\rticle 8: Urban Design St:indard~
88
Lancaster County, Per111sylva11ia
updated January 4, 2016
2. Parking space length and width can be increased from minimum siies where
appropriate in accordance with location, use, and tum-over rate.
3. Encroachments such as columns and lighl poles may encroach into a module by 1
fool and affect up to 30% of the parking spaces.
n_ General Pa rking Standa rds.
1. A ngled park.ing may be pull in or reverse (back-in).
2. Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall meet the Ameri cans with
Disabili ties Act (/\DA). llandicapped parking shall be provided for all nonresidential
developments and multi -family Structures and shall be located closest
to the accessible Ouilding entrance(s).
Manheim Oorough
3. On-S treet parking shall be provided on at least one side of' all Access Dri ves and
proposed Streets with speeds equal lo or less than 30 mph.
4. On-Street parking shall not be located within twenty live (25) feet of a Cartway
i ntersection in order to provide safe Sight Distance and adequa1e 1urning radius
for large vehicles.
I.
/.
,i
I
I 25' I
I
I
I / b~· r ,
I ...J,
~
--
S. Off-Street parking areas shall be oriented to, and within a reasonable walking
distance of, the Bui ldings they are designed for and consistent with adjacent
neighborhoods.
6. Parked vehicles adj acent to sidewa lks shall nol overhang or extend over the
sidewalk in a manner thnt restricts pedestrian circulat ion. Where such overhang
is not restricted by a wheel stop or other device, sidewalks shall have a four (4)
foot minimum clearance width from any obstacles.
7. Not less than a two (2) foot radius of curvature shall be permitted for horizontal
curves in pa rking, areas.
8. A ll dead end parking lots shall be designed to provide suflicicnt back-up area for
al I end stalls.
9. Painted lines, arrows, and dividers shall be provided and maintained to control
parking, and when necessary to direct vehicular circulation.
89
Subdivision and Lund Ocvclopincnt Ordinuncc
Art ic lc 8: Urban Design Standnrds
Lancaster County, l)cnnsyl vn nia
updated January 4, 2016
10. The typical cross section of any parking compound shall be prepared to meet the
following minimum standards:
(a) Non Permeable
Crushed aggregate based course with a minimum thickness of six (6)
inches, as specified in the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Specifications. Porm 408, and its latest revisions. or other Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation approved equivalent. Pavement shall
consist of a minimum of two (2) inches of binder COLlrses and one ( I)
inch wearing surface, Material shall be equal or superior to Pennsylvania
Department ofTranspo11.ation Specifications for
Bituminous Surface Course l D-2 and shall be applied in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications, Form
408. and its latest revisions, or other Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation approved equivalent
(b) Permeable Pavement
Permeable pavement shall not be located on heavy industrial Sites,
fueling stations, Sites with expansive soils or shallow depth Lo bedrock,
areas draining to the permeable pavement greater than 5 acres, areas with
lhe water table less than two feet below the bottom of the pavement base,
and less than I 00 feet from drinking wells. Permeable pavement
incllldes paving units, porous asphalt pavement, or pornus concrete
( L1sing single-sized aggregate and low water content); unirormly graded
stone aggregate with void space; filter fabric lining the subsurface beds;
and uncompacted (or hand compacted) subgrade. Permeable pavement
shall consider the infiltration rate of the soil subgrade under the base.
Constant supervision during construction is encouraged as sediment rnust
be kept from the aggregate base.
t I. Shared parki11g is encouraged. The number of parking spaces may be reduced if
shown that the uses are compatible with regard to parking needs. (See Shared
Parking Second Edition, by Urban Land Institute)
C. Parking Standa rds.
Manheim Borough
1, A minimum of seventy- five (75%) percent or the off-Street parking provided
ml1st be located within the side and/or rear of the Stn1 cture(s) to be served.
Where appropriate, no more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the required
parking may be located in front of the Structure(s).
2. Sidewalks/pedes trian Easements shall be provided for pedestrian circt1lation. All
development shall incorporate a sidewalk between the Building and the Street.
3. L ighting per Section 8.1 1 shall be provided.
4. Landscaping shall be req uired and located in unusable parking or circulation
areas with proper clearance from parked vehicles and sidewalks. Planter areas
and tree wells should be installed in accordance with the parking lot dimension to
avoid adverse impacts on parking functions due to improper location and/or
90
Subdivision ond L.nnd Dcvelnp1m:nl Ordinonc~
Article 8: Urbnn Design Standards
Lt111c11sler County. Pennsylvania
updated January 4. 2016
design.
E. Parking Structures.
1. L ighting and reflective materials I flat paint should be used inside the parking
Structure and within aH pedestrian areas to increase the ree ling of safety. Glossy
or semi-gloss paint is discouraged. Lighting for parking Structures shall be
provided in accordance with the illumination levels presented below:
Manheim 13orou~h
Minimum- Minimum/Maximum Minimum-Maximum
Maximum Horizontal Vertical~
Horizontal1 Uniformity3 (Footcandlcs)
(Footcandles)
Basic1 J-5 10:1 - 5:1 0.5-5
Ramps5
Dav 2-5
Night 1-5
Entrance/Bxit /\reas6
Day7 50
Night 1-5
Stairways 2-5
Tllblo based on the llluminatifl& Bngi nccring Society (IET)
1 For typicnl condition~.
I 0:1 - 5: I 1-5
10: 1- 5:1 0.5-5
25
10:1 - 5:1 0.5-5
1-5
1 Minimum " maintained"" Footcandles measured on Ille po rking surface, wilhoul any shadowing
effect from p;1rked vehicles or colu1nns. ·n1is rnay require J -5 Pootc(lnd le uverage
3 The highest horizontal ll lu111innnce area, di,1idcd by the lowest horizontal llluminancc point or
area should not be greater thun the rotio shown.
• Measured facing Ille dnvc oisle at 5 !'eel ubovc the parking surlilce ol the point or th~ lowest honzc11lal
llluminnnce 5 /\pphes only to clearway ramps (With no adjacent parking) but not sloping lloor des igns.
6 A high lllumimrnce levd for the tirst 65 feet inside the Structure is needed to cllect a lrnnsition
from bright daylight t () a 101.~er interior level.
7 Daylighl may be considered i111hc design calculal1ons.
2. Parking lot lighting shall address Glare control, light pol lution (unnecessary
light), L ight Trespass (bright visible sources or light spi lling into neighboring
properties), and reduction of shadows.
(a) Provision ror energy conservation to mit igate over-lighting is
encouraged. A maxi mum I ighting power density of 0.3 watts per square
foot is encouraged.
3. Provision of signagc at ex.its of the parking Structures sh al I be required.
4. Open-Strncture wall areas for natural ventilation or mechanical ventilation shall
be encouraged.
5. Interaction between vehicles and pedestrians shotild be prov.idcd in a safe
manner.
6. Traflic flow by vehicles entering the parking garage shall be mitigated by either
on Site or external deceleration lanes based on the traffic impact study i f
required.
91
Subdivision and Land Develop111en1 Ordi1111nce
Article 8: Urban Design Smndards
Lancaster County, l'cnnsylvani11
updakd Janu11ry 4. 2016
8.3.2 Non-Motorized Vehicle Parking Facilities.
Non-moto1ized vehicle parking facilities shall be provided 111 accordance with the following
regulations when non-motorized vehicle use could occur:
A. Scooter I Bicycle Parking Facilities.
Scooter I Bicycle parking facilities for non-residential land uses shall be provided in
accordance with the following regulations:
1. Each scooter I bicycle: space shall be equipped with a device to which a bicycle
frame and one (I) wheel can be attached using a chain or cable. There shall be
adequate separation between adjacent devices to allow scooter I bicycles to be
attached or removed without moving other scooter I bicycles. The devices shall
also be suitable for use by scooter I bicycles not equipped with kickstands, and
the appearance of the device shall be generally consistent wi th nearby Urban
design features.
2. Scooter I Bicycle parking spaces shall be convenient to the Structure for which
they are provided. They shall be visible froni at least one ( 1) entrance to the
Structure.
3. For every SO vehicular spaces required, 3 scooter I bicycle parking spaces shall
be provided, not to exceed a total of 9 required scooter I bicycle parking spaces
8.4 BLOCKS AN I) LOTS
8.4. t Blocks.
A. A ll Blocks that include residential dwellings shall have a maximum length of 1/4 mile or
one thousand three hundred and twenty ( 1,320) feet.
B. The design of any Block longer than one thousand three hundred and twenty ( 1,320) feet
shall give special consideration to the requirements of fi re protection, pedestrian
circulation. and utility service. The Borough Counci I may require Easements as necessary
for these purposes.
8.4.2 Lot Configuration.
The configuration of Blocks and Lots shall be based upon the minimum and maximum Lot Arca
requirements, sa lient natural features. existing Improvements, proposed Improvements, and the
adjacenl development pattern. Lot configurations should provide for flexibility in Building
locations, while providing sa fe vehicular and pedestrian circulation. When possible, l .. ots with
areas that are two (2) or more times the minimum requirements should be designed with
configurations that allow for additional Subdivision.
8.4.3 Specific Lot Configuration Requirements.
A. Relationship to Municipal Bounda ries.
ln order to avoid j urisdictional problems, Lot Lines shall, wherever feasible, follow
Manheim l3orougJ1
Subdivision end La11d Development Ordinance
Arlicll: 8: Urbnn Design tandards
92
Lancaster Co11n1y. r ennsylvatiia
updarc:d lnnuary 4. 2016
lllL!11icipal boundaries rathel' lhan cross tl'em.
B. Frontage.
A ll Lots must front on a public or Private Street.
C. Provisions for Future Subdivision.
Lots resulting from a proposed Subdivision that will be large enough to be further
subdivided should be configured to fac ilitate such future Subdivision. Adequate Street
Right-of-Way shall be provided as necessary. The Borough Council may require a Sketch
Plan of such large Lots that indicates the potential l'L1ture Subdivision is generally in
conformance with the design standards of this Ordinance and the appl icable zoning
provisions.
n. Lot Access.
Lots shall not result in unsafe Driveway locations on public Streets.
E. Flug Lots.
Flag Lots represent a viable design alternative under tbc following sta11dards. In such
cases, evidence shall be submitted to the Borough Couhcil that documents the
ci rcumstances and demonstrates that the platting of Flag Lots shal l not restrict the
development potential and pattern of development of the Tract and adjacent lands.
L Adjacent Flagpoles shall be encouraged to share Driveway access poi nts. More
than four (4) adjaceht Flag Lots shall be oriented to a common publ ic or Private
Street Rigl1t-of-Way, not Driveways.
2. Flag Lots are encouraged when Infill situations exist to ac hieve maximu111
densities.
3. Plag Lots shall not be proposed in order to avoid construction of Streets. Flag
Lots proposed to create Lots for home Sites whc1·c there is no potential for the
construction of a public or Private Street must de11101lstrate thal there is no
potential to construct a Street due to: (a) severe topogrnphic or other
environmental constraints that limit the design of a Street; or (b) other factors
inherent in the Site which make the construction of a public or Private Street
i 111 practical.
4. The width of a Flagpole should be determined by Lhe function of the Driveway,
number of Lots served, setbacks, grading, and utility requirements.
F. Dou hie I Reverse Frontage Lots.
Manheim Dorough
1. Residential Double Prontage Lots are only permitted when a reduction of
Driveway intersections along a Street with a high volttme of vehicular
movt:ments is desired or the maintenance of the integrity of a corridor is desired.
2. Reverse Prontage Lots may be permitled when rear Alleys are proposed to
93
Subdivision nnd I.and Development Ordimmcc
Article 8: Urban O.:sign Stnndards
La11coster County. Penn sylvania
updated January 4, 2016
provide vehicular access to Lots.
3. A ll double and Reverse Frontage Lots shall i11c ludc an identification of the
Frontage for use as a Street access.
4. All Reverse Frontage Lots shall have within the Yard(s) that is/are adjacent to
any Street Right-of-Way, other than the Street of vehicular access, an Easement
running the entire width of the proposed Lot, across which there shall be no
vehicular access.
8.5 EASEMENTS
8.5.1 Cenernl.
A ll Easements including by way of example and not limitation; sanitary sewer facilities, Storm
Water drainage facilities, public or pri vate utilities, access and/or pedestrian access shall meet the
standards found in this Section.
8.5.2 Design Guidelines.
A. To the fullest extent possible, Easements shall be centered on property lines.
B. Notl1ing shall be placed, plan ted, set. or put within the area of an Easement that would
adversely affect t ile function of the EasemenL
C. Indicate on the Plans all proposed and existing Easements of record and indicate their
location and width. All Strnctures localed within the Basement shall be indicated. Nore
the recording information on the Plan of record.
O. To the fullest extent possi ble. ut ilities and pedestrian paths should be centered wi thin an
Easement. However, due to unexpected on-Loi conditions, utility and pedestrian
locations may be nexible within the Easement.
K A ll utility companies are encouraged to use common Easements. Utility Easements shall
be based on the width required by the utility authorities but shall have a minimum width
of len (10) feet. Utility Easements shall be located within the Street Right-of-Way or
within the Building Setback Line.
F. Where pedestrian access is provided outside or a Street Right-of-Way. pedestrian
Easements shall have a minimum width often ( 10) feet.
G. The Applicant shall reserve Easements where Storm Water or surface waler management
facilities exist or arc proposed when located within the boundaries of the Subject Tract.
Th~ Applicant proposing to aller existing Storm Water Management faci lities on adjacent
and/or downstream properties shall obtain a temporary construction Easement and/or a
permanent Easement and maintenance responsibilities shall be established, to the extent
feasible.
H. When the proposed Storm Water management system wil l utilize or be integrated into an
existing Storm Water collection or conveyance system, the existing facilities shall be
improved lo the standards of this Ordinance. The A pplicant shnll determine the impacts
tvlanhl: iln l3orou~1
Subd ivision :in<l Land Development Ordinance
Article 8: Urbun Design S tandards
94
Lancustcr County, Pennsylvania
uridot.:d January 4, 2016
of any proposed Improvements of the existing system to downstream properties. Ir the
Improvements will cause adverse impacts on downstream properties. the Applicant shall
mitigate such impacts.
8.6 SURVEY MONUMENTS AND MARKERS
8.6.l Monuments Shown on Final Plan.
The location of all existing and proposed Monui11ents. Lot Line Markers, property corners, and
drill holes shall be shown on the Final Pla11. T hose that are proposed shall be labeled as such.
Drllled holes in curbing shall be referenced mathematically to a point on the Right-of-Way Line.
8.6.2 New Monuments.
Three Monuments shall be spaced around the proposed project with precise bearings and
distances labeled which reference those Monuments to known prope1ty corners.
A. Two such Monuments shall be consecutive corners aJong Street rights-of-way and the
third may be placed either on the boundary or internal to the Site.
B. Longitude and latitude coord inates of the Monuments shall be shown on the recorded
Plan.
C. If GPS technology is used, it shall be rectified and calibrated lo the State Plane
Coordinate System, Norlh J\merican Datum (NAD) 1983.
1. Monuments must be readi ly accessible and clear of overhead obstructions.
O. /\ computer readable point lilc including property lines, comers, rights-of-way. and
Easements for the Sile shall be submit1ed to the Borough prior lo Plan recordation.
8.6.3 Monument Materials.
Monuments shall be of concrete or stone, with a nat top having a minimum width or diameter of
four (4) inches and a minimum length of thirty (30) inches. Concrete Monuments shall be marked
with a three-quarter (3/4) inch copper, brass dowel, or drill hole; stone or precast Monuments
shall be marked on the top wi th a drill hole.
8.6.4 Existing and Proposed Property Linc and Rigl1t-of-Way Markers.
Markers shall be set at all points Where Lot Lines intersect curves, at all angles in property lines,
at th1:1 intersection of all other property l ines, and at the Street Right-of-Way.
8.6.5 Miuker (Pin) Materials.
A. Markers shall consist of iron pipes or steel bars at least thii1y (30) inches long and not
less than five-eighth (5/8) or an inch in diameter.
B. Ori ll holes shall be drilled in concrete curbs (with or without PK nails or discs) having a
minimum diameter of one-quarter (1/4) inch. The depth of the holes shall be such that a
PK nail or disc. if used, can be set in as close to the surface or the curb as possible.
Manheim 13orough
Subdivision and Land Dewlopmcnl Ordinance
Article 8: Urbon Design tandurds
95
Lancaster Cliu nly, Pcnnsylvnnie
updated Janum·y 4. 2016
Minimum depth without the u e of PK nail or disc shall be one-half (112) inch. In the
absence of PK nails or discs, chisel or saw marks shall be used lo facilitate and identify
the dri ll hole locations.
8.6.6 Certification of Monuments and Markers.
A. All Monuments, markers, and dri lled holes shall be placed by a registered professional
land Surveyor so that the scored marked point, or center of the drilled hole shal I coincide
with lhe point of intersection or the lines being Monumented or marked.
B. Provide a note on the Plan indicating when lhe Monuments and markers are to be set.
8.7 SANITARY WASTEWATER DISPOSAL
8.7.1 Sanitary Wastewater Disposal.
A. The Applicant shall provide Public Sewage Systems consistent with current Plans,
including but not limited to the municipal Comprehensive Plan and /\cl 537 plan as well
as existing, physical, geographical and geological cond itions.
B. The Borough Council may require installation of a capped system within the road Righlor-
Way. If required, the Borough or authority shall inspect the capped system and accept
Dedication.
C. The Applicant shall provide evidence of approval from the Pennsylvania Depcirtment of
Environmental Protection prior to Plan recording.
D. When connection to an existing Publ ic Sewage Sys tem, the application shal l include a
statement frorn the authority or organiw.tion providing such service that sufficient
capacity to service the proposed development is available. Such notice shall be dated
wi thin twelve ( 12) months of the Plan application. Extender agreements shall be provided
prior to Dedication.
E. A statement shall be provided fro111 the sewer authority indicating approval or the Plans
for design, installation and financial guarantee.
8.8 WATER SUPPLY
8.8.1 lntcnt.
The t\ pplica11t shall provide the type of Community Water Supply system consistent with current
Plans, including but not limited to the 1m1nicipal Comprehensive Plan as well as existing physical,
geographical and geological conditions.
8.8.2 Design Guidelines.
A. Publicly owned Community Water Supply systems are the required water supply.
B. Applicants shall submit to the Aorough Council a statement that the water authority has
the capacity to serve the project at this time. A statement shall also be provided from the
Manheim Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
Article 8: Urban Dcsi ~n Standard!>
96
Lu11c11stcr County, Pennsylvania
upd:itcd Jrmuary 4, 20 16
water authority indicating approval of the Plans for design, installation and financial
guarantee.
C. Fire hydrants shall be provided whenever the Community Water Supply system contains
sufficient capability or is planned to have such capability within two (2) years from the
date of Final Plan approval.
1. The location and kind of tire hydrant shall meet the specifications of the local
municipal regulation.
2. Pi re hydrant location(s) shall be submitted prior to F'i11al Plan approval.
8.9 HAZARDS ASSOCCATED WlTIJ CARBONATE ROCKS
A. Hydrogeologic Report Required.
When, in the opinion of the Borough Council, there is a probable likelihood that a project
will affect or be affected by carbonate geologic hazards the Borough Council shall
require submission of a hydrogeologic report pursuant to Section 7.4.
B. Specifications for Storm W:i tcr Management Basins.
I. The design of all Storm Water Management fac ilit ies over the fo llowing features
shall include an evalllation of measures to minimize adverse effects and shall be
constructed to minimize those effects.
(a) Sinkholes.
(b} Closed depressions.
(c) Lineaments in carbonate areas.
(d) Fracture traces.
(e) Caverns.
(f) Ghost lakes.
(g) Disappearing Streams.
8.10 LANDSCAPINC
8.10. I Native and Invasive Planting.
A. Native Plant materials should be incorporated in al l designs. The use of Native Plant
material can help improve water quality, provide add itional and improved wildlire
habitat1 and typically adapt to loca l conditions which then require less maintenance.
Native Plants must be used near greenways, suburban forested areas, Wetlands, and
riparian areas.
B. Except as noted above. Non-Native Pla nts may be included in place ofa Native Plant if it
is not considered invasive and the plant does not introduce pests or diseases. A NonNative
Plant may be incorporated into designs when they prove lo be better suited for the
Urban soil, environment, or spatial constraints, Urban stress mitigation. and integration
into lhe surrounding ecosystem.
Manheim Borough
Subdivision and Land Dcvelopmt:nl Ordinuncc
Articlc 8: Urbon Design Stnndard~
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
updated Jununry 4. 2016
C. The fo llowing is a list of Invasive Species which may not be used in any Urban planting
schedule:
t. Trees.
Tree-of-heaven (Ailanthus altissima), Norway maple l*Accr platanoidcs),
Sycamore maple (Acer pseudoplatanus), Empress tree (Paulownia tomentosa),
Callery pear (*Pyrus calleryana), Siberian elm (Ulm us pumila)
2. Shrubs.
Mn11heim Borough
Japanese barberry (* Berberis thunbcrgi i), European barberry (f3crbcris vu lgaris,
Russian Olive (Elaegnus angustifolia), Autumn olive (claeagnus umbel late),
Winged Euonymus (*Euonymus alatus), Border privet (Ligustrum obtusi folium),
Common Privet (Ligustrum vulgarc), Ta1tarian honeysuckle (Lonicera tai1arica),
Standish honeysuckle {Lonicera standishii), Morrow's honeysuckle (Lonicera
morrowii). Amur honeysuckle (Lonicera maackii), Bell's honeysuckle ( Loniccra
morrowii x tatarica), Common buckthorn (Rhamnus catharticus), Glossy
buckthorn (Rhamnus frangula), Wincberry (Kubus phoenicolasius). Multi flo ra
rose (Rosa mul li nora), Japanese spiraea (* piraea japonica), G ueldcr rose
(*Viburnum opulus var. opulus)
3. Grasses.
Cheatgrass (13romus tectortJm), Japanese stilt grass (Microstcgium vimineum).
Maiden grass (*Miscanthus sinensis), Common recd (Phragmites ausrralis). Recd
canary grass (Phalaris arundinacea), Johnson grass (Sorgl1um halcpcnse), and
Shattcrcanc (Sorghum bi color ssp. drummondii)
4. Flower s.
Garlic mustard (Al liaria petiolata), Ooutwecd (Acgopodium podagraria), Bull
thistle (Crisium vulgare). Canada thistle (Cirsium arvcnse). Musk thistle
(Carduus nutans), Jimsonweed (Datura strarnonium), Goatsruc (Galega
officinalis), Giant hogwccd (Heracleum mantegazzianum. Dame's rocket
(1 lcsperis matronalis). Purple Loosestri fe (Lythrum salicaria, L. virgatum).
Eurasian water-mi I foi I (Myriophyllum spicatum), Scar-of-Bethlehem
(Ornithogallum nutans. umbt.:ll<1tum), Japanese knotwced (Polygonum (Falopia)
cuspida1L1m/ Polgonum sachalincnsc), Wild parsnip (Pastinaca saliva). Beefsteak
plant (Peri lla frutescens), Lesser celandine (Ranunculus licftria). Water chestnut
{Trapa natans)
S. Vines.
Fiveleaf akebia (Akebia quinata), Porcelain-berry (A mpelopsis
brcvi pedunculata), Oriental biHersweet (Celastrus orbiculatus), Japanese
honeysuckle (Lonicerajaponica), Kudzu (Pucraria lobata), Mile-a-mi nute vine
(Polygonum perfoliatum)
Species with cultivars that nre known to he non-invasive may be ncceptable within u planting plan.
98
Subdivision and L:111d Dcvelop1nc11t Ordinance
Article 8: Urban Design Stnnd11rds
Lancaster County, Pennsylvnnia
updotcd Jonunry 4, 2016
8.10.2 Street T rees I Screening I Vegetative Buffering.
A. Any existing vegetation that is in appropriate locations, of an acceptable species and
quality may be used to fulfill Landscaping or Buffering requirements.
B, In order to aid survei llance and mi nimize the potential for crime, planting shall also be
sited, massed, and scaled to maintain visibility or doors and first floor windows from the
Street and from within the devel opment to the greatest extent possible. Planting patterns
shall not obstruct sight l ines or create isolated areas, especially near pedestrian walking
paths.
C. Off Slreet parking and storage of vehicles in Pront Yards of commercial, industrial, and
institutional Lots shall be screened at least 50% from the public Right-of-Way by
vegetative Screening or fencing between 3 and 4 foot in height.
D. Trash disposal areas, such as dumpste1· 0 1· compactor sites, shall be ef fectively screened
so as not to be visible from off Sile adjacent parking areas, roadways, or adjacent
residential prope1iics. Such areas shal I be screened with a combinalion or architectural
masonry (or foncing) and/or Landscaping with a height of at least six (6) feet.
E. Urban Common Open Space areas shoul d also incl ude but not be li111ited to at least three
(3) of the following:
1. Seasonal planting areas
2. Large deciduous trees
3. Sea Ung
4. Pedestrian scale lighting
5. Gazebos or other decorative shelters
6. Play Structures for children
7. Natural environment areas
8. Recreational amenities
9. Trails
10. Otherwise approved by tile Borough which would implement the
goals of the municipal Comprehensive Pl a11.
F. All planting shall be performed in conformancl? with good nursery and landscape
practice. Plant materials shall conform to the standards recommended by the American
Association of Nurseryman, I tic., ill the American Standard of Nursery Stock. ANZ1Z60,
current edition, as amended.
Manheim Borough
1. Provide a landscape Plan note indicating that the top of the mai11 oi-det root (first
large set of roots that divide from the trunk} shal I be planted no lower than one or
two inches into the soil.
2. Plan ting designs are enco uraged to share planting space tor optimal root growth
whenever possible. Continuous planting areas vs. isolated planting boxes arc
encouraged.
3. No staking and wiring of trees shall be allowed without i1 maintenance note for
the staking and wiring to be removed within one year of planting.
99
Subdivision (Jnd Lnnd Oevc lopmcnt Ot·dinance
Article 8; UrbM Oesi~n Stand11rds
Lancaster County. Pennsylvania
updated Janunry 4. 2016
4. A ll Street trees shall be provided by the Applicant in accordance with lhe
following standards:
(a) The trees shall be nursery grown in a climate similar to that of the
locality of the project. Varieties of trees within the Right-of-Way shall be
subject to the approval of the authority that accepts ownership of the
Street.
(h) All trees shall have a normal habit of growth and shall be sound, healthy,
and vigorous; they shall be free from disease. insects, insect eggs. and
larvae.
(c) The trunk cali per. measured at a height of six (6) inches above finish
grade shall be a minimum of two (2) inches.
(d) Tree planting depth shall bear the same relationship to the linished grade
as the top of the root ball or original grade of origin.
G. All required landscape plants shal l be maintained and guaraiHeed for a length of eighteen
( 18) months from the dnte of planting. No more than one-third ( I /3) of the tree or shrub
shall be damaged or dead without replacement. Replacement plants shall conform to all
requirements of this section and shall be maintained after replanting for an additional
eighteen ( 18) months.
II. The plant's growth shall not interfere with tl1e Street Cartway, sidewalk, signage,
Easements, Clear Sight Triangles, or uti lity line. Within Lhe Clear Sight frianglc, typical
branching shall not be within ten ( I 0) feel. or ground level after ten ( I 0) years of growth.
l. No one species shall comprise more than thirty-three percent (33%) of the entire number
of Street trees in a panicular development.
J. Existing Significant Trees and natural features, such as drainage corridors, shall be
preserved to the maximum extent practicable and incorporated into Site Plans and Site
design as major amenities.
1. If a Significant Tree is designated to be preserved but is removed or substantially
damaged during the clearing. grading, or construction, the Applicant or
Developer may be required by the Borough lo replace the removed or damaged
tree.
K. Street trees shall be provided in all Land Developments which include new Streets.
Manheim Borough
t. St reet trees shall not be localed farther than for1y (40) feet away from the new
Street Right-of-Way.
2. The number of Street trees sha1J be based on 2 Street trees required for every 100
linear foot of new Street measured from the centerline.
3. The spacing of trees shall be based on the size of the tree canopy al maturity with
trees spaced no closer thnn 30 feet on center if the tree canopy is less than 30 foot
spread at maturity, spaced 30-60 feet on center if the tree canopy is 30 to 50 feet
100
Subdivision nnd Land Development Ordinance
Article 8: Urbnn Design Standnrds
Lancaster County, Pennsy lvn nia
updnted Jnnmll)' 4. 2016
Common
Nnme
Red Mnple
' ugar Maple
River birch
Common
I lnekbcrry
Americun
Ye llowwood
Americun
beech
(hornless
I loncylocusL
wcctgum
T1tliptree
l3lackg111 11/
So urgurn
America11
I lophornbenm
Sycamore
White Oak
spread at maturity. and Street trees spaced 50-100 feet on center if the tree
canopy is over 50 feet spread at maturity. When a less formal arrangement is
desired, where more massing is appropriate, or Improvements such as benches
are located grouping of Street trees is encouraged.
4. Other tree species may be used provided acceptable information is submitted to
i ndicate that the species are hardy trees or fits the sites ecosystem. Street trees
shall be one of the following species:
Dotnnical II eight/ l>rOUJ.!hl
Soil Acidity/ Soil Root Cnnopy
Nome Spread Tolcr11 11ccs Soil Ty11c Aerosol Snit Snturathrn l)atlcrn Structure/
Toler:rncc Preference Growth Rate
i\ciclic/
llx tcnded
Lorge
Upright oval
Acer rubrum 75/35 Modernh: Clay: loam: OCloding to canopy/ fast
Low tolc.?runcc well drained surface roots 11.J'OWinp,
Sensi tive to Sund: loom. Acidic:: Acer reflected onen Densc: Oval/
saceharum 70140 heat and Not al kal ine/ Well drained
sh:1llow
Mod-slow
droUJl.hl
compacted Nol lolcranl growing
Narrow·
40-50/
Extended Not a pyramidal
Bctula nigra 25-35
Modem le Clay; lonm Acidic llooding, 10 problem crown/ Fast
well drained growing when
111ois1
Tolerant of Round/Pru11e
Cell is 45-801 1 lighly lligh ly Extended l.orgc to prevent
occillental is 40-50 tnleranl Clay; lna111 alkaline to nooding 10 $urlilce roots
weuk branch
moderate well dra ined crotches
acidic
Cludrustis 30-50/ Clay; sand; Alkaline;
Occasional Surface Round/
Moderate wcl to well- roots when Mode rote/
kentuckea 40-50 loam ac idic drained WCI Pnme structure
Fag us 50-151 Moderate Acidic/Low Needs well- Surface Very
Sand: loam roots/ Needs dense oval/
grandifolia 40-60 10 low Tolcrum:c drn i11c:d
sooce Moderate
Gleditsia 50-70/ lligh ly Clay: :;and: Alkaline: Occasional
Cnn grO\\ triacanthos acidic/ highly wet to well· Opc:n oblang
incrmis 35·50 tolerant loam tolernnt drained surface roots
Acidic / Extended Surface
Pyramidal/
Liquidnmbar 60-75/ Moderate C.:lay; sand:
Moderately flooding lo roots when
Extreme
styracinue 35.50 to lilllc loum tolcmnt we ll -drn incd moist sensitivity lo construction
l..iriodendron 80- 100 Acidic I No Wcll-Jraincd Noto Ov11I /
lulipi fero 130·50
Modernte Send: loam tolerance
l() occu~iona I problem: Moderate
wet 'Needs space J1.rowlh
Nyssa 65-75/ I lig hly
Acidic/ l!xtended Not a
Cluy: loam Modera tely flooding to problem: Pyramidal/
sylvntica 25·35 lo lernnl tolerant well -drained deep roots
Slow grmvth
Ostrya 25-50/
I olcrant Poor salt Prefers Noto
virginiano 25
once Sand; loam tolen1nce moist when problem
Rounded
csrnhlishcd ol I ad aptable YO Uni?.
Clay: loam:
Alkaline;
Extended Dense
Platanus 75-90/ I ligh ly acidic Cnn grow
occidental is 50·70 tolerant should not /Moderately
nood ing to
s\\r foc:c roots
pyri1111idnl/ Fast
dry Olli tolerant well-drained growing
Sand: Acidic / Occasional
Quercus alba 60- 100 Moderate lonm; Highly wet 10 well- Not a Pyramidal/
/60-80 to low i;hould not problem Slow growing
dry out tolerant dra ined
Mnnhcim Dorough IOI
Subdivision and I.and Development Ordinunce
Artic le 8: Urban D.;sign Stundurdf.
Lancaster County, Pennsylvtmia
upd11ted Junuary 4, 20 16
40- Tolerant Rich; deep: Roundedi
Shingle Oak Quercus Alkaline soi ls Nol a 60/40- intermillcnt 11cll Moist Transplants
imbricnria 60 drou1?.ht drained up to 7.5 pl I problem well
Quercus 50-601 llighly
Acidic/ Root llare
Round/
Chestnut Oak
montnna 40-60 lo lcrunl
Sand; 1011111 unknown salt Well-d rained
wht11 older
Moderate
tolemncc izrowlh
Acidic/
Dense;
Red Oak Qucrcus rubra
60-70/ llighly Sand: lou111 llighly Well-drnincd
Can for large round/Fast
50-60 tolerant loleranl
surface roots growth: Train
into one leader
Acidic/ Extended Round/
1vt1111p White Qucrcus 50-70/
Modcrnte
Clay: sand: MmJerutc nooding to
Not a Moderate
Oak bicolor 50-70 loam tnlerfmce well-drained
problem growth: long
lived
l111sswood/ Tilia 50-80/
Acidic; Notu Dense:
American
americana 35-50
Moderate Sand: loam alkaline/ Well-drn incd problem; Pyramid(!( /
Linden Low tolerance Needs space Mode111te
8.10.4 Ground Cover.
8.10.5
Ground cover shall be provided on all areas of Lhc project to prevent soil erosion. All areas which
are not covered by paving, stone, or other solid material shall be protected with a suitable ground
cover, consisting of spreading plants including sods and grasses less than eighteen ( 18) inches in
height.
Existing Wooded Areas.
No more than twenty percent (20%) of existing woodlands localed in Environmentally Sensitive
Areas shall be destroyed or altered. If the Applicant can prove that Invasive Species are within
either of these areas, then the percent of wood la nd ~ lo be removed may be increased to eradic:ne
Invasive Species (See Section 8. 10. 1.C).
8.10.6 Tree Protection Zone.
A. Prior to construction the Tree Protection Zone shall be delineated at the Dripline of the
tree canopy. A ll trees scheduled to remain shall be marked: however, where groups of
trees ex.isl, only the trees on the edge need to be marked. A fo rty-eight (48) inch high
snow fence or fotiy-eight (48) inch high construction fence mounted on steel posts
located eight (8) feel on center shall be placed along the boundary of the Tree Protection
Zone.
8. No co11slructio11, storage of material, temporary parking, pollution of soil, or regrading
shall occur within the Tree Protection Zone. When there is a group of trees, the Tree
Protection Zone shall be based on the location of the outer trees.
8.1 l LIGHTING
8.l l.1 Purpose.
The standards eslablishcd in this section set forth cri teria for:
Manheim Borough
Subdivision und Lond Development Or<linancc
Article 8: Urban Design Stand11rds
102
Lrmcaslcr Count). l'ennsylva11ia
updated January 4. 2016
A. Providing lighting in outdoor public places where public health, safety, and welfare are
potential concerns.
B. Controlling Glare from non-vehicular light sources that impair safe travel.
C. Protecting neighbors and the night sky from nuisance Glare and stray light li·om poorly
aimed, placed, applied, maintained, or Fully Shielded light sources.
8.11.2 Applicability.
Outdoor lighting shall be required for safety and in areas of public assembly and travel, including,
but not limited to: Streets, multi-family dwelling units, commercial, industrial, recreation a1·eas,
and institutional uses. The Borough may requi re lighting to be i11corporatcd for other uses or
locations, as they deem necessary. The Glare control requirements herein conta ined apply to
lighting in all above menrioncd uses as well as sign. architectural, Landscaping, and residential
lighting.
8.1 l.3 llluminntion Levels.
Lighting shall have intensities and uni formity ratios in accordance with the current recommended
practices of the Ill uminating Engineering Society of North America (!ESNA) as contained in the
IESNA Lighting Handbook. Future amend1ncnts to said recommended practices shall become a
part of this Ordinance without fu11her action of the. Oorough. Examples of intensities for typical
outdoor appl ications, as extracted fro111 the 8th E;dition of the Lighting Handbook, arc presented
below:
Use Task Maintained Uniformity
Footcandles' Ratio2
(Max.:Min.)
Streets Local Residential 0.4 Min. 6:1
Local Commercial 0.9 Min. 6:1
Parking: Multi- Low Vehicular/Pedestrian Acti vity 0.2 Min. 4 :1
Family Residential Medium Vehicular/Pedestrian Activity 0.6 Min 4:1
Parking: Industrial, High Activity (e.g., regional Shopping 0.9 Min. 4:1
Commercial, centers/fast food facilities, major athletic /civic
Institutional and /cultural events)
Municipal Medium Activity (e.g .. community shopping 0.6 Min. 4:1
centers, office parks, hospitals, commuter lots,
cultural /c ivic/recreational events)
Low activity (e.g., neighborhood shopping, 0.2 Min. 4: I
industrial employee parking, schools, church
parking, farm businesses, farm operations)
Walkways and 0.5 Min. 5:1
Bikeways
Building Entrances 4.0 Avg. -
:ind Si2ns
I. Illumination levels are maintnined horizontal Footcundles 011 the task- e.g .. pavement or area surface.
2. Uni formity ratio is a measure of the dispersion of light on un area. The ratio is measured r1s mm<imum l ight level to
minimum l ight level. Example: 4: I for the given area. the maximum level of i llumination shou ld be no less than 4 times the
minimurn level or illumination {0.2 x 4 0.8 maximum light level).
Munhcim [k1rough
Subd ivision and Land Development On.linance
Article 8: Urban Desig11 Standards
103
Lancns1er County. Pennsylvania
updated .lunu11ry 4, 2016
8.11.4 LjglJtjng Fixture Design.
A. Dedicated fixtures shall be of a type and design approptiate to the lighting application
and aesthelically acceptable to the Borough.
B. For lighting horizontal tasks such as roadways, sidewalks, entrances. and parking areas,
fixtures shall meet !ESNA Fully Shielded criteria (no light output emitted above ninety
(90) degrees at any lateral angle around the fixture). Individual fixtures whose aggregate
lamp output does not exceed one thousand eight hundred (1 ,800) lumens (typical
household outdoor lighting) are exempt from this requirement.
C. The use of floodlighting, spotlighting, wall-mounted fi xtures, decorative globes and
spheres, and other fixtures nol meeting !ESNA full-cutorr criteria shall be permitted only
with the approval of the Borough, based upon applicability in retaining the Urban
character of the Borough and achieving acceptable Glare control.
D. Fixtures shall be equipped with, or be modified to, incorporate light directing and/or
shieJdi11g devices such as shields, visors, skirts, or hoods to redirect offending light
distribut ion and/or reduce direct or reflected Glare. Glare control shal l be achieved
primarily through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields and baffl es, and
appropriate application of fixture mounting height. wattage, aiming angle and fixtL1re
placement.
8.11.S Control of Nuisance and Disabling Glare.
A. All outdoor lighting shall be aimed, located, designed, fittec.l, und maintained so as not to
present a hazard to drivei·s or pedestrians by impairing their ability to safely travel.
B. Unless for safety, security, or all-night operations, lighting shall be control led by
automatic switching devices to permit extinguishing between eleven ( 11) p.m. and dawn.
C. Lighting proposed for use after eleven ( I I) p.rn ., or a flcr the normal hours of operation,
shall be reduced by an average of seventy-five pernent (75%) from that time until dawn.
Lin less suppo11ing a speci fie purpose.
D. Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the primary means for controlling
Glare.
E. The intensity of illumination proj ected onto an existing residential use from an existing
property boundary shall not exceed the following ve1·tical Footcandle, measured at the
exisling properly line at a l1eight of 5 feel;
J. 0. 1 Footcandle in General Building Areas.
2. 0.2 l'ootcand lcs in Concentrated l3uilding Areas.
3. 0.6 ~·ootcandles in Core Reinvestment Areas.
8. l 1.6 Installation.
A. Rlcctrical feeds to l ighting standards shall be run underground, not overhead.
Manheim 13orovgh
Subdivision and Land Dcvclormenl Ordi11a11cc
Article 8: Urban Design Standards
104
L:mcastcr County, Pennsylvania
updated Jnnuary 4. 2016
B. Pole mounted fixtures shal 1 not be mounted in excess of 25 feet high.
C. Lighting standards in parking areas shall be placed outside paved areas or on concrete
pedestals at least thi1ty (JO) inches high above the pavement, or by other approved
protective means.
8.t l.7 Post-Installation Ins1Jcction.
The Borough reserves the right to conduct a post installation nighttime inspection to verify
compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance and, if appropriate. to require remed ial action
at no t:xpense to the Borough.
8.11.8 Street Lighting Dedication.
A. The Borough must accept Dedication of Street lighting facilities located within the Rightof-
Way of a Street dedicated to the Borough.
B. Until such time as the Street lighting is dedicated, the Developer of the Tract (who has
escrowed the Street lighting) will be responsible for any and all costs associated with
each Streetlight. Such costs shall include. but not be limited to: administration,
placement, and maintenance. P.lectrical charges shall be the responsibility of the
Borough at the i ssuance of the first Building occupancy permit within the development.
C. Streetligllts not dedicated to the Borough will remain the responsibility of the Developer
or appropriate private entity including all costs and responsibilities for the lighting in
perpetuity.
Mnnheim Borough
Subdivisio111111d Land Dcvelopine11t Or<li1111ncc
Artic le 8: Urban Design Standards
105
l.ancuster County, Pennsylvaniu
l1(1dl1ll!U Ju11Ul11)' 4. 2016
ARTICLE 9
DESIGN STANDARDS FOR
INFILL AND REDEVELOPMENT PLANS
i'he purpose of the In fi ll and Redevelopment standards is to promote revitalization, di reel
reinvestment, and sustain the economic vitality while being sensitive to design context and
individual neighborhood character. T herefore, the design standards incorporate flexibility into
traditional.ly regulated areas and promote a unified Streetscape to strengthen the visual and
physical character of existing neighborhoods. The inlent is to retain and promote lhe existing
businesses and to facilitate New Development that contributes to, and upgrades. older, established
communities. As increased development interest in older Urban areas begins, it is essential that
both new projects and Redevelopment contribute, be respectful, and be sensitive to the distinctive
neighborhood character.
The intenl of A 11icle 9 is to provide clear, quantitative review standards that arc easy to
ad1ninister and offer certainty to Developers and citizens alike while maintaining a degree of
design flexibility to allow and encourage creative Site and Building designs and encourage
alternative design solutions that result in a better, distinctive product.
9.l GENERAL
9.1.1 Minimum Standards and Requirements.
Use of a Sketch Plan per Article 4.1 and Appendix H (Street ROW Matrix) is stro ngly
encouraged to be used in conjunction wi th Article 9.
A. Infill development using Article 9 shal I include all of the following criteria:
l. Located within a Urban Growth Area.
2. Lots and Parcels which are adjacent to developed land on perimeter boundaries.
(For this A rticle, A rterial and Collector roads are considered to be developed
land.)
B. Redevelopment proj ects using Article 9 shall include a.II of the following criteria:
t. Located either within or outside a Designated Growth A rca.
2. Remodeling, reusing, or replacement of existing Structures on a previously
development Lot or Parcel.
9.l.2 Compliance with Municipal Ordinances Required.
A ll Plans shall be designed in compliance wi lh the municipal ioning ordinance and all other
appl icable ordinances, Plans, studies, <lnd local requirements.
Manheim Oorough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
lu1iclc 9: ln lill-Redeveloprnent Design Standards
106
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
updated January 4. 20 16
9.1.3 Zoning Approvals Required Prior to Phrn Submission.
When a Plan proposal requires the grant of a special exception, conditional use or variance from
the municipal zoning ordinance, the Applicant shall obtain such special exception, conditional use
or variance apptoval from the Borough Council and/or zoning hearing board, as applicable, prior
to the submissio11 of the Preliminary Plan. The Plan shal l be designed and developed in
acco1·dancc with any conditions that have been imposed upon the grant of such special exception,
conditional use or variance by the Borough Council and/or zoning hearing board, as applicable.
9.2 SITE LA VOUT/DEVELOPMEN'r PATTERN
9.2.l Intent.
Building design for Infill and Redevelopment projects shall be compatible wi th adj acent
development where appropriate. The Jayollt o f Principal Buildings, Accessory Structures, and
parking areas along a Street is an example of a repeated Site pattern that creates a cohesive visual
identity and attractive pedest1'ia11 Street scene for an area. Creating a strongly defined Street edge
will improve the pattern of development. A sense of v isual unity is created within a
neighborhood when similar 13uilding fearures are repeated.
Building orientation strongly influences a developmen[ Site's focus of acti vity. A Building
oriented at least in part to an adjoining publ ic Street can create a strong presence in the public
realm, and can contribute signi licantly to a pedestrian-friendly built environment. Building
design that creates or adds to the visual interest of a Streetscape and a pedestrian scale is an
essential element of Infill a11d Redevelopment projects. Building height, scale, and massing can
be used to emphasize important corners. designate points of entry, and promote compatibi l ity
with surrounding uses. Planting shall be sited, massed, and scaled Lo maintain visibility o f doors
and first floor wi ndows frorn the Street and from within the development.
9.2.2 General Arrangement.
A. Buildings and Common Open Space shall be compatible with, or complement the
establ ished p1·oportion and Building mass of adj acent developments. Maintain a
pedestrian scale and character when appropriate.
B. In order to maintain or ct·eate a sense of place and " arrivar', all developments at the
intersection of two A11erial and/or Collector Streets shal I comply with the followi ng Site
layout and Building orientation standards:
M:inhcim ~orough
1. Parking areas and drive-through facilities shall not be located within a 150 foot
1'adius measured from the intersection of the centerline of the two Streets.
2. Development located within a 150 foot radius from the intersection of the
centerline of the two treets shall include one or more of the following focal
point feature~ which shall be visible from the intersecting Streets;
(a) A distinctive architectural or Building design that does not represent
standard franchise architecture;
(h) Fountains or other water feature:
107
Subdivision an<l Land Dcvelopmem Ordinance
Arlick 9: lnlill-Ri.:dt.:vclopmcnt Design Standards
Lancaster Cqun!y. Pennsylvania
updnted Jnnuary 4, 20 16
(c) Public plazas or other Common Open Space; or
(d) Signilicant landscape fea1ure.
C. Entry facades shall orient towards the primary Street or active pedestrian zone within the
Site to create an inviting image, consistent front. and Street edge defini tion.
D. To the maximum extent practicable, the orientation of new Lots created shall repeat the
predominant relationship of Buildings to Buildings and Buildings to Street along the
same and fac ing Block faces.
9.2.3 Lot Access.
A. Connections to compatible adj acent land uses should be provided to the maximum extent
feasible.
1. Common or shared service and del ivery access to compatible land uses should be
provided between adjacent Parcels and/or Buildings.
2. Projects should not become an isolated island in the surrounding community.
Instead, to reduce vehicle congestion and offer greater connectivity between
adjacent land uses, the following standards shall apply except
where prohibited for overriding public safety or other traffic re lated
considerations:
(a) The internal Street system shall connect to the perimeter public Street
system to provide multiple direct connections to, and belween local
des ti nations.
(h) The internal Street system shall connect to the perimeter public St reet
system to provide community connections to knit separate development
together rather than forming barriers between them.
0. In order to maximize the efnciency of the Street network, major traffic generators should
be localed so that their primary access is from a thoroughfare or commercial access
roads.
Manheim Borough
1. If a land use is proposed at a location or density that will have a significant effect
on current traffic patterns, a traffic impact study shall be required lo ensure that
the Street network can accommodate the Mticipated traffic demands and to
define req uir~d Street Improvements.
2. The number of entrances should be minimized to the extent possible in order lo
red lice conflicting points and faci l ilate traffic flow. The speci !ic location of
primary veh icle entrances is dependent otl the following factors:
(a) The location of existing or planned median breaks;
(b) Separation distances between I.he entrance and major intersections, minor
intersections. and adjacent entrances:
108
Suhtlivision and Land Dcvelopmenl Ord inuncc
Article 9: lnfil t·Redcvelopmenl Design ' lanc.lurds
Lancaster County. t,cnnsylvunia
updated Jnnuary 4. 20 t 6
(c) The need to provide shared access to adjacent Parcels of land;
(d) The need to align with previously approved or constructed access points
on the opposite side of the Street;
(c) The minimum number of entrances needed to move trarfic onto and off
the Sile safely and efficiently; and
(t) The need to provide multiple direct connections to, and between, local
destinations such as parks, schools. and shopping.
C. Speci Cic design or geometrics of development Streets and Access Drives shall meet the
intent of these design guidelines. (See Section 9.3)
I. Configuration and design shall be appropriate given the si7..e of the development
and the Capacity of the Si'rect.
2. Geometrics shall be dependent 0 11 a variety of factors including trat1ic volume.
speed, and distributio11. The resul ti ng des ign should provide an ef1icient ingress
and egress to the development and the fo llowing design issues should be
add!'essed in each case:
{a) Tbe number of in-bound and out-bound l anes~
(b) Lane width;
(c) Throat length (i.e. the distance between the Street and the fi rst point at
which cross lraflic or lel't LL1rns are permitted);
(d) Curb radii;
(c) The need or desirability ofa raised median;
(I) The need for a deceleratio11 lane; and
{g) Accommodation for pedestrian and non-motorized crossings.
D. A clear system of Driveways I Access Drives I Streets shall be established to carry the
highest volumes oftraflic within the Si te. (See Section 9.3)
Manheim Ooroug.h
I. Internal Driveways I Access Drives I Streets shall contain no perpendicular
parking spaces that directly access them.
2. Truck loading and circulation facilities shall be approp riately des igned and
provided fo r. To the greatest extent possibte, these areas should be separate from
customer parking and pedestrian areas.
3. As the size of the development and the volume of the trucks increase, intemul
circ ulation patterns shoulc.l reflect an increased separation between non-truck and
truck traffic.
109
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
Article 9: l ntill-Redcvelopment Design Standards
Lm1cas1er County, Pennsylvania
upduted January 4, 21116
9.2.4 Lot Frontage.
A ll Lots must front on a public Street or a Private Street.
9.2.5 Provisions for Future Subdivision.
Lots resulting from a proposed Subdivision that will be large enough to be further subdivided
should be configured to facilitate such future Subdivision. A dequate Street Right-of-Way shall be
provided as necessary_
9.2.6 Flag Lots.
Flag ~ots represent a viable design allernative under· the following standards. In such cases,
evidence shall be submitted to the Borough Council that documents the circumstances and
demonstrates that the platting or Plag Lots shall not restrict lhe development potential and pattern
of development of the Tract and adj acent lands.
A. /\djacent Flagpoles shall be encouraged to share a common access point.
B. Up to fo ur (4) adj acent Lots are encournged to be oriented to a shared Driveway. Mo1·e
than four (4) adj acent Lots shall be oriented to a St reet Right-of-Way.
C. Plag Lots are encouraged when Infill situations exist to achieve maximum densities.
O. Flag Lots proposed to create l .. ots for home Sites where there is no potent ial for the
construction of a public or Pl'ivate Street must demonstrate that there is no potential to
construct a Street due to: (a) severe topographic or other environmental constraints that
l imit the design of a Street; or (b) other factors inhe1·ent in the Site which make the
const.rucl ion of a public or Private Street impractical.
E. The width of a Flagpole should be determined by the function of the Driveway. number
of Lots served. setbacks. grading. and util ity requirements.
9.2.7 Double I Reverse Frontage Lots.
A. Residential Double Frontage Lots are only permitted when a reduction or Driveway
intersections along a Street with a high volume of vehicular movements is desired or the
maintenance of the integrity of a corridor is desired.
B. Reverse Frontage Lots may be permitted when rear Alleys are proposed to provide
vehicular access to Lots.
C. All double and Reverse Frontage Lots shall include an identification of the Frontage for
use as a Street access.
0. All Reverse Frontage L ots shall have within the Yard(s) that is/are adj acent to any Street
Right-of-Way, other than the Street of vehicular access, an 13asement running the entire
width of tl1e proposed Lot, across which there shall be no vehicular access.
Manheim Borough
Subd ivisiun and Land L)cvelop111cnl Ordinance
Article 9: In Ii II-Redevelopment Design S11111<l~mls
110
Lancaster County, Pennsylvenin
updated Jonunry 4. 20 I (j
9.3 STREETS, ACCESS DRIVES AND DRlVEWA VS
A. Each Street shall be designed to meet the design requirements by use of Appendix G and
A ppendix H.
R. Consideration should be given to where snow placement Easements will be situated on
the Site.
9.3.1 Intent.
Ensure that new Streets ai·e compatible with established Street pattern and support the expansion
of the ove1·all Street system. This may be accomplished by evaluating Future Access Strip
connections pr ior to SL1bmitting Plans.
Maintaining established Street patterns within communities helps to retain a visual continuity and
unity to an area. Proj ects shall repeat established patterns of vehicle ci1·culation, when feasible.
and shall provide safe, convenient, and efficient vehicular access both within a development and
to the SLll"rounding communities. Circulation patterns shall be designed to limit poinl<; of access
from maj or thoroughfares and minimize the impacts of non-residential traffic on adjacent
residential properties. Joint ose with adjacenl Landowners is encouraged and access Easements
to adjoining properties should be explored. Internal vehicle circulation shall provide a clear visual
path to pl'Ovide safe, convenient, and efficient vehicular access within and between developments.
9.3.2 General Arrangement.
The following criteria shall be considered in the design or new Streets in all lntill/Rcclevelopment
Land Developments.
A. The alignment of Streets shall con1orm to the circulation plan of the municipal
Comprehensive Plan, to Official Maps, and lo such municipal, County and State rnad and
highway plans as have been duly adopted.
n. r or St1·cets not shown on the circulation plan or Official Map, the arrangement shall take
into account existing. 'ropography and other Site constraints when providing for the
appropriate extension of existing Streets.
C. Local Streets shall be arranged so as to discourage excessive speeds when their function
is to remain local.
O, Curvilinear Streets and Cul-de-sacs should be uti lized only where Topography and
natural features dictate them on the Site, and where their use wi II be consistent with
adj oining development patterns. Curvilinear Streets shall not be used immed iately
adjacent to an existing grid Street system without prnviding a transition that continues
and protects the grid. New Street systems shall take into consideration the dispersal of
traffic and to the ultimate functioning of the existing Street system and regional
trans portal ion 11etwork.
E. Streets shall be laid out to provide convenient and safe access to the property. Where
appropr iate, the Borough Council may require additional Cartway Improvements and/or
tvtanhei111 Borough
S11bdivision und Uind Develop111enl Ordinance
/\rtic lc 9: ln li ll-Rcde"eloprncnt Design Standards
111
l,a11caster Co11nty, Pennsylvania
updater,! J p 1~1.1ary 4. 20 16
Right-of-Way width along existing Street Frontages to accommodate the anticipated
traffic increases and lo faci litate vehicular turning movements to and from individual
Lots.
F. Where a development abuts nn existing or proposed Arterial and Colleclor Street, the
Borough Council may require access management techniques such as the use or marginal
access Streets, Reverse Frontage Lots, or other such treatment that will provide protection
for Abutting properties, reduce the number of intersections with the Arterial Street, and
separate the local and through tr<1ftic.
C. T he use of permeable pavement is encouraged on sidewalks, plazas, Drivl.!ways. parking
lots, and low-traffic roads. Permeable pavement shall not be located on industrial Sites,
fueling stations, Sites with expansive soils or high depth to bedrock, areas draining to l'hc
permeable pavement greater than 5 acres, areas with the water table less than two feet
below the bottom of the pavement base, and less than 100 feet from drinking wells.
H. Streets shall be designed with drainage grates that are safe for crossing by bicycles and/or
horse-drawn vehicles.
9.3.3 Street Hierarchy.
A. Each proposed Street shall be classi fied and designed to meet the standards for one of the
Street types by use of Appendix G. This classification should be according to the Street
hierarchy of rhe existing rransport<1tion network
B. Private Streets may be used provided the Borough Council determines thal no public
benefit wi ll be setved by Dedication. Applications that propose a Private Street' shall be
accompanied by a recorded declaration or an agreement which shall be recorded w ith the
Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds as part of the final Plan. T his agreement shall
establish the conditions under which the Street will be constructed and maintained in
accordance with the design approved on the Final Plan, and shall stipulate:
1. Ownership interest in the Private StreeL
2. No limitations on users unless identified in the private agreement.
3. A statement indicating that civil court, not the Borough Counci l, is responsible
for mitigating differences relating to the agreement.
4. The method of assessing maintenance and repair cost.
S. Private Streets shall not be offered for Dedication as a public Street unless they
are restored to municipal design standards for Streets. The offer l"nr Dedication
of the Street shall be made only for the Street as a whole.
9.3.4 Determination of Required New Street Design Standurds.
Each Street shall be designed to meet the design requirements by use of Appendix G and
Appendix 11. Newly created Right-of-Way and Cartway width for each interior Street
classification and Frontage Street identified by the municipal long range plan shall be
determined by the proposed use. projected A DT and the intensity of development permitted and
Manhe i111 Borough
Subdivision and Land DeveloplTlent Ordinance
Article 9: l11fill-Rcdcvclop111cni Design Stundm·ds
112
l.ancostcr County. Pennsylvania
llpdatcd Jonuar)' 4. 20 16
existing along each Street. Bach Cartway width shal l be based on the travel lane, on-Street
parking, multi-modal lanes, and gutter width.
URBAN*
~s · 0 ·8 ' 0 or 7' 0-8' 9-12' 9-12' 0-8 ' 0 or T o.s· ~s·
side buf.• t)llrkJll~ 01cycle travel travel t31cycle parking buf.' side
walk lime hmc Ian~ lune lnne lane wulk
21-54 fool CARTWAY
2 1-72 foot RIGllT·OF·WAY
* Bufter areas and shoulders are enco uraged but not required.
A. Travel Lanes.
1. Travel lane width requirements shall vary according to the Average Daily Traffic
(ADT).
Miles Per I lour U ndcr 400 A DT 40 1 to 1500 ADT 1501 to 2000 ADT Over 2000 A DT
15 9 ft. travel lane I 0 ft. travel lane 10 ft. travel lane I I ft. travel lane
20- 40 9 ft. travel lane I 0 ft. travel lane 11 ft. travel lane 12 fl. rravel lane
45 - 50 10 ft. travel lane 11 ft. t ravel lane 1 I ft. travel lane 12 ft. travel lane
55 11 ft. travel lane l I ft. travel lane 12 ft. travel lane 12 ft. travel lane
* derived from A/\SHTO as a1nended
B. Bicycle La oes.
Manheim Borough
l. Bicycle lanes shall be provided for al l Streets identified by the municipal long
range plans.
2. Bicycle lane requirements shal l vary accord ing to the speed of the Street.
(a) For a posted speed limit of twenty-six to thirty-five (26-35) miles per
hour four (4) fool Multimodal lanes shall be provided.
(b) Por a posted speed limit of thirty-six to forty-five (36-45) miles per hour,
six (6) foot Multimodal lanes shall be provided.
3. Grates shall be bicycle safe.
l 13
Subdivision and Land Developmenl Ordinance
Arliole 9: l111ill-Redcvclop111ent Design Standard~
Lancaster County, Pc11nsylvania
updated Ja11uary 4, 2016
C. Curbs, Gutters, aod Swales
1. Flexibility regarding curbing (type and necessity to provide) shall be permitted as
long as the existing Stotm Water management system can accommodate design
flows from the proposed drainage system.
2. Design of curbs, gutters, and Swales should take the following into
consideration:
(a) Storm Water management
(h) Road and inlet stabi lization.
(c) Soil and/or Topography.
(d) Cohesive best management design (BMP).
(c) Pedestrian/ handicap safety.
Buffer Areas.
When Buffer areas are provided, signage and Street trees shall generally be located
within the Buffer area of the Right-or-Way. Buffer areas should be planted with grass,
ground cover, or t1·cated with other suitable Pcrvious Material. See Section 9.9 for Street
tree standards. When Buffer areas arc provided, 13uffer areas should be a minimum of 4
feet wide with 8 feet preferred when planted with trees.
E. Rights-of-way.
l. Centerline of the Right-or-Way may r1ot always be the centerline of the travel
lanes.
2. Where the Right-o f-Way width of the new Street is differen1 than the existing
Street, a transition area shall be provided, the design of which is s u~j eot to
Borough Council approval.
3. The Rig.ht-of-Way width shall be designed to meet the design requirements by
use of Appendix 0. Right-of-Way widths may change for eacb Street, based on
the anticipated future development.
F. Vertical Street Alignments.
Mnnheim Dorough
Vert ical curves shall be used in changes in grade exceeding one percent ( I%).
1. Alignment:
(a) Vertical Street and Access Drive alignments shall be measured along the
center Ii ne.
(b) Minimum Rate of Vertical Curvature K shal l be as specified below:
114
Subdivisio11 and Land Development Ordinance
Ar1icle 9: lnfi ll ·Redevelopmenl Design Standards
Lancaster County, r ennsy lvania
updated Ja nuary 4, 20 l 6
Initial Speed (mph) Curvature, K 1 Curvatua·e, K1 (ft/1%)
(ft/%) Crest Sa2
15 3 10
20 7 17
25 12 26
30 19 37
35 29 49
40 44 64
45 61 79
50 84 96
55 114 115
1 l~nte of verlicnl cu n ature, I("" length ur curve (L) per per cent algebraic difference
(A) in the int~rscct io n grades ( l<=LIA)
2. Leveling areas shall have a maximum grade of four percent (4%) for a minimum
length of fo rty ( 40) feet measured from the intersection of the center! i nes. A
Modification to increase the percent of grade may be warranted due to Site
constraints.
G. Horiw ntal Street Alignments.
Manheim Borough
1. Horizontal curves shall be used at all angle changes in excess of two (2) degrees.
2. The design of horizontal curves shall be based on an appropriate relationship
between design speed and curvature and on their j oint relationships with
Superelevation (roadway banking). (The longer the radius of a curve, the higher
the speed through that curve).
3. Single, long rad ius curves shall be used rather than a series of curves with
varying radii and/or a series of short curves separated by short, straight segments.
4. Access Dri ves intersections shall be designed Lo Local Street horizontal
alignment standards.
5. Determination of minimum horizontal centerline rad ius*
Initial Centerline Radius' Centerline Radius' (feet)
Speed erect) 4% Superclcvation
(moh) No Suoereleva tion (e max.)
15 50 42
20 107 86
25 198 154
30 333 250
35 510 37 1
40 762 533
45 1039 7 11
50 926
55 11 90
l 15
Sub<livision and Land Devclopme111 Ordinance
Article 9: I nli ll·R.:devctop111cn t Design Standards
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
updated January 4, 2016
*derived from AASllTO formu la Rm1n-Y2 / 15•(0.0le+ f,11.~)
1 Curve radius shall be measured lo lhe centerline ofCartways and Access Drives.
6. Superelevation in certain conditions may be amended when using AASI ITO
Exhibit 3-16 as updated.
No Street inl\!rsection shall be granted at an angle of less than sixty (60) degrees.
11. Sight Distance at Intersections.
I. Proper Sight Distance shall be provided at all new Streets, Access Drives, and all
Driveway intersections in accordance with lhe latest edition of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Design Manual - Part 2, llighway Design
(Publication 13). and Section 2.18.r as amended. Sufficient design and Plan
information shall be submitted with the Plan application proving that this
minimum standard will be achieved. Such design information shall be sealed by a
professional registered in Pennsylvania to perform such design work.
(a) Access Drive Sight Distance based on I 0 root off of edge of Cart way, an
eye height orJ.5 feet to an object at 3.5 foot height.
(b) Street Sight Distance based on 15 foot off of edge of Cartway, an eye
height of3.S feet to an object at 3.5 foot height.
2. /\II intersections shall be provided with appropriate stop control devices on the
lesser classiflcation Street or Access Drive. No Clear Sight Tri angle Gnsements
are required when stop control devices are used.
3. Clear Sight Triangle Easements shall include the area on each Street co rner that
is bounded by the line which connects the sight or "connecti ng" points located on
each of the Right-of-Way l.,ines of the intersecting Street. The planting of trees,
other plantings, signs, and Structures exceeding thirty (30) inches in height that
would obstruct the clear sight across the area of the f:asements shall be
prohibited.
(a) Arterial Streets shall have a Clear Sight Triangle side of 150 feet.
(l>) Collector Streets shall have a Clear Sight Triangle side or I 00 feet.
(c) Local roads, Cul-de-sacs, and Alleys shall have a Clear Sight Triangle
side of 75 feet.
I. New Street Improvements.
Mnnhcim Oorougn
All Street paving must conform to the following specifications unless superseded by n
roa<l ordinance or zoning ordinance. All new Streets shall be designed the fo llowing
cross-sectional specifications (al I courses are compacted thicknesses):
1. All new Streets, other than those owned and maintained by PennDOT shall be
designed with the following cross-sectional specification: Sight (8) inch 2A stone
sub base, four ( 4) inch 25-mm Superpave asphalt base course, one and one half ( I
116
Subdivision and L~md Development Ordinance
Article 9: lnlill·Rcdcvelopmenl Design Stnndards
Loncn~ter Cnunly, r1:1111!tylvuni::1
updated January 4. 2016
W') inch 9.5-mm Supcrpave asphalt wearing course. A ll pavement shall be
Superpave asphall mixture design HMA, PG 64-22. 0.3 to 3 million ESALs with
Skid Resistance Level (SRL-H). unless otherwise requesled by the Borough.
2. All Streets to be owned and mainrained by PennDOT shall be designed in
accordance with Penn DOT speci lications.
9.3.5 Access Drives.
Access Drives shall be designed to meet the following requirements:
A. Any properly that utilizes an Access Drive shall have Frontage along a public or private
Right-of-Way.
B. The Plan shall note that the Access Drive does not qualify for Dedication to the Borough
and that the Landowner assumes all responsibility for its maintenance.
C. Access Drives shall be designed for their intended runction. A 11 travel lanes shall be a
minimum of eight (8) feet wide; however, sufficient design information must be
SLlbmitted to indicate that the number of travel lanes and width proposed has been
designed to accommodate the anticipated traffic to and from the development.
D. Parking shall be permilted when sufficient Cartway width is proposed. See Section 8.3,
Parking Standards.
E. Access Drives shall maintain a centerline separation distance of one hundred and twentyfive
(125) feet from all other Access Drives and Streets. Access Drive intersections with
other Access Drives within the Site shall not be subject lo such restrictions.
F. Proper Sight Distance shall be provided at Access Drive intersections with existing publ ic
and Private Streets according to this ordi nance.
9.3.6 Drivewnys.
Shared or joint Driveways must meet the fol low standards:
A. Driveways shall be used only for four (4) or fewer dwelling units.
B. To decrease the potential for vehicular conflicts, Drivewnys may be located either
partially, centered on, or entirely on one property.
C. An Easement agreement shall be provided and recorded that indicates the rights of
ownership, access, and maintenance. The Borough is not responsible to sett le conflict
issues with joint or shared Driveways.
D. Driveways shall be paved with Pervious or Impervious Surfaces.
Manheim Borough
Subdivision ond l ,~111d Dcvclop111e11l Ordinance
Article 9: lntill-Rcdcvch>pmcnt lJcsign Stant.lords
117
Lancoslcr County. Pennsylvonin
opt.lo led .January 4. 20 16
9.3.7 Single Access I Cul-de-sac Streets
A. To the greatest extent possible, through Streets shall be provided. The feasibility of a
through Street wi II be based on the physical features of the Tract proposed for
development and/or Adjoining Lots, the potential for extension of the Street to adjoining
lands based on existing development patterns, restrictions imposed by other government
regulations and other recorded documentation, and t he ability of the design to meet all
other requirements of this Ordinance. When single access I Cul-de-sac Streets are
proposed, the application shall be accompanied by a written analysis of the merits of the
design and the reasons that a through Street would not be desirable.
B. Cul-de-sacs shall have a circu lar. "T" shaped or "llammcrhead" shaped turnarounds.
Turnarounds shall be constructed completely within the Right-of-Way.
1. T shaped or hammerheads may be used if the Cul-de-sac serves less than 10
dwelling units. Dimensions of a T shaped or hammerhead are sixty (60) feet by
twenty (20) feet.
60'
~1
60'
C. When connecting to an existing temporary Cu1-de4 sac. removal of the Cul-de-soc paved
areas and restoration of the sidewalk system within the Right-of-Way shall be the
responsibility of the connecting Developer.
0. Permanent Cul4 dc-sacs with a circular turnaround shal l be paved, have a minimum radius
of forty two (42) feet without a center island and forty five (45) with a center island.
Mnnheim Oorough
Sul>division and 1.nnd bcvdopmcnt Ordinance:
Article 9: lnfi ll·Redevc:lopmcnt Dc:;ign Standords
118
Lnncastcr County, Pennsylvania
updnlcd January 4, 2016
9.3.8 Street Names.
A. Continuation of existing Streets shall be known by the same name.
B. Written notice that the proposed new Street names arc acceptable from the Lancaster
County-Wide Com in uni cations (fax number: 717 664-1126 as amended) shall be
submitted.
C. At least two (2) Street 11a111c signs shal I be placed at each four-way Street intersection and
one ( I) at each "T'1 intersection.
D. Signs shall be free of visual obstruction. The design of Street name signs should be
consistent, of a style appropriate to the Borough, of a uni form size and color, and erected
in accordance with mt111icipal standards.
E. Private Streets shall be provided with Street name signs in conformance with this section.
The Plan shall note that it is the responsibility of the Developer to install the Street name
signs for Private Streets.
9.4 TRAFFIC S IGNS.
A. Design and placement of tramc signs shall follow the requirements of the Borough and
Penn DOT.
B. Signs shal I be free of visual obstruction.
9.5 DWELLING UNIT IDENTIFlCATlON.
Street numbers for all dwelling units shall be visible from Lhe approved Street Frontage.
9.6 PAl{KlNG FACILIT IES
9.6. l Intent.
Given the potential for Infill and Redevelopment projects to develop 0 11 more constrni11ed Si tes,
provid ing options for shared parking, both on and off-Street is important. While development
shoul<l have adequate parking for users, they sho~tl d also seek to minimize Impervious Surfaces
that detract from environmental issues and a pedest rian environment and may limit appropriate
development density.
The intent of these standards is to minimize the visual impact of parking lot s, parking Structures.
and garages from the public Street while providing convenient internal automobile and pedestrian
access. Parking lot Landscaping sha'll be used to minimize the expansive appearance of parking
lots. provide shaded areas, and mitigate acoustic and visual impact of motor vehicles.
Landscaping should contribute to the sense or place and aid surveillance and ini ni111ize the
potential for crin1e. Planting patterns shall not obstruct sight lines or create isolated areas,
especi al ly near pedestrian walking paths. Specific landscape requirements will vary slightly
depending upon the size and configuration of the parking areas on a Site.
Manheim Borough
~ubd iv ision and tm1d Dt:wlopmc nt Ordinanuc
Arlick: 9: lnfill ·Rcdcvclopm1:nl Design Sll!ndards
119
Lnnc:asler Coun ty, Pennsylvania
updnted Jnmmry 4, 2016
Shared parking is encouraged. The number of parking spaces may be reduced if shown that the
uses are compatible wi th regard to parking needs. (See Shared Parking Second Edition, by Urban
Land Instit ute)
9.6.2 Parking Lot Standards.
1. A minimum of seventy-five (75%) percent of the off-Street parking provided
must be located within the side and/or rear of the Stru cture(s) lo be served.
Where appropriate, no more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the required
purking may be located in front of the Structure(s).
2. Sidewal ks/pedestrian Easements shall be provided for pedestrian ci rculation. All
development shall incorporate a sidewalk belween the 13ui lding and the Street
3. Lighting per Section 8.1 I shall be provided.
4. Landscaping shall be required and located in unusable parking or circulation
areas with proper clearance from parked vehicles and sidewalks. Planter areas
and tree wells should be installed in accordance with the parking lot dimension to
avoid adverse impacts on parking functions due to improper location and/or
design.
9.6.3 Pa rking Lot Landscaping.
Perimeter Landscaping standards sha ll apply to perimeters of a parking area adjacent to either
public rights-of-way and/or adjacent propert ies. Parking garages and roof parking shall be
exempt from this requirement. Perimeter pai·king lot Landscaping requirements may be satisfied
by required Street edging Landscaping and required landscaped Buffers where the locational
requirements far the Buffer or Strecl edge Landscaping overlap with these perimeter Landscaping
reqi1i re111e11ts. Perimeter of all parking areas shall be screened by any of the following rnethods
except as set forth above:
A. A variety of Landscaping planted so as to not obstruct sight lines; or
B. A low, decorative wall or fence three (3) feet high. Height limitations shall not preclude
the constru ction of a higher structural retai ning wall necessitated by grade or Topography
of a Site; or
C. A combination of these methods.
9.6.4 Design Guidelines.
A. ADA parking spaces shall be provided according to federal standards.
t. Accessible parking shall be located to avoi d the need f'or users to cross drive
aisles.
B. To the maximum extent practicable, garage entries, carports, parking areas, and parking
Structures shall be internalized in 13uilding groupings or oriented away from public Street
Frontage.
Manheilll Borough
Subdivi~iLln uml Lund Development Ordinance
Article 9: lntill-Rcdevclop111en1 Design Standnrds
120
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
uptlatccl January 4, 2016
C. Preferred access to below grade parking shall be either from the side or rear of Buildings.
D. On-Street parking spaces may be counted towards the minimurn requiremenls for parking
provided that the on-Street spaces are located on an adjacent or internal Street that allows
on-Street parking. On-Street parking spaces being counted towards credit must be
identi lied on plans at the time of submittal.
9.<i.S Moto rized Vehicle Parking Facilities.
A. Size Standards.
I. Parking space size and interior drive widths shall be as required by the Borough
Zoning Ordinance.
3. Parking space length and width can be increased from m1111111um sizes where
appropriate in accon.lance with location, use, and turn-over rate.
4. Encroachments such as columns and light poles may encroach into a module by 1
foot and affect up to 30% of Lhe parking spaces.
B. General Standards.
Munhcim Borough
l. Angled parking may be pull in or reverse (back-in).
2. Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall meet the A mericans with
Disabili ties Act (ADA). l l<111dicapped parking shall be provided for all nonresidential
developments and multi-family Structures and shall be located closest
to the accessible l3uilding entrance(s).
J . On-Street parking on at least one side of the Street is enco1.1ragcd on Access
Drives and proposed Streets with speeds eq\,lal to or less than 30 mph.
4. Where provided1 On-Street parking shall not be located within twenty nve (25)
feet of a Cartway intersection in order to provide safo Sight Distance and
adequate turning radius for large vehicles.
5.
I.
/
~ "
/ 25'
I
I
I
// §-·-.
I -'
I
~
---·
Off-Street parking areas shall be oriented to, anc.I within a reasonable walking
121
Subdivision and Land Dcvclop1ncnt 01·dina11ce
Article 9: ln!ill-Redevelopment Design Standards
Loncoster County, Pennsylvunin
updrucd January 4. 20 I (i
distance of, the Buildings they arc designed for and consistent with adjacent
neighborhoods.
6. Parked vehicles adjacent to sidewalks shal l not overhang or extend over the
sidewalk in a manner that restricts pedestrian circulation. Where such overhang
is not restricted by a wheel stop or other device. sidewalks shall have a three (3)
foot minimum clearance width rrom any obsitacles.
7. Not less than a two (2) foot radius of c~1rvature shall be permitted for horizontal
curves in parking areas.
8. A ll dead end r arking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient back-up area for
all et'ld stal Is.
9. Painted lines, arrows. and dividers shall be provided and maintained to control
parking, and when necessary to direct vehicular ci rculation.
Manheim Dorough
IO. The typical cross section of any parking compound shat I be prepared to meet the
following minimum standards:
(a) Non Permeable
Crushed aggregate based course with a minimum th ickness of six (6)
inches. as specified in the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Specificat ions, form 408, and its latest revisions, or other Pennsy l v:inia
Depai1mcnt of Transportation approved equ ivalent. Pavement shall
consist of a minimum of two (2) inches of binder courses and one ( I)
inch wearing surface. Material shall be equal or superior to Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Speci fications for Bi tuminous Surface
Course ID-2 and sllall be applied in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Specifications, Form 408, and its latest
revisions, or other Pennsylvania Department or
Transportation approved equivalent.
(b) Permeable Pavement
Permeable pavement sllall not be located on heavy industrial Si tes,
fueling stations, Sites with expansive soils or shallow depth to bedrock,
areas drai ning to the permeable pavement greater than 5 acres. areas with
the water table less than two feet below the bottom of the pavement base,
and less than I 00 feet from drinking wells. Perml!able pavement
includes paving units, porous asphalt pavement. or porous concrete
(using single-si1..cd aggregate and low waler co ntent); L1niformly graded
stone aggregate with void space; filter fabric lining the subsurface beds;
and uncompacted (or hand compacted) subgradc. Permeable pavement
shall consider the inlilLrat ion rate of the soil subgradc under the base.
Constant supervision during construction is encouraged as sediment must
be kept from the aggregate base.
122
C:: ubdivision tllld Land Development Ord inance
Article 9: Inli ll -Rcdcvelopment Oci;ign Standards
Lancaster County, Pct111sylv1111ia
updated January 4. 20 16
1 l. Shared parking is encouraged. The number of parking spaces may be reduced if
shown that the uses of the facility are compatible wi th regard to parking needs.
(See Shared Parking Second Edition, by Urban Land Institute)
C. Parking Structures
J. Lighting and reflective materials I tlat paint should be used inside the parking
Structure and within all pedestrian areas to increase the feeling of safety. Glossy
or semi -gloss paint is discouraged. Lighting, for parking Structures shal l be
provided in accordance with the illumination levels presented below:
Manheim Boroup,h
Minimum- Minimum/Maximum
Maximum Horizonta l
Horizontal2 Uniformityl
(Foo tea ndlcs)
Basic' 1-5 10:1 -5:1
Rarnpss
Day 2-5 10: 1- 5:1
Night 1-5 10:1 -5:1
Entrance/Exit
Areas6
Day7 so
N ight 1-5 10:1-5: 1
Stairways 2-5
Table based on the I llum1nc1ting Enginecrmg Society (I ET)
1 For typical conditions.
Min imum-
Maximum
Vertica l4
(Footca n<l!es)
0.5-5
1-5
0.5-5
25
0.5-5
l -5
l Minimum ··main ta ined .. Footcnndles 111easu red on the parking surfi1cc, without any shudowing
effect from parked vehicles or columns. rhis 11111y require 3·5 1:uotcn11dle nveragc
J 'rhc: highest hori1on tt1I ll luminnnce areu. divided by the !(!west hurLi.ontal llluminnncc point or
area ~h oukl not be ~ro!aler than the ratio sho\1~1 .
-' Measured facing the drive aisle at 5 li::et abuve the parking su rface al the roint or the lowest
horiz.on tul l lluminnncc.
~Applies onl) to clenrwoy ramps (with no adjacent parking) but not sloping Ooor designs.
6 A high llluminance level for the first 65 feet i n ~itle the lructurc is needed to effect 11 tronsition
from bright daylight to n lower interior level.
' Dayl ight may be considered in the de:.ign calculations.
2. Lighting. design shall address Glare. light pol lution (unnecessary light), Light
Trespass (bright visible ~Ources or lighl spil ling into neighboring properties). and
reduction of shadows.
3. Provision of signagc at exits of the parking Structu res shull be required.
4. Open-Structure wal I areas for natural ventilation or mcchan ical venti lation shall
be encouraged.
5. lnteraction between vehicles and pedestrians st10uld be p1·ov iJcJ 1n a safe
manner.
6. Trame flow by vehicles entering the parking garage shall be mitigated by either
on Site or external deceleration lanes based on the traflic impact study i f
requi red.
123
Subdivision on<l Lan<l Development Ordinance
Art icle 9: l11t1l l·Rcdcvclopmcnt Design . tandnrds
Loncnstcr County. Pe nn ~yl vania
updated January 4, 20 16
9.6.6 Non-Motorized Vehicle Parking Facilities.
Non-motorized vehicle parking facilities should be provided in accordance with the following
regulations:
A. Bicycle Parking .Facmties.
Bicycle parking faci lities for non-residential land uses shall be provided in accordance
with the following regulations:
J. F..ach bicycle space shall be equipped with a device to which a bicycle frame and
one ( I) wheel can be attached llSing a chain or cable. There shal I be adequate
separation between adjacent devices to allow bicycles to be attached or removed
without moving other bicycles. The devices shall also be suitable for use by
bicycles not equipped with kickstands, and the appearance of the device shall be
generally consistent with nearby Urban design features.
2. Bicycle parking spaces shall be convenient to the Structure ror which they arc
provided. They shall be visible from al least one ( I) entrance to the Structure.
J. For every 50 vehiclllar spaces required, 3 bicycle parking spaces shall be
provided, not to exceed a total of 9 required bicycle parking spaces.
9.7 PEDESTRIAN ACCESS AND CIRCULATION
9.7.1 Intent.
By c1·eat ing a safe, continuous network of walkways within, and between developments, and
completing par tially constructed sidewalk patterns within communities, pedestrians feel more
inclined to safely walk, visit, or shop. Walkways should provide an inviting and convenient
option for pedestrian movement within a community and promote direct pedestrian access to
neighboring residential, non-residential, and public uses.
9.7.2 Design Guidelines.
A. Trails.
Manheim 13orough
I. Trait width shalt be a minimum ot'five (5) feet.
2. Easement arc required for trails. Provide a Plan note indicating such Easement
must be nve (S) foot on either side of the edge of the trail as constructed.
3. Encroachments into the trail shall not result in less than a 4 foot wide minimum
clearance width from any obstacles.
4. Marked crosswalks shall be provided within the vehicular travel ways
intersecting wi th trails.
124
' ubdivision nncl Lnnd Development Ordinanr.:c
t\rliclc 9: lnfill·Redevelopmenl Design Stnnda1·ds
lAin ca.~lcr Coun ty, Pcnnsylvnnia
updut<!d fonuury 4, 20 l 6
B. Sidewalks.
1. Paved sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of a new Street within Urban
Growth Areas.
2. Sidewalk widths sh!'!l I be a minimum offtve (5) feet.
3. Where possible, sidewalks should be sloped towards adj acent Pcrvious Surfaces,
not adj acent l111perviot1s Surfaces.
4. Encroachments into the sidewalk shall not result in less than a 4 foot wide
minimurn clearance width from any obstacles.
5. Sidewalks shall not exceed a cross slope of two percent (2%).
6. Ramp cuts shall be localed at all sidewalks intersecting with vehicular travel
ways.
7. Marked crosswalks shall be provided within the vehicular travel ways
intersecting with sidewalks.
9.8 PRESERVATION OF NATURAL, HISTORIC. AND CULTURAL FEATURES
9.8.1 Intent.
M ature trees, Topography, 11alural drainage ways, and histmic si tes arc a few of the elements that
contribute to the distinct character of our Borough. To protect these features and resources that
enhance the local character, Infill and Redevelopment projects shall work with the context and
integrity of this environment by preserving natural, historical, and cultural features to the
maximum extent possible.
9.8.2 Design Guidelines.
In fil I and Redevelopment projects should integrate exi sting natural features. required Common
Open Space, existing historic Structures, and cultural resources located on lhe Site into the overall
design and layout of the development.
A. A Si te analysis shall be submitted using all applicable reports, Plans. and maps to
determine whether significant natural or other features exist on a Site that should be
protected, with priority being given to lhc followiug areas (which are not listed in order
of priority or significance):
1. Floodplains, surface drainage Swales, bodies of water;
2. Wetlands;
3. Existing Significant Trees;
4. Historical, cul tural, or archeological sites or areas recognized by the Borough,
state, or federal governments as significant~
Manheim Dorough
Subdivision and Land Developmenl Ordinance
/\11icle 9: lnlill-Redcvc lopment Design Standards
125
Lancas1cr County, Pennsy lvania
updated Januory 4, 2016
5. Prominent Topography: and
6. Steep Slopes
B. The proposed 13uilding and lmpervious Surfocc(s) shall be clearly identified on each Plan
ta identify potential impacts to existing treos, other natural features, historic Stn1ctures,
and cultural resources.
9.9 LAN OSCAPINC
9.9.1 Intent.
Landscaping plants intercept rain fall, reduce Storm Water Runoff, prevent erosion, and reduce
the need for detention. Landscape plants also provide shade and reduce the temperature created
by additional Impervious Surfaces. Plants release moisture back into the environment, improve
air quality, and remove contamination from the soil and water by absorbing excess nL1irients, fi ller
sediments, and break down pollutants. Planting Native Plants helps ptovide habi tat, food, and
protection for native species and ecosystems. Planting native species generally increases the
chance for long term survivability of the planl because they are naturally adapted to local
co11ditions. Planting Non-Native species and cultivars could be 1ncorporated in designs when
they provide a superior plant for spatial constraints and Urban stress mitigation found in local Site
conditions. Existing Significant Trees which help contribute to the sense of place should be
preserved to the maximum extent practical.
9.9.2 Design Guidelines.
A. For li1 flJVRedevelopment within Urban areas, the Applicant must comply with Section
8. 10.
B. P'or Infill/Redevelopment within Rural areas, the Applicant must comply with Section
I Q. LO.
9.10 LIGHTING
9.lO.l Intent.
L ighting must be scaled and laid out in a pattern that promotes safe vehicular and non pedest rian
access to and within a development while minimizing impacts on adjacent properties. Lighting in
outdoor public places helps improve public safety and welfare. The control or Glare from nonvehicular
light sootces can improve impaired sare travel. Controlling Glare also helps protect
neighbors and the night sky from nuisance Glare and stray light from poorly a imed, placed.
appl ied, maintained, or Fully Shielded light sources.
Manheim Bomugh
Subdivi ~ion untl Lnn<l Dcvclopmcnl Ordinance
Article 9: lnfi1f.Rctlcvclopmcnt Design Standards
126
LanCllster County, Pennsylvania
updated January 4, 20 16
9.l0.2 Design Guidelhtcs.
Use
A. Lighting shall have intensities and uni formity ratios in accordance with the current
recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society or North America
(IESNJ\) as contained in the IESNA Lighting Handbook. Futme amendments to said
recommended practices shall become a part of this Ordinance without further action of
the Borough. Examples or intensities for typical outdoor applications, as extracted from
the 8th Edition of the Lighting Handbook, arc presented below:
Task Maintained Uniformity
Footcandlest Ratio1
(Max.:Min.)
Streets Local Residential 0.4 Min. 6:1
Local Commercial 0.9 Min. 6: 1
Parking: Multi-Family Low Vehicular/Pedestrian Activity 0.2 Min. 4:1
Residential Medium Vehicular/Pedestrian Activity 0.6 Min 4: I
Parking: Industrial, I ligh Activity (e.g., regional Shopping 0.9 Min. 4:1
Commercial, Institutional centers/fast food fac ilities, major
and Municipal athletic /civic /cul tural events)
Medium Activity (e.g., community 0.6 Min. 4:1
shopping centers. oflice parks,
hospitals, commuter lots, cu ltural
/civic/recreational events)
Low acti vity (e.g., neighborhood 0.2 Min. 4:1
shopping, industrial employee parking,
schools. church parking, farm
businesses, farm operations)
Walkways and Bikewavs 0.5 Min. 5:1
Building Entrances and Siens 4.0 Avg. -
t. lllumimnion leve ls arc moinlaincd horizontal F'oolcandles on the task. e.g .. pavement or nrea surface.
2. Uniformity ratio is a 1rn:asurc of the di pcrsion of light on on area. The ratio is measured os rnaximum littht level to
minimum light le.,,el. E.xample: 4: I for the given area. the maximum level of illumination ~hou ld be no less than 4
times the minimum level of illum ination (0.2 x 4 - 0.8 maximum light level)
B. Dedicated lighting fixtures shall be of a type and design appropriate to the lighting
application and aesthetically acceptable to the Borough. Dedicateu and non dedicated
lighting fixtures shall meet the followi ng standards:
Manheim norOU!?h
1, 17or lighting horizontal tasks such as roadways, sidewalks, entrance, and parking
areas, fi xtures shal I meet IESNA Pul ly Shielded criteria (no I ight output cm ilted
above ninety (90) degrees at any lateral angle around the fi xture). Individual
fixtures whose aggregate lamp output does not exceed one thousand eight
hundred ( 1,800) lumens (typical household outdoor lighting) are exempt from
this requirement.
2. Fixtures shall be equipped with, or be modified to, incorporate light directing
and/or shielding devices such as shields, visors, skirts, or hoods to redirect
offending light distri bution and/or reduce direct or reflected Glare. Glare control
shall be achieved primarily through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures,
shields and bafnes. and appropriate application of fixture mounting height,
127
uh<livision and Land Development Ordinance
Article 9: In Ii II-Redevelopment Design Standards
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
updated January 4. 20 16
wattage, aiming angle and fixture placement.
3. The use or noocllighling. spotlighting, wall-mounted fixtures, decorative globes
and spheres, and other fixtures not meeting !ESNA full-cutoff criteria shall be
permitted only with the approval of the Borough, based upon applicability in
retaining the character of the Borough and achieving acceptable Glare control.
C. All outdoor lighti11g shall be aimed, localed, designed, fitted, and maintained so as not to
present a hazard to drivers or pedestrians by impairing their ability to safely travel.
D. Unless for safety, security, or all-night operations, lighting shall be controlled by
automatic switching devices to permit extinguishing between eleven ( 11) p.m. and dawn.
I. Lighting proposed for use after eleven ( 11) p.111., or arter the 11ormal hours of
operation, shall be reduced by an average of seventy-five percent (75%) from
that lime until dawn, unless supporting a specific purpose.
E. Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the primary means for controlling
Glare.
F. Tht! intensity or illumination projected onto nn exi sting residential use from an existing
property boundru·y shall not exceed the following vertical Footcandles. measured at the
existing property line at a height of 5 feet;
1. 0.1 Footcandle in Rural Areas and in General Building Areas.
2. 0.2 Footcandles in Concentrated Building Areas.
3. 0.6 Pootcandles in Core Reinvestment Areas.
G. Pole mounted fixtures sh al I not be mounted in excess of 25 feet high.
H. Lighting standards in parking areas shall be placed outside paved areas or on concrete
pedesta ls at least thirty (30) inches high above the pavement, or by other approved
prolecli ve means.
I. The Borough reserves the right to conduct a post installation nighttime inspection to
verify compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance and, i f appropriate, to require
remedial action at no expense lo the Borough.
J. The Borough must accept Dedication of Street lighting fac ilities located within the Rightof-
Way of a St reet to be dedicated to the Borough.
Manheim Oorough
L Until such lime as the Street lighting is dedicated, the Developer or the Tract
(who has escrowed the Street lighting) wil l be responsible for any and all costs
associated with each Streetlight. Such costs sha ll include, but not be limited to:
administration, placement, and maintenance. Electrical charges shall be the
responsibility of the Borough at the issuance of the first Building occupancy
permit within the development.
128
Subdivision and Lnnd Development Ordinance
Article 9: lntill-Rcdevelopmenl Design Standards
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
updated January 4. 20 t 6
2. Streetlights not dedicated to the Borough will remain the responsibility of the
Developer or appropriate private entity including all costs and responsibilities for
the lighting in perpetuity.
9.11 EASEMENTS
9.11.1 General.
All F.:asements including, by way of example and not li111itatio11, sanitary sewer facilities, Storm
Water drainage facilities, public or p1i vate utilities, access and/or pedestrian access shall meet the
standards round in this Section.
9,11 .2 Design Guidelines.
A. To the fullest extent possible, Easements shall be centered on p1·operty lines.
B. Nothing shall be placed, planted, set, or put within the area of an Easement that would
advei-sely affect the function of the !Sascmcnt.
C. lndicatc on the Plans al I proposed and exi sting Easements or record and indicate their
location and width. A ll Structures located within the Easement shall be indicated. Note
the recording information on the Plan of record.
0. To the ful lest extent practical, utilities and pedestrian paths should be centered within an
Easement. However, due lo unexpected on-Lot condilions, utility and pedestrian
locations may be flexible within the Easement.
E. All utility companies are encouraged to use common Easements. Utility Easements shall
be based on the width required by the utility authori ties but shall have a miniinum width
of ten ( 10) feet. Utility Easements shall be located within the Street Right-of-Way or
within the Building Setback Linc.
F. Wbere pedestrian access is provided outside of a Street Right-of-Way, pedestrian
l:!asements shall have a minimum width often ( JO) feet.
G. The Applicant shall reserve Easements where Storm Water or surface water management
faci lities exist or are proposed when located within the boundaries of the Subject Tract.
The Appl icant proposing to alter existing Storm Water Management facilities on adjacent
and/or downstrea111 properties shall obtain a temporary construction Easement or a
permanent Easement and maintenance responsibilities slmll be established, to the extent
feasible.
II. When the proposed Storm Water management system will utilize or be integrated into an
existing Storm Water col lection or conveyance system, the existing faci lities shal l be
improved to the standards of this Ordinance. The Applicant shall determine the impacts
or any proposed Improvements orthe existing system to downstream properties. If the
Improvements wi II cause adverse impacts on downstream properties, the Applicant shal I
mitigate such impacts.
Manheim Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
l\l'ticle 9: lnfi ll·Redeveloprnent Design Stondards
129
Lancaster County. l'ennsylv:i nia
updated January ti . 20 16
9.12 SURVEY MONUMENTS AND MARKERS
9.12.1 Monuments Shown on Final Plan.
The location of all existing and proposed Monuments, Lot Linc Markers, property corners, and
drill holes shall be shown on the Final Plan. Those that are proposed shall be labeled as such.
Drilled holes in curbing shall be referenced mathematically to a point on the Right-of-Way Line.
9.12.2 New Monuments.
Three Monuments shall be spaced around the proposed project with precise bearings and
distances labeled which reforence those M onuments to known property corners.
A. Two such Monuments shall be consecutive corners along Street ri g,llls-or-way and the
third may be placed either on the boundary or internal to the Site.
B. Longitude and latitude coordinates of the Monuments shall be shown on the recorded
Plan.
C. If GPS technology is used, it shall be rectified and calibrated to the State Plane
Coordinate System, North American Datum (NAD) 1983.
l. Monuments must be readily accessible and clear of ovel'head obstructions.
0. A computer readable point file including properly lines, corners, r ights-of-way, and
Basements for the Site shall be subtnitted to the Borough prior to Plan recordation.
9, 12.J Monument Materials.
Monuments shall be of concrete or stone, with a nat top having a minimum width or diameter of
four (4) inches and a minimum length of thirty (30) inches. Concrete Monuments shall be marked
with a three-quarter (3/4) inch copper, brass dowel, or dri II hole; stone or precast Monuments
shall be marked on the top with a drill hole.
9.12.4 Existing and Proposed Property Line and Right-of-Way Markers.
Marker:-; shall be set al all points where Lot Lines intersect curves. at all angles in property li nes.
at the intersection of all other property lines. and at the Street Right-of-Way.
9.12.5 Murker (Pin) Materials.
A. Markers shall consist of iron pipes or steel bars at least thirty (30) inches long and not
less than five-eighth (5/8) or an inch in diameter.
n. Drill holes shall be drilled in concrete curbs (wi1h or withoul PK nails or discs) having a
minimum diameter of onc-quatier (I /4) inch. The depth of the holes shall be such that a
PK nail or disc, if used, can be set in as close to the surface of the curb as possible.
Minimum depth without the use of PK nail or disc shall be one-half ( 1/2) inch. In the
absence of PK nails or discs, chi sel or saw marks shall be used to faci litate and identify
the dril l hole locations.
Manheim Borough
Subdivision and Land lJcvelopment Ordinance
A1ticlc 9: l 111ill·Rcdcvclopmc11t Design Stlll\dards
130
Lancaster County, Penn sylvania
updated Jnnuary 4, 2016
9.12.6 Certification of Monuments and Markers.
A. All Monuments, markers, and dri lled holes shall be placed by a registered professional
land Surveyor so that the scored marked point, or center of the drilled hol e shall coincide
with the point of intersection of the lines being Monumented or marked.
B. Provide a note 011 the Plan indica.ting when the Monuments and markers are to be set.
9.13 SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL
9. 13. l Sanital'y Sewage Disposal.
For Infill or Redevelopment development within an Urban Growth Area, the Applicant shall refer
to Section 8.7 for Sewage Paci lity Requirements.
9.14 WATER SUPPLY
9.14.1 Water Supply.
For Infill or Redevelopment development within an Urban Growth Area, the Applicant shal l refer
to Section 8.8 for water supply requirements.
9.15 HAZARDS ASSOCIATED WlTH CARBONATE UOCKS
9.15.1 Intent.
Hazards associated with carbonate rocks should be mitigated whenever possible.
9.15.1 Design Guidelines.
A. When, in the opinion of the ~1orough Cot111cil, there is a probable likelihood that a project
will affect or be affected by carbonate geologic ha7.ards the Borough Council shall
require submission of a hydrogeologic report pursuant to Section 7.8.
B. T he design of all Storm Water Management facilities over the fol lowing feat ures sha ll
include an evaluation of measllres to minimize adverse effects and shall be cons1ructed to
minimize those effects.
1. Sinkholes.
2. Closed depressions.
3. L ineaments in carbonate areas.
4. Fracture traces.
S. Caverns.
6. Ghost lakes.
7. Disappearing St reams.
Manheim Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinanec
Article 9: l11lill· Rcdevelopment Des igt1 Standard:;
l}l
Lanc~sler County, Pennsylvania
updated January 4. 2016
10. t
Munhcim 13orough
ARTICLE 10
CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS
RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE
132
Subdivision and Land Developn1cnt Ordinance
Article I 0: Conse rvation Subdivisions
Lancaster Coumy, Pcnnsylvunia
upda1cd January 5, 2016
ARTICLE 11
MOBILE HOME PARKS
11.1 GENERAL STANDARDS
ln accordance with the provision of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning, Code (MPC), Act
247, Article V, Section 50 1, as amended, Mobile Home parks and Sites for the placement of
Manufactured llomes are governed as Subdivisions or Land Developments, and are subject to the
procedures and standards of this Ordinance.
M11nheim Dorough
Subdivision and Land Dcvclopmcn1 Ordinance
Artii.:le 11 : Mobile llome Parks
133
Lanuustcr County, l'cnnsylvnnia
updat"d Ja11Lrn ry 5, 2016
ENACTMENT
Adoption
This Ordinance shall be effectjve on April 1, 2016 and shall remain in force until modified,
amended or rescinded by Manheim Borough, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
Severability
The provisions of this chapter are severable) and if any section, sentence, clause, part or
provision hereof shall be held to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decisio11 of the court shall not affect or impair the remaining sections,
sentences, clauses, parts or provisions of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the
Board that this chapter would have been enacted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional
section, sentence, clause, part or provision had not been included herein.
ENACTED AND ADOPTED by the Borough Council of Manheim Borough this 29 day of
March, 2016
ATTEST: COUNCIL OF THE BOROUGH OF MANHEIM
By: ~-~Jjif:~d£~ ~ d
Council President
APPROVED, this 29 day of March, 2016, by the Mayor, Manheim Borough
Mayor
11 LANDOWNER
APPENDIX A
CERTIFLCATlONS
A. statement duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to take acknowledgement of Deeds and
signed by all Landowners. This statement shall be signed and dated on or after the last change or revision
to said Pl an.
A. Individual - Certification of Owne rship, Acknowledgement of the Plan, and Offer of
Dcd ication.
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
County of Lancaster
On this, the day of 20 __,before me, the undersigned
officer. personally appeared who being duly sworn accordi ng
to law, deposes and says that he is the of the property shown on this
Pl an, that he acknowledges the same to be his act and Plan, that he desires the same to be recorded, and
that all Streets and other prope1ty identi li ed as proposed public property (excepting those areas labeled
"not for Dedication" are hereby dedicated to the public use.
Signature of Landowner
Signature and Seal of Notary Public or Other Officer Authori 7.cd to Acknowledge Deeds
My Commission Expires---------------· 20 __ _
Manheim 13orough 134
11
Subdivision nnd Land Development Ordinance
Appendices
Lancaster County, Pcnnsylvonin
updu11:d Jnnuary 4. 20 16
R Co-Partnership - Certification of Ownersh ip, Acknowledgement of the Plan, and
Offer of J)ed ication.
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
County of Lancaster
On this, the ______ day of _________ ~ 20 --~ before me, the undersigned
officer, personally appeared being of the fi rm of
-----------------who being duly sworn according to law, deposes and
says that Lhe co pa1t nership is the of 1he property shown on th is Plan, that
the Plan thereof was made at its direction, that it acknowledges the same to be his act and Plan and desires
the same to be recorded, and that all Streets and other properly identified as proposed pub I ic property
(excepting those areas labeled " not for Dedication") are hereby dedicated to the public use.
Signature of the Individual
Signature and Seal of Notary Public or Other Offi cer Authorized to Acknowledge Deeds
My Commission Bxpircs _______________ ___;, 20 __ _
C. Corporate - Certification of Ownership, Acknowledgement of the Plan, and Offer of
Ded icatio11.
Cornmonwealth of Pennsylvania
Co~inty of Lancaster
On this, the day of , 20 , before me, the
undersigned officer, personal ly appeared , being
_____________ of (Name
of Corporation), who being duly sworn according to law, deposes at1d says that the corporation is the
------------of the property shown on this Plan. that he is authorized to execute
said Plan on behalf of the corporation, that the Plan is the act and Deed of the corporation, further
acknowledges, that all Streets and other prope11y identi fied as prnposcd public property (excepting those
areas labeled "not for Dedication") are hereby dedicated to the public use.
Signature of the Ind ividual Corporate Seal
Signature and Seal of Notary Public or other Officer Authorized to Acknowledge Deeds.
My Commission Expires , 20
-~------~~-~~--- --~~
Manheim Borough
Subtli visio11 nnd Land DcvclopincnL Onlinancc
Append ices
135
I .ancasLcr County, l\;nnsylvania
updated .lanimry 4. 20 16
I SURVEYOR, ENGINEER AND/OR LANOCAPE ARCHITECT STATEMENT OF ACCURACY
A. Survey Certification of Accuracy.
I hereby certi fy lhat, lo U1e besl of my knowledge, the survey and Plan shown and described hereon is true
and correct to the accuracy required by Manheim Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
and/or Storm Water Management Ordinance.
n. General Plan/Report Data.
I hereby certify that, to the best of my knowledge, the (title of
Plan/repo1t data) shown and described hereon is true and correct to the accuracy required by Pennsylvania
State Law and the Manheim Borough Subdivision and Land Development ordinance and /or Slor111 Water
Management Ord inance.
Manheim Borough
Subdivision and I.and Development Ordinance
Appendices
136
Lancaster County, PennsylV<lllin
updated January 4. 2016
11 MUNICIPAL APPROVAL
A. Manheim Borough Prelimin~1ry Plan Ap(>roval Certification
AL a meeting 0 11 20 , the Manheim Borough granted
PRELIMINARY !)LAN APPROVAL of this project, including the complete set of Plans marked SheeL(s)
___ through which form a part of the application dated , last revised
__________ . This Plan may not be recorded in the office of the Lancaster County
Recorder of Deeds, nor may any construction be initiated but when combined wilh the other necessary
approvals and permits, grants of authority to install on the Public Improvements rcqLJired as pa1t of the
Plan.
Borough Council Signature Borough Council Signature
B. Manheim Borough Final Plan Approval Certification
At a meeting on 20_, the Manheim Borough approved this project, and
all conditions have been met. This approval includes Lhe complete set of Plans and information that are
filed with the Borough in Fi le No. , based upon its conformity with the
~t andards of lhe Manheim Bo1·ough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and Storm Water
Management Ordinance.
Borough Counci l Signature Borough Council Signature
C. Manheim Borough Phlnning Commission Review Certification
At a meeting on ___________. 20_ _, the Manheim Borough Planning Commission
reviewed this Plan.
Planning Commission Signature Planning Commission Signature
D. Manheim Borough Engineer Review Certificate
Rev iewed by the Manheim Borough Engineer.
Borough Engineer Date
MDnheim llorn11gh 137
11
Subd ivision and I.and D1.:vclop1111.:nl Ordina11c1.:
Appendices
L<rnoa~tcr County, Pennsy lvania
updated Ja1111ary 4, 2016
11 LANCASTE.R COUNTY APPROVAL 11
A. Lancaster County Planning Commission Review Certificate
The Lancaster County Planning Commission, as required by the Pennsylvania Municipali ties Planning
Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended, reviewed Lhis PJ a11 on , 20_, and copy
orthe review is on file at lhe office of the Planning Commission in LCPC File No. _______ _
This ce1tification does not' indicate approval or disapproval of the Plan by the Lancaster County Planni ng
Commission. and the Commission does not represent nor guarantee that th is Plan complies with the
various ordinances, ru les, regulations, or laws of the local Municipality, the Commonwealth, or the
Federal Government.
Chairman Designee signature Vice Chairman Designee signature
B. Lancaster County Planning Commission Waiver Certificate
For Plans reviewed under Article V Section 502(b) and memorandum of Understanding betwee11 the
Borough dated _ ______ _
This Plan, beating LCPC File No.----------' accepted by the Lancaster County Planning
Commission this --------day or __________ _,, 20 _ _
Chai rman Designee signature
Manheim Borough
Subdivision nnd Land Develo1)menl Ordinance
l\ppe11dices
Vice Chairman Designee signatut'e
138
Lancasicr Coun1y, PcnnsylvaniH
up<leited January 4. 20 16
APPENDIXB
APPLICATION FOR CONSIDERATION OF A SUBDIVISION AND/OR
LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN
for Municipal Use Only:
Fi le No. ------------------ Date of Receipt/ Pi ling:------------
Planning Commission Meeting Date:------Borough
Council Meeting Dale: ---------
The u11dersigned hereby applies for approval under the Manheim Borougb Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance for the Plan, submitted herewith and described below:
I. Application Classification:
____ Sketch Plan
____ Final Plan
____ Preliminary Plan
____ Waiver I Modification Process
2. Plan Name: Consu 1 ta nt P-roj-ect- No-.: ------------------------------------------
Plan Date:
---------------------~
3. Project Location:---------------------------
4, Naine of Property Owners(s): ----- -----------------Address:
Phone No.:
-----------------~ -------
Source of Ti tle:-------- Account No.: ------------
Second Property Owners(s) : ----------------------Address:-----------------
Phone No.:-------
Source of Title: -------- Account No.:-------------
5. Land Use and Number of Lots and/or Units (indicate answer by number):
____ Single Family Detached Commercial
____ Multi-Family Attached Industrial
____ Agricultural Institutional
____ Mixed Use Other (please specify)
6. Name of Applicant (i f other than owner):------------------Address:
---- Phone No.: -----
7. Firm which prepared the Plan:----------------------Address:
- -----------------Phone
No.:------
Person Responsible for the Plan:----------------------
Manheim Borough 139
Subdivision ond Land Development Ordinance
Appendices
Lancaster County. Pcnnsylvunia
updu1cd Jonuary 11, 2016
8. Zoning District:----------------------------Is
a Zoning Variance, Special Exception. and/or Conditional Use ApprovaJ Necessary? Y I N
If yes, please specify:--------------------------
9. Net Acreage of Parent Tract(s): ----------------------Gross
Acreage of Parent Tract(s): -----------------------
Squa re Feet of Ground Floor Area:----------------------
10. Type of Water Supply Proposed:
_____ Public Owned Community
Private On-Lot Well
____ Privately Owned Community
-----
11. Type of Sanitary Sewage Disposal Proposed:
_____ Public _____ Private Community
_____ Community On-Lot Individual On-Lot
12. Sewage Facilities Plan Revision or Supplement Number---------------
Date Submitted 20, ----
13. Li neal Feet of New Street:
------------------------~ Identify all Street(s) Nol Proposed for Dedication:----------------
14. Acreage Propo5ed for Park or Other Public Use:-----------------
The undersigned hereby represents that, to the best of his knowledge and bef ief, al I in formation listed
above is true. correct, and complete.
________ . 20 __ _
Signature of Landowner or Applicant Date
____ ____ ,20 __ _
Signatu re of Landowner or Applicant Date
We do hereby request the Lancaster County Planning Commission review the enclosed Subdivision or
!and Development Plan in accordance with the Pennsy lvania Municipalities Pl an ning Codt:, Act 247, of
1968, as amended, Aiticle Y, Section 502.
Signature Title Date
For LCPC Use Only:
LCPC r ile No.
~-----------~~- Date of Receipt: __, 20 __ _
Lancaster County Planning Commission Meeting Date:---------
Mimhcim l3orough
Subdivision and Uind Development Ordinance
Append ices
140
Lancaster Coumy. Pennsylvania
updated January 4. 20 16
APPENDIX C
APPLICATION FOR CONSIDERATION OF A MODIFICATION
For M unicipal Use On.ly:
Fi le No. ------------------------- Date of Receipt I Piling:-------------------
Planning Commission Meeting Date: ______________ _
Borough Council Meeting Date:-----------------
The undersigned hereby applies for approval of a Modification I waiver, submitted herewith and
described below:
I. Plan Name:-----------------------------
Plan No.:----------
2. Project Location:---------------------------
3. Name of Property Owners (s): ----------------------Address:
------------------ Phone No.: -------
Source of Title: ----------- Account No.: __________ _
Second Property Owners (s): - - - ---------------- ---- Address: ------------------ Phone No.: ______ _
Sour cc of Title: ----------- Account No.:------ -----
4, Speci fic Section of the Subdi vision and Land Development Ordinance for which a
Modification is requested: ________ _
The Proposed Alternative to the Requirement:-----------------
Justification for the Modification I Waiver:
-----------------~
The undersigned hereby represents that, to the best of their knowledge and belief, all information listed
above is true, co rrect. and complete.
Signatllre
Munheim Uoro11gh
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
Append ices
_______ ,20 __ _
Date
141
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
updated Ja nuary 4, 20 16
APPENDIXD
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDlNG
I INSTALLATION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS IN CON.JONCTJON WITH
PRELMIMINARY PLAN APPROVAL
This Memorandllm of Understanding is entered into by and between the following parties: Manheim
Oorough, hereinafter called ·'Borough" and , hereinafter cal led
"Developer".
RECITALS:
WI !ERE.AS, Developer has submitted to the Borough a Plan and Application for Subdivision or Land
Development Plan located in which is known and designed as
WI IERE.AS, Borough and Developer desire to set forth their understanding concerning the Developer's
agreement and responsibility to install the Public Improvements and pay the costs involved in processing,
inspecting, and reviewing Developer's Subdivision and Land Development Plan.
NOW, THEREFORE., intending lo be legally bound hereby, Borough ancl Developer agree as follows:
I . The Dewloper. at their own cost and expense, shall proceed to perl"orm and complete
only thc.)se Public ltnprove111cnts required by the Developer' s Subdivision and Land
IJevelopment Plan, subject to the approval of the Plan and specifications by the Borough.
2. The Developer. prior to the commencement of work, shall provide in writing to the
Borough a notice of intent to commence construction and to provide an ru1ticipated
construction commencement date.
3. The Borough, or its designee. and the Developer shall agree upon a notification
procedure and a schedule of field inspections to be made during construction and upon
completion or all Public Improvements.
4. Upon completion of the Public Improvements, the Developer shall give notice Lo the
Borough. in writing. to inspect the Public Improvements. Within ten (10) days aner
receipt or such notice, the Borough shall direct the Borough Engineer to inspect the
Public Improvements to determine i r tht:y are completed in accordance with the
Subdi vision or Land Development Plan and acceptable engineering practices. The
Borough Engineer shall provide a written report to the Borough within 30 days of receipt
or the aforesaid authorization from the Borough. The 13orough shall noli ry the Developer,
within I 5 days or receipt of the 13orough Engineer's report of the action of Borough
Council with relation thereto.
5.
Manheim Borough
Developer agrees to reimburse the Borough for professional engineering consultant
services, and Lancaster County Planning Commissio11 services necessitated by the review
and approval of the Developer's Plans and necessitated by the review and inspection of
all required Public Improvements (both at the Plan and installation stages) at the
prevailing rate, plus associated i temized expenses, where applicable. It is agreed that
professional engineering consultant services. ancl Lancaster County Planning
Co111mission services shall be payable by Developer within forty-five (45) days after the
142
I
Subdivision and Land Dcvelopml!nl Ordinance
Appendices
WLncnster County. Pcnnsylvanin
updated January 4, 2016
date of invoice and prior to final approval of Developer's Subdivision or Land
Development Plan.
6. Where applicable, Developer agrees to reimburse the Borough for Solicitor services
necessitated by the review and approval of the Developer's Plan, and necessitated by the
review or all required financial security and other agreements. lt is ag.rced the Solicit0r's
services shall be payable within forty-five (45) days arter the date of invoice and prior to
final approval or Developer's Subdivision or Land Development Plan.
7. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Developer reserves the right to contest the amount and/or
reasonableness of the foes pursuant to the prov isions or the M PC.
IN WITNESS WI IEREOr, the parties hence caused this Memorandum of Understanding to b~ executed.
dated this day of 20 .
MANI IEIM BOROUGI I COUNCIL
(Notary Seal) DEVELOPER
Manheim 13oruuj!h
::\ubdivision and Land Development Ordinance
Appcnd ieci.
143
Lancaster Counly, Pcnnsylvonin
updated .January 4, 2016
APPENDIX D-1
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING AND FINANCIAL SECURITY
I INSTALLATION OF PUBLIC lMPROVEMENTS IN CONJUNCTION WITH FINAL PLAN I
APPROVAL
This Memorandum of Understanding is entered into by and between the following pa11ies: Manheim
Borough, hereinafter called "Borough" and hereinafter called
"Developer".
RECITALS:
WI IERGAS, Developer has submitted to the Borough a Plan and Appl ication for a Subdivision or Land
Development Plan located in which is known and designated
as ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-
WI I EREAS. Borough has required and Developer has agreed lhat Public Improvements shall be
completed by the Developer, as provided in Article 6 of the Manheim Borough Subdi vision and Land
Development Ordinance of 20 _ . as amended.
WHEREAS, Borough and Developer desire to set forth their understanding co11cen1ing the Developer's
agreement and responsibility to install the PL1blic Improvements and pay the costs involved in processing,
inspecting, and reviewi11g Dcvclopet·'s Subdivision or Land Development Plan.
NOW, THEREFORE, intending to be legally bound hereby. Borough and Developer agree as follows:
I. The Developer, at their own cost and expense, shall proceed lo perform and complele
only those Public Improvemen ts required by the Developer's Subdivision or Land
Development Plan, subjed to the approval of the Plans and specifications by the
Borough.
2. The Borough, or its designee, and the Developer shtill agree upon a noti Ii cation
procedure and a schedule of ticld inspections to be made during construction and upon
completion of all Public Improvements.
3. Upon completion or the Public lmprovemenLc;, the Developer shall give notice to the
Borough, in writing, to inspect the Public Improvements. The Borough shall inspect the
Public l mprovements within ten ( I 0) dnys and shall approve same if !hey arc completed
in accordance with rhc Subdivision or Land Development Plan and acceptable
engineering practices. If the Borough disapproves, they shall noliry lhe Developer
promptly.
4. Developer agrees to reimburse the Borough for professional engi neering consultant
services, and Lancaster County Planning Commission services necessitated by the review
and approval of the Developer's Plans and necessitated by the review and inspection of
all requi red Public Improvements (both at the Plan and installation stages) at the
prevail ing rate, plus associated itemized expenses. where applicable. Developer agrees to
reimburse the Borough for engineering, professional consultant services, and Lancaster
County Planning Commission services associated with the As-Built Plan review. It is
Manheim Hurnugh 144
ubdivision and Lund Development Ordi1111ncc Lnncuster County, Pennsyl\nnia
Appendices updated January 4. 2016
agreed that professional engineering consultant services, and Lancaster County Planning
Commission serv ices shall be payable by Developer within forty-five (45) days aner the
date of invoice and prior to final approval of Developer's Subdivision or Land
Development Plan.
5. Whei-e applicable, Developer agrees lO reimburse the Borough for Solicitor services
necessitated by the review and approval of the Developer's Plan and necessitated by the
review of all required fi nancial security and other ag1·eements. It is agreed the Solicitor's
services shall be payable within fo rty-five (45) days after che date of invoice and prior to
final approval of Developer's Subdi vision or Land Development Plan.
6. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Developer reserves the right to contest the amount and/or
reasonableness of the fees pursuant to the provisions of the MPC.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hence caused this Memorandum of Understanding to be executed,
dated this day of , 20 _ .
MANHEIM BOROUGI T COUNCIL
(Notary Seal) DEVELOPER
MAnhcim Borough
Subdi vision and Lirnd Devclopmenl Ordi nanc~
Appendi<:es
145
Lancaster County. l>cnnsylvanla
updat.ed January 4, 20 16
11 FINANCIAL SECURITY
This Financial Security is entered into by and between the following parties: Manheim Borough.
hereinafter called "Borough" and . hereina~er caJled ''Developer".
RECIT /\LS:
WHEREAS, Developer has submilled to the Borough a Plan and Application for a Subdivision and Land
Development Plan located on which is known and designated
as ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
WI IE REAS, Borough and Developer desire to set forth lheir understanding concerning the Developer's
agreement and responsibility to install the Public Improvements, provide a financial security, and pay the
costs involved in inspecting and approving Developer's Subdivision or Land Development Plan.
NOW, THEREPORE, intended to be legally bound hereby, Borough and Developer agree as rollows:
I . 'l'he Developer, at their own cost and expense, shall proceed to perform and complete all
PL1blic lmproveme11 ts required by the Developer's Subdivision or Land Developer Plan,
subj ect to the approval of the Plans and speci fications by the Borough.
2. To assL1rc completion of the Public Improvements requi red as a condition for the final
approval of the Developer's Subdivision and Land Development Plan, the Developer
shall provide for t.leposit with the Borough, financial security (co11sistent with Article 6 ol'
the Manheim Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of20 _ , as
amended, in the a1110L111t sufflcient to cover the costs of all Public Improvements,
including. but not limited to. Streets, St reet signs, sidewalks, curbs, Landscaping, storm
drainage for Dedication or which affect adj acent prope1ties or Streets, sanitary sewer
faci lities for Oedication. waler supply facilities for Dedication, fire hydrants, Lot Line
Markers. survey Monuments, and other related faci lities. St1ch security shall provide for,
and secure the completion of the Publ ic Improvemen ts within one ( I ) year of the date
fixed in the Subdivision or development Plan. The amount of financial security shall be
equal to one hundred te11 percent ( I I 0%) of the cost of rite required Public Improvements
ror which financial sccuri ty is posted. The cost of the Public J111provc111ents shall be
established by submission to the Borough of an estimate prepared by the Developer's
Engineer, subject to review. comment, and approval by the Borough or its designees.
3. The Borough, or its desig.nee, and the Developer shall agree upon a 11oti lication
proccdL1re and a schedule of field inspections to be made during construction and upon
completion of all Public Improvements.
4. Upon completion of the Public Improvements, the Developer shall give notice to the
Borough or its designee, in wri ting, to inspect the Public Improvements. The Borough or
its designee shall inspect the Public Improvements within ten ( I 0) days and shall approve
same if they are completed in accordance with the Subdi vision or Land Development
Plan and acceptable engineering practices. If the 13orough or its designee disapproves,
they shall noli fy I he Developer promptly.
Manheim Aorough 146
11
Subdivision nnd Land Development Ord innnce
Appendices
Lancaster County. Pennsylvania
updated J<muary 4. 20 l 6
5. Developer agrees to reimburse the 13oroug,h for professional engineering consultant
services, necessitated by the review and approval of the Developer's Plans and
necessitated by the review and inspection of al l required Public Improvements at the
prevailing rale, plus associated itemi7..ed expenses, where applicable. It is agreed that
engineering, professional consultant services shall be payable by Develope1· within ten
( 10) days after the date of invoice and prior to final approval of Developer's Subdivision
01· Land Development Plan.
6. Where applicable, Developer agrees to reimburse the Borough for Sol icitor services
necessitated by the review and approval of the Developer's Plan(s), and necessitated by the
review of all required financial security and other agreements. It is agreed the Solicitor's
services shal I be payable within ten ( I 0) days aft.er the date orinvoice and prior to n nal
approval of Developer's Subdi vision or Land Development Plan.
IN WI llTNESS WHEREOF. the parties hence caused this Financial ,Security to be executed, dated this
~~~~~~~~~~ day of ,20~~-
MANHEIM BOROUGH COUNCIL
(Notary Seal) DEVELOPER
Manheim l)orough
Subdivision and Land Developmem Ordinance
A1,pendiccs
147
Lancaster County. l'~nnsyl vfln ia
undated .l :1nuory 4, 20 16
APPENDIX E
NOTICE OF APPROVAL OF NEW STREET NAME(S)
Municipaliry name: Manheim 13orough
Date: ________ _
Fi le No.: _______ (To be Compleled by Applicant)
Plan Name:----------------- ----------(To be Completed
by Applicant)
I ancaster County-Wide Communications has reviewed and approved the fol lowing new Street names:
(Applicant to provide on this form a list of all proposed new Street names prior to submilling th is lorm for
approval. This form mllst bear the authorized signature from Lancaster County-Wide Communications.)
Authorized Signature from Lancaster County-Wide Communications
Mnnheim Borough
ubdivision ond I ,and Development Orclinancc
Appendico!s
148
Lancaster County. Pennsylvanio
updated J1111uary 4. 20 16
APPENDIX F
GENERAL DESIGN GUIDELINES WITH HISTORIC FEATURES
A. Size, Scale rmd Proportion.
New construction should reflect the dominant propo11ions, size and scale or Buildings
comprising the Streetscape. The height and width of lhe rront fa~ade should relate to the
average height and width of historic Buildings. New Buildings should be designed
within te n percent of the average height of adjacent historic Buildings.
B. Mussing and Shape.
Building shape, massing, and roof shape or new construction should reflect that found in
surrounding 11uildings.
C. Material~· and Textures.
Building materials, textures and treatments should be compatible with surrounding
Buildings. Where traditional materials, such as brick, stone, and wood area common in
tht: immediate neighborhood, use of these materials on front facades and secondary
facades for corner properties is recommended.
D. Rh11t11111 and Patlerns.
De.sign elements of principle facades should renect the neighborhood patterns. Examples
include prevalent ve11ical or horizontal orientation of clements. Large Buildings can be
divided into bays to reflect neighborhood rhythms.
E. Com ice a11d Floor-to-fi'loor f/eiglrts.
Design elements of principal facades should reflect the cornice and floor-to-floor heights,
spacing between windows and doors and between windows and cornices or rootlincs, or
should incorporate detail ing lo suggest the same. The design should also reflect the
dimensions of the fac;:ade's base and cornice.
F. Windows timl Doors.
The use of window and door openings of size and design typical to the neighborhood is
recommended.
G. Streetscapes, Orie11tatio11 aurl Locntio11.
New construction should refiect prevailing setbacks, orientation and physical elements,
which define Streetscapes.
Mnnlieim Borough
ubdivision and Land Development Ordinance
Appendices
149
Lancaster Cou nty, Pelln:iylva11 ia
updated Janunry 4. 2016
APPENDIX G
CHECKLIST FOR STREET & ACCESS DRIVE DESIGN
STREET NAME: PROJECT NAME:
~---------- ------------ ST AT TONN UMBER: _________ DATE: ______ SllEET: __ _
I. Classi lication: (circle one) 3. Ownership: (circle one) 5. Stred Function: (cm:li.: on.i)
• Rural • Public I Dedicated • Alley
• Urban • Private • Local
• Collector
2. Project Type: (circle on~) 4. Pri ncipal Design Vehicle: (circle one) • /\rkrial
• Residential • Automotive
• Mixed Use • Truck
• Commercial / Industrial
6. Attached Design Criteria Matrix Verifies the Following:
• Volume of Average Daily Trips: ___ _
• Des ign Speed: __ __
• Vc11ical Allributes:
o Maximum Slope: %
o Minim um Slope: %
o ·'K" Value for ('rest Curves: ___ _
o "K" Value for Sag Curves: ___ _
• Level of Service (LOS) al Intersections:
o New Intersection: LOS C or better
o New Intersection with Existi ng Street: LOS Dor better
• l lorizontal Attributes:_ __
a Minimum Safe Stopping Sight Distance: ___ _
o Minimum Sight Distance al Intersections: ___ _
o Minimum Ce11terl ine Curve Radius: ___ _
• Curb Radii
• Local - Local: Io-. 15'
• Loca l-Collector: 15'-20'
• Collector - Colle<:tor: I 5'-25'
One Side/Both Sides Width Total Width
0 Thru Lanes: x
0 Turn lane: x
0 On-Street Parking: )I. =
0 Multi-modal Lane: x =
0 Gutter (Storm Water): x
0 Shoul dl!r: x
0 Cutb: '<
0 Swale: x
0 Sidewalk: x
0 Grass I Tree Strip: x
0 Boulevard Island: x
Total Right-of-Way Width = ___ _
7. Special Considcrarions: (tra ffic signals, Streetscapc a11d lighting requirements, crosswalk treatments, etc.)
8. Agreed by Developer meeting attendee(s): ----------------------
9. Agreed by Borough meeting attendee(s): ---------------------
Mnnhcim Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinnncc
Appendices
150
Lancaster County. l'ennsylv:m in
upd11ted January 4, 20 16
APPENDIX R
STREET I RIGI IT OF WAY MA TRIX
Project Name: Developer: Municipality: Da1e: - ----- ------
Sig- nature
I I Existing Streets
: Frontage Slreel Conoeclion Streets Arterial Major CoUector
~lreet and Seiroient
Design Speed (mph)
Tra,rel Lane Width
One-way
Two-way
!Turn Lane Width
On Street Parking (7 fl min}
None
One-side
Two-side
Multi-Modal Lane Width
One-Sided or Two Sided)
2 feet
4 feet
5 feet (min. for bike)
6 feet
8 feet
Gutter (SWM) Width
Curb (Yes/No if guuer is used)
Buffer Strip Width (4 ft min)
Sidewalk Width (4 fl min}
None
One Side (S 2 u/a)
Two Sided (~ 2 u/a}
TotaJ Right-of-Way Width
Design Speed Equal!.: 15 mph
20mph
25 mph
30mph
Mmbcim Boroutb
Subdivi\100 anJ Land Dcvclopmelll Ordinan•'l:
.\ppcm.lii:e<
55 mph
I or2
Alley. Minor Local I Cul-<le-Sac
Minor Local I Cul-de-Sac
45 mph
l or2
Minor Local I Cul-<le-Sac. Major Local
Major Local. Minor Collector
50mph
I or2
30 mph
I or2
35mph
40 mph
4Smph
50mph
l~ I
Signature
Proposed Street =
Minor Collector Major Local Minor Local I Cul-de-sac Alley
35 mph
I or2
40 mph 45 mph 25 mph
I or2 I or2
Major Local. Minor Col lec1or
Minor CoUector
Major Collector. Minor Collec1or
Major Collector
30mph
I or2
35 mph 15 mph 20mph 25 mph L5 mph
I or2
:'i5 mph Ancrial, Mojor CQllcc1or
JI ll\otto be used
l~<I rulstd IOfl J/03
Lanca<1er Cowily, Penn.<ylvan"1
updalal January 4 , 2016