


Article 101       MEADVILLE MUNICIPAL CODE*

Sections:

101.01  Codification adopted – Saving clause.

101.02  Contents.

101.03  Amendments and supplements –Numbering – Minor changes.

101.04  Definitions and interpretation.

101.05  Separability of provisions.

101.06  Sections and ordinances repealed.

101.07  Exemptions from repeal.

101.08  Costs of prosecution.

101.99  General penalty.

*Editor’s note: The provisions of this article are incorporated in the ordinance which adopts the Meadville Municipal Code of Meadville, Pennsylvania, 1993.


101.01       Codification adopted – Saving clause.

(A) Adoption. The Meadville Municipal Code, as prepared and published for the City of Meadville, a true copy of which is attached hereto, consisting of the general administrative and regulatory ordinances, permanent in nature, of the City of Meadville, including previously codified ordinances of the City of Meadville, and as consolidated, revised and codified, are hereby ordained and adopted as the Meadville Municipal Code.

(B) Saving Clause. The provisions of the Meadville Municipal Code of the City of Meadville, so far as they are the same as those ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the adoption of said Meadville Municipal Code, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and regulations and not as a new enactment. The ordinances of the City of Meadville which are being consolidated and codified in the Meadville Municipal Code of the City of Meadville are hereby ratified as ordained and as revised and included in this Meadville Municipal Code. Any codes and maps adopted by reference by the ordinances being consolidated and codified in these codified ordinances are likewise adopted by reference in this Meadville Municipal Code as referenced. (Ord. 3582 §§ 1, 3, 2001; Ord. 3350, 1993)


101.02       Contents.*

The "Meadville Municipal Code of the City of Meadville," hereby adopted and a true copy of which is attached hereto, is comprised of the following administrative regulatory codes organized as set forth in the Table of Contents of the Meadville Municipal Code as follows:

Part 1. Administrative Code

Title 1. General Provisions

Articles:

101	Meadville Municipal Code

103	Official Standards

105	Real Estate Registry

107	Street Improvement Proceedings

108	Notices and Orders

109	Authorized Investments

Title 3. Legislative

Articles:

111	City Council

113	Ordinances and Resolutions

Title 5. Administrative

Articles:

121	Administration Generally

123	City Manager

125	City Treasurer

127	City Controller

129	City Assessor

131	Department of Law

133	Department of Public Works – City Engineer

135	Department of Records

137	Department of Finance

139	Department of Police

141	Department of Fire

143	Department of Personnel

145	Department of Purchasing

147	Officers and Employees Generally

151	Police Magistrate

153	Joint Environmental Advisory Council

155	French Creek Council of Governments

Title 7. Pensions

Articles:

161	Firemen’s Pension Fund

163	Police Pension Fund

165	City Employees’ Retirement and  Pension Fund

Title 9. Authorities, Boards and Commissions

Articles:

171	Authorities

173	Boards and Commissions Generally

175	City Planning Commission

177	Civil Service Commission

178	Citizen Advisory Committees

Title 10. City Employee Specialty Funds

Articles:

179	City Employee Prescription Drug Reimbursement Account

180	City of Meadville Accident and Sickness Disability Plan

Part 3. Business Regulation and Taxation Code

Title 1. Business Regulation and Licensing

Articles:

305	Circuses and Menageries

309	Dances and Dance Halls

313	Peddlers, Hucksters and Solicitors

317	Transient Retail Merchants

321	Vehicles for Transportation

Title 3. Taxation

Articles:

341	Earned Income Tax

345	Repealed

349	Occupational Privilege Tax

353	Juke Box and Mechanical Amusement Device Tax

357	Per Capita Tax

358	Repealed

360	Realty Transfer Tax

Part 5. Traffic Code

Articles:

501	General Regulations

503	Traffic Regulations

505	Unmetered Parking Regulations

507	Snow and Ice Emergency

513	Pedestrians

518	School Bus Loading Zones

519	Handicapped Parking Regulations

521	On-Street Parking

525	Off-Street Parking

526	Prohibiting Parking and Unattended Vehicles

529	Bicycles

530	Bridge Weight Limits

531	Regulation of the Use of Skates, Skateboards and Similar Devices

Part 7. General Offenses Code

Articles:

705	Abandoned Refrigerators

709	Curfew

713	Disorderly Conduct and Disturbing the Peace

717	Disorderly Houses

721	Pet Code

725	False Fire Alarms – Injuring System

729	Gambling

733	Handbills and Samples

737	Minors and Liquor Control

741	Parades and Public Assemblages

745	Street and Sidewalk Code

749	Weapons and Explosives

750	Prohibiting the Operation of Motor Vehicles in City Parks and Upon City Property

Part 9. Streets, Utilities and Public Services Code

Title 1. Street and Sidewalk Areas

Articles:

901	Street Base Lines and Datum Line

903	Street Excavations

905	Sidewalk Construction and Repair

907	Repealed

908	Construction of Curb Cuts

909	Trees on Sidewalks

Title 3. Utilities

Articles:

911	Sewer and Water Connections

912	Publicly Owned Treatment Works Pretreatment Requirements

913	Sanitary Sewer Rentals

915	Water Regulations and Rates

917	Watercourses

Title 5. Other Services

Articles:

931	Refuse Storage, Collection and  Disposal

932	Source-Separation and Collection of Recyclable Materials

933	City Market

935	Parks and Public Property

Part 11. Health Code

Articles:

1103	Board of Health – Health Officer

1111	General Sanitary Regulations

1115	Vacant Lots

1119	Public Eating and Drinking Places

Part 13. Zoning Code

Title 1. Zoning

Articles:

1301	General Provisions

1302	Definitions

1303	Residential and Transitional Districts

1304	Institutional Districts

1305	Business and Economic Development Districts

1306	Supplementary Regulations

1307	Nonconforming Uses and Structures

1308	Off-Street Loading and Parking 

1309	Sign Regulations

1310	Administration, Enforcement and Appeals

1311	Zoning Hearing Board

1312	Amendments

1313	Reserved

1314	Reserved

1315	Streetscape Advisory Committee

Title 3. Subdivisions

Articles:

1351	Title, Purpose, Application and  Interpretation

1353	Definitions

1355	Design Standards

1357	Plan Requirements

1359	Plan Processing Requirements

1361	Improvement Construction Requirements

1363	Conditions of Acceptance

1365	Variances, Amendment and Penalty

Part 15. Fire Prevention Code

Articles:

1503	Fire Prevention Code

1505	Disposition of Insurance Covering Fire-Damaged Structures

Part 17. Building Code

Title 1. Standards Adopted

Articles:

1701	Code Appeals Board

1703	Building Code

1705	Electrical Code

1707	Plumbing Code

1709	Mechanical Code

Title 3. Local Provisions

Articles:

1711	Swimming Pools

1713	Signs and Awnings

1715	Building Lines

1717	Numbering Buildings

1721	Property Maintenance Code

Part 19. Housing Code

Articles:

1901	Policy, Scope and Conflict

1903	Definitions

1905	Enforcement, Hearings, Orders and Penalty

1907	Rooming Houses and Bed and Breakfast Residences – Permits

1909	Dwellings Unfit for Human Habitation

1911	Structural Requirements

1913	Utilities and Fixtures

1915	Habitable Rooms

1917	Rodent and Pest Control

1919	Rooming Houses and Bed and Breakfast Residences - General Standards

1921	Facilities and Services

(Ord. 3582 § 2, 2001; Ord. 3350, 1993)

* Editor’s note: The contents of the Meadville Municipal Code set out in this section are current as of the 2001 codification and do not reflect amendments made in subsequent supplements.


101.03       Amendments and supplements –Numbering – Minor changes.

(A) The Meadville Municipal Code of the City of Meadville may be amended or supplemented at any time and, when any amendment or supplement is adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of council to make the same a part thereof, such amendment or supplement shall be incorporated in and deemed a part of the Meadville Municipal Code, so that a reference to the Meadville Municipal Code shall be understood and construed as including the Meadville Municipal Code of the City of Meadville and any and all such amendments and supplements. 

(B) All amendments and supplements enacted as a part of the Meadville Municipal Code shall be integrated therewith by following the form of arrangement and plan set forth in the original Meadville Municipal Code as follows: each code shall be subdivided into titles; each title shall be subdivided into articles and each article shall be subdivided into sections, which shall be numbered in accordance with the decimal numbering system. The numbering of all sections, except penalty sections, shall be consecutive within each article commencing with the first section of Article 101, which shall be numbered 101.01, the first "1" signifying Code 1, and the two figures "01" before the decimal signifying the article within the code, and the two figures "01" after the decimal signifying the first section in Article 101 of the code. Penalty sections shall be designated "99" and shall be the last section of the article. 

(C) Changes. The following minor nonsubstantive changes have been made to existing City of Meadville ordinances in this Meadville Municipal Code:

(1) Grammatical and spelling errors have been corrected where necessary;

(2) Minor changes have been made to correct obsolete terms and usages;

(3) Changes have been made to the numbering of the sections to conform to the codification organization. (Ord. 3582 §§ 4, 5, 2001; Ord. 3350, 1993)


101.04       Definitions and interpretation.

In the construction of the Meadville Municipal Code, the following rules shall control, except those inconsistent with the manifest intent of council as disclosed in a particular provision, section or article: 

(A) "Adopting ordinance" means the ordinance of the city adopting the Meadville Municipal Code of Meadville, Pennsylvania, 1993, in conformity with the Third Class City Code of Pennsylvania and this article. 

(B) Authority. Whenever in the Meadville Municipal Code "authority" is given to an officer or an act is required to be performed, such authority may be exercised and such act may be performed, at the instance of such officer, by a deputy or subordinate, unless contrary to law or to the clear intent of any such particular provision. 

(C) Calendar Computation of Time. "Month" and "year" mean the calendar month or year. The time expressed in days within which an act is to be done or a period is to expire shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day, except if the last is Sunday, it shall be excluded. If time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday shall be excluded.

(D) "City" and "municipality" mean the City of Meadville, Pennsylvania. 

(E) Conjunctions. "And" includes "or" and "or" includes "and," if the sense so requires. 

(F) "Council" means the elected council of the City of Meadville, Pennsylvania. 

(G) "County" means the county of Crawford, Pennsylvania. 

(H) Gender. Words importing the masculine shall extend and be applied to the feminine and neuter genders. 

(I) General Rule. Except as otherwise provided in this section, words and phrases shall be construed according to the common usage of the language; provided, however, that technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a special meaning in the law shall be construed according to such technical or special meaning. 

(J) Joint Authority. Words giving authority to a board, commission, authority or to three or more officers or employees or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority thereof, unless otherwise specifically provided. 

(K) "Keeper" or "proprietor" means and includes persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 

(L) "Land" or "real estate" includes rights and easements of incorporeal nature. 

(M) Number. Words in the plural include the singular and the singular include the plural number. 

(N) "Oath" includes affirmation. When an oath is required or authorized by law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken by a person having conscientious scruples to taking an oath. An affirmation shall have the same force and effect as an oath. 

(O) "Owner," when applied to property, includes a part owner, joint owner or tenant in common of the whole or any part of such property. 

(P) "Person" extends and applies to associations, clubs, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic, as well as to individuals. 

(Q) "Premises," when used as applicable to property, extends to and includes land and buildings. 

(R) "Property" includes real and personal and any mixed and lesser estates or interests therein. "Personal property" includes every kind of property except real property, and "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 

(S) Reasonable Time. In all cases where provision is made for an act to be done or notice to be given within a reasonable time, it shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such act or giving of such notice. 

(T) "Sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 

(U) "State" or "commonwealth" means the commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(V) "Street" includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, streets and other public ways in the city. 

(W) "Tenant" or "occupant," as applied to buildings or land, shall extend and be applied to any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or any part of a building or land, alone or with others. 

(X) Tenses. The use of any verb in the present tense includes the future. 

(Y)  "The Third Class City Code" means the Pennsylvania Act of June 28, 1951, (P.L. 662), as amended. 

(Z) The "Optional Third Class City Charter Law" means the council-manager plan of the Pennsylvania Act of July 15, 1957, (P.L. 901), as amended. 

(AA) Time. Whenever any time established in the Meadville Municipal Code for the taking of any action expires on a Sunday or legal holiday, such time shall not expire on such day but shall expire on the next weekday. (Ord. 3350, 1993)


101.05       Separability of provisions.

It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the parts, articles, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this codification are severable. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of the Meadville Municipal Code is declared unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid by the judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, that invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining parts, articles, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this Meadville Municipal Code. (Ord. 3582 § 7, 2001; Ord. 3350, 1993)


101.06       Sections and ordinances repealed.

All ordinances or resolutions or parts thereof in conflict with provisions of the Meadville Municipal Code of the City of Meadville, and the ordinance codified in this article, are hereby repealed. (Ord. 3582 § 6, 2001; Ord. 3350, 1993)


101.07       Exemptions from repeal.

The repeals provided for in MMC 101.06 shall not affect: 

(A) Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the adoption of this Meadville Municipal Code.

(B) Any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any preexisting ordinance or regulation.

(C) Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the city, or authorizing the issuance of any notes or bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city’s indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city.

(D) The administrative ordinances or resolutions of council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of the Meadville Municipal Code.

(E) Any right, license or franchise conferred by any ordinance or resolution of council on any person or corporation.

(F) Any ordinance or resolution affecting the disposition of real or personal property.

(G) Any ordinance establishing, naming, relocating or vacating any street or public way.

(H) Any ordinance or part thereof providing for the establishment of positions, for salaries or compensation.

(I) Any prosecution, suit or other proceeding pending, or any judgment rendered on or prior to the adopting of this Meadville Municipal Code.

(J) Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes or assessments.

(K) Any ordinance establishing or changing the boundaries of the city.

(L) Any ordinance or resolution adopted by council after the adoption of the Meadville Municipal Code.

(M) Floodplain Management Ordinance No. 3347 adopted August 28, 1993. (Ord. 3582 § 6, 2001; Ord. 3350, 1993)


101.08       Costs of prosecution.

Whenever in the Meadville Municipal Code or in any ordinance of the city there is no specific direction or authority for the taxing and collection of costs of prosecution, such costs shall be charged and collected as provided by law. (Ord. 3350, 1993)


101.99       General penalty.

Whenever in the Meadville Municipal Code or in any ordinances of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in the Meadville Municipal Code or in any ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violator of any such provision or of any such ordinance shall be fined not more than $300.00 or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both. (Ord. 3350, 1993)


Article 103       OFFICIAL STANDARDS

Sections:

103.01  Official seal.

103.02  Flags and colors.


103.01       Official seal.

(A) The official seal of the City of Meadville shall consist of a raised, circular impression, two inches in diameter, of the state coat-of-arms, surrounded by the words City of Meadville, Pennsylvania. Incorporated, March 23, 1823. 

(B) It shall be the duty of the city clerk to procure, at the expense of the city, a seal in conformity with subsection (A) of this section, and thereafter to use the same in attesting all official documents and papers of the city. (Ord. 455 §§ 1, 2, 1868)


103.02       Flags and colors.

(A) The colors in the civic flag, the city ensign, the city streamer, and the pennant of the City of Meadville shall be gold, white and green. 

(B) The Meadville civic flag, or standard of the city, shall be as follows: 

(1) The materials shall be bunting or silk of the colors above designated;

(2) The length or fly of the flag shall be three feet and its width or hoist two feet, or in proportion thereto;

(3) The flag shall be divided horizontally into three stripes, two of gold of equal width, and one of white between. The width of the white stripe shall be equal to three-fourths that of each gold stripe;

(4) Superimposed upon the upper gold stripe shall be three equilateral triangular patches of green, the bases of each of which shall be equal to one-eighth the total length of the flag. These patches shall be placed side by side, a little above the middle, and near to the staff end of the upper gold stripe. The distance between the first patch and the staff end of the flag shall be equal to one-twelfth the total length of the flag, while the end of the third patch farthest from the staff end shall be placed midway between the ends of the stripes; 

(5) The date "1788" shall appear midway between the base of the middle patch and the white stripe. 

(C) The significance of the colors and symbols of the flag shall be as follows: Meadville is a city of golden opportunities (symbolized by the golden stripes), with a beautiful white stream (symbolized by the white stripe), and three green clad hills (symbolized by the green patches), founded in 1788 (as indicated by the inscription). 

(D) An exact copy of the aforesaid civic flag is hereby directed to be placed on file in the archives of the City of Meadville, and displayed in the City Hall, marked "Approved Colors for the City Flags of Meadville". 

(E) The aforesaid civic flag shall be displayed upon public buildings at meetings of councils and upon suitable public occasions; provided always, that it never shall be displayed in any position that shall indicate precedence over the flag of the United States. 

(F) The city pennant shall be of the same colors as the civic flag. It shall be triangular in form, and shall be three feet wide and five feet long or in proportion thereto with the symbols for the hills arranged across its wide end, and parallel thereto. 

(G) The city streamer shall be two feet wide and 10 feet long or in proportion thereto with the symbols for the hills arranged across its wide end, and parallel thereto. (Ord. 1662 §§ 1 – 7, 1925)


Article 105       REAL ESTATE REGISTRY

Sections:

105.01  Establishment.

105.02  Fee for certified copy of entries.


105.01       Establishment.

For the purpose of procuring accurate information in reference to the ownership of all real estate within the city, council hereby provides for a registry of real estate to be maintained as provided for in Section 1515 et seq. of the Third Class City Code. (Ord. 2737 § 1, 1970)


105.02       Fee for certified copy of entries.

Certified copies, signed by the city engineer, of any of the entries in such books, or upon such maps or plans, shall be received in evidence in the same manner as the books, maps and plans themselves might be admissible for such purposes, and may be also furnished to any person desiring the same for a fee of $1.00. (Ord. 2737 § 2, 1970) 


Article 107       STREET IMPROVEMENT PROCEEDINGS

Sections:

107.01  Street improvements to accord with plans and specifications.

107.02  Assessment of cost by foot-front rule – Reductions.

107.03  Completion certificate by city engineer – Council approval and certification of assessments.

107.04  Assessment payment – Installments – Prepayment and delinquency.

107.05  Use of moneys collected – Records and accounts of payment.


107.01       Street improvements to accord with plans and specifications.

All grading, paving, macadamizing or other improvement to any street or part thereof, including curbing and draining by storm sewer or otherwise, and also including sidewalks when part of a paving improvement, shall be done in accordance with the plans and specifications as provided by the city engineer and on file in his office at the time bids are requested, and at the grade as established and shown therein. (Ord. 2705 § 1, 1969) 


107.02       Assessment of cost by foot-front rule – Reductions.

The costs and expenses of any or all of the things done under MMC 107.01 shall be paid by the owners of the real estate bounding and abutting thereon, which costs and expenses upon the abutting real estate shall be assessed according to the foot-front rule. However, council may provide for an equitable reduction from the frontage of all lots at street or like intersections, or where, from the peculiar or pointed shape of the lots, an assessment for the full frontage would be inequitable. (Ord. 2705 § 2, 1969) 


107.03       Completion certificate by city engineer – Council approval and certification of assessments.

The city engineer shall, upon completion of the paving, macadamizing or improvement of any street, or part thereof, submit to council the date of the completion of the work, along with the assessments for the costs of such work indicating for each assessment the city lot number, owner, the total frontage assessed and the amount therefor. Council shall, after approving such assessments, certify same to the city treasurer for collection. (Ord. 2705 § 3, 1969) 


107.04       Assessment payment – Installments – Prepayment and delinquency.

(A) The payment of assessments, with interest from the proper date, shall be paid in all cases at the office of the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall give notice to the owners of the property affected when payment shall become due, which shall be 30 days after the date of mailing such assessment. Council shall have the authority, when it deems necessary, and after application of the property owner affected, to provide that the assessments may be paid in not more than 10 equal installments, the last thereof not to be more than 10 years after the completion of the work on an improvement for which the assessment is made, and that the installment shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum commencing 30 days after the date of the notice of the assessment or at the time the installment payments are approved, whichever shall first occur. 

(B) If any of the installments shall remain unpaid for two months after the same become due and payable, the whole of the assessment remaining unpaid shall be due and payable. Any person upon whom an assessment has been made may pay all or as many as he chooses of such installments before the same are due. The due date of any assessment or the due date of any payment due on any assessment shall not be extended without the approval of council or a committee designated by council. In case assessments are not fully paid within six months of the time prescribed, they shall be certified to the city solicitor who shall file liens therefor in the office of the prothonotary of Crawford County as provided by law. (Ord. 2705 § 4, 1969) 


107.05       Use of moneys collected – Records and accounts of payment.

The moneys collected from assessments shall be applied and are hereby appropriated solely to the payment of the cost and expense of the grading, paving, macadamizing or other improvements for any streets, and to the payment of any bonds which may be issued therefor and interest thereon. The city treasurer shall keep in proper books or book separate accounts of all moneys paid and received by him from owners or property against which assessments for such improvements have been made, showing the payments made by each and the balance due. (Ord. 2705 § 5, 1969) 


Article 108       NOTICES AND ORDERS

Sections:

108.01  Notices generally.

108.02  Notice periods.

108.03  Notice recipients.

108.04  Emergency matters.

108.05  Scope of application.


108.01       Notices generally.

Whenever any city official issues any order or notice requiring the abatement of any public nuisance, the demolition of any property or the repair, replacement or correction of any condition upon any land within the city, or affecting or relating to any other matter under and pursuant to the terms of any statute, ordinance or article of the Meadville Municipal Code, the following notice standards shall prevail. (Ord. 3210, 1989)


108.02       Notice periods.

Notices and orders affecting any property or the use of any property within the city shall be given as follows: 

(A) In accordance with a notice period as specifically set forth in the statute, ordinance or article of the Meadville Municipal Code under and pursuant to which the order or notice is issued; or 

(B) In the absence of a specified required notice period in any statute, ordinance, or article of the Meadville Municipal Code, with a notice period which shall not be less than the period in which an appeal of such notice or order may be taken under the express terms of the statute, ordinance, or article of the Meadville Municipal Code pursuant to which such order or notice is issued; or 

(C) In the absence of any specified notice requirement under any statute, ordinance or article of the Meadville Municipal Code or of any express appeal period affecting the order or notice, with a notice period of not less than 30 days. (Ord. 3210, 1989)


108.03       Notice recipients.

Notices and orders shall be given to such persons as may be required by the statute, ordinance or article of the Meadville Municipal Code under and pursuant to which such notices or orders are issued. (Ord. 3210, 1989)


108.04       Emergency matters.

Nothing in this article shall be deemed to limit or restrict the right, authority or power of any city official to enter such orders or notices as may be authorized under any statute, ordinance, or article of the Meadville Municipal Code providing for such matters to such persons and within such times as may be necessary in the event of the existence of a public emergency or of an immediate threat or danger to the public health or safety. (Ord. 3210, 1989)


108.05       Scope of application.

The provisions of this article are applicable to all orders and notices required by all statutes, ordinances and articles of the Meadville Municipal Code for all purposes. In addition to general orders and notices of all natures and descriptions, the provisions of this article are hereby stated to be specifically applicable to all orders and notices by all city officials under all statutes, ordinances and articles of the Meadville Municipal Code which are intended to result in (or which, in fact, result in) the imposition of municipal liens upon properties in the city for the recovery of costs and expenses incurred by the city as the result of the failure of any person or entity to comply with any order of any city official. (Ord. 3210, 1989)


Article 109       AUTHORIZED INVESTMENTS

Sections:

109.01  Addition of the Pennsylvania Treasury INVEST Program to the list of authorized investments available for city funds.


109.01       Addition of the Pennsylvania Treasury INVEST Program to the list of authorized investments available for city funds.

The Pennsylvania Treasury INVEST Program is hereby added to the list of lawful vehicles for the investment and management of city funds as such list may now or hereafter be authorized and prescribed by applicable statutes or regulations. (Ord. 3543 § 1, 1999)


Article 111 CITY COUNCIL

Sections:

111.01    Date and time of regular meetings.

111.02    Sale of real estate.


111.01 Date and time of regular meetings.

Council shall hold a regularly scheduled public meeting on the first and third Wednesdays of each month beginning at 4:00 p.m., prevailing time, and on the fourth Wednesday of each month beginning at 6:00 p.m., prevailing time. Unless special notice is published as required by law, all meetings of the city council will be held in the Meadville City Building, 984 Water Street, Meadville, Pennsylvania. (Ord. 3646 § 1, 2007; Ord. 3487 § 1, 1998; Ord. 3449 § 1, 1996; Ord. 3265 § 1, 1990) 


111.02 Sale of real estate.

(A) City Real Estate – General Powers. The city council may, by resolution or ordinance, in its discretion, provide for the acquisition or disposition of real property and any and all interests therein for such consideration (if any) and upon such terms and conditions as the city council may, in its discretion, determine. 

(B) Auction of Surplus Property. In addition to all other lawful methods and forms of sale and in addition to the general discretion provided in the preceding section, the city council may, from time to time, authorize the sale of any city real property or real property interests which were acquired or owned by purchase and any and all real property or real property interests which were acquired or owned as the result of tax sale and any real property and real property interests purchased or taken over for the purpose of protecting municipal liens to the highest bidder. In the event of any such authorization, without specification of other procedures, the advertising and bidding procedures shall be as are provided for the sale of lands acquired and held by the city by purchase from a tax claim bureau as is set forth in applicable statutes governing such sales by cities of the third class generally. Council may authorize the sale of any such real property or real property interests upon the request of any would be purchaser or council may make a general authorization to sell any or all lands so owned or held, but in all events, the affirmative vote of a majority of the council shall be required to approve any sale based upon bidding before any deed may be given for the conveyance of any such land. 

(C) Bids shall be advertised by the city solicitor to be received by the city clerk and opened at the first meeting of council occurring after the bid closing date, and subject to the provisions required by law. 

(D) Council may authorize the sale of such lands upon request of any would be purchaser or may make a general authorization to sell any or all lands, so owned or held, but in any event, it shall require a majority vote of council approving the sale before a deed may be given for the conveyance of such land. (Ord. 3240 § 1, 1990; Ord. 2377 §§ 1 – 4, 1955) 


Article 113       ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS*

(Reserved)

*Editor’s note: There are no sections in Article 113 MMC. This article has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 


Article 121       ADMINISTRATION GENERALLY

Sections:

121.01  Departmental organization – Direction and control of department heads.

121.02  Duties of department heads.

121.03  Other appointive offices – Duties.


121.01       Departmental organization – Direction and control of department heads.

(A) The administrative service of the city shall be divided into the following departments and heads thereof: 

Department of public works:	Director of public  	works – City engineer

Department of records:	City clerk 

Department of finance:	Director of finance 

Department of police:	Police chief 

Department of fire:	Fire chief 

Department of personnel:	Director of personnel 

Department of purchasing:	Director of purchasing 

Department of law:	City solicitor 

In the interest of efficiency and economy, the city manager may appoint the same person to more than one office. 

(B) Except the department of records and the department of law, all of the other departments shall be under the direction of the city manager. With relation to the department of records, the city clerk shall be under the direction of the city manager for recording services related to the general operation of the various departments and in all other matters shall be under the direction of council, being directly responsible to council for the overall operation of the department. 

(C) With relation to the department of law, the city solicitor shall be available to the city manager for legal services related to the general operation of the various departments and in all other matters shall be under the direction of council which shall appoint the city solicitor and any assistant solicitor when the position is authorized by council. Such officers shall be directly responsible to council for the overall operation of the department. (Ord. 2683 § 4, 1968) 


121.02       Duties of department heads.

Subject to the above stated provisions with relation to the department of records and the department of law, the heads of departments shall: 

(A) Be immediately responsible to the city manager for the effective administration of their respective departments and all activities assigned thereto. 

(B) Keep informed as to the latest techniques in their particular field and submit recommendations on the same to the city manager when beneficial to the city and to the public. 

(C) Submit monthly and annual reports of their department to the city manager, upon his request. 

(D) Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the city manager. 

(E) Recommend to the city manager appointment to and removal of all subordinates, subject to civil service and other personnel regulations. 

(F) Be responsible for the proper utilization and maintenance of all city property and equipment used in their departments. (Ord. 2683 § 5, 1968) 


121.03       Other appointive offices – Duties.

(A) In addition to the offices set forth in MMC 121.01, the appointive offices of the city, to serve within the administrative service as provided in this administrative code, shall be as follows: 

(1) City magistrate; 

(2) Receiver of taxes; 

(3) Zoning officer;

(4) Building inspector; 

(5) Electrical inspector;

(6) Plumbing inspector;

(7) Housing inspector;

(8) Sealer of weights and measures;

(9) Dog warden;

(10) City chemist; 

(11) City physician;

(12) Market master;

(13) Airport manager.

(B) The duties of each such office shall be governed by the existing laws and ordinances and directives applicable to such office. Appointments and removals to such offices shall be made by the city manager. (Ord. 2683 § 14, 1968)


Article 123       CITY MANAGER

Sections:

123.01  Powers and duties.


123.01       Powers and duties.

The city manager shall, in addition to the duties and powers set forth in the Optional Third Class City Charter Law (council-manager plan): 

(A) In connection with his executive and administrative powers and duties, direct and supervise the heads of departments in their respective areas of responsibility and perform the necessary executive and administrative functions to provide for the effective administration of the various departments and the responsibilities assigned thereto.

(B) Prescribe such procedures and practices as he shall deem necessary or expedient for the operation of administrative agencies subject to his authority, and to revoke, suspend or amend any such practice or procedure; provided, that the city manager shall have no authority to make, change or alter matters of policy. The procedures and practices shall be in writing and reported to council on a current basis.

(C) Designate himself or some other officer or employee to perform the duties of any office or position in the administrative service under his control which is vacant or which lacks administration due to the absence or disability of the incumbent. 

(D) Direct any department, division or bureau to perform the work for any other department, division or bureau. 

(E) Assign any employee of the city to any department or branch thereof requiring services appropriate to the classification of the employee so assigned subject to the limitation of the civil service regulations and laws.

(F) Be a member, ex officio, of such boards, commissions, committees, authorities and other operating or advisory boards to council as directed by council. As such member, he shall have the right to take part in the discussion and deliberations but shall not have the right to vote. The city manager shall keep council informed of the planning and activities of all such bodies to which he is designated a member by council. 

(G) Keep informed of the latest developments, techniques and practices in city administration, operations, development and planning and make periodic reports to council with relation thereto with any recommendations for action by council he may deem necessary, expedient or desirable concerning the same.

(H) Appoint persons to the rank of captain in the paid fire department subject to and in accord with the provisions of the civil service laws applicable to all cities of the third class in the commonwealth. (Ord. 2887 § 1, 1975; Ord. 2683 § 3, 1968)


Article 125       CITY TREASURER*

(Reserved)

*Editor’s note: There are no sections in Article 125 MMC. This article has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 


Article 127       CITY CONTROLLER*

(Reserved)

*Editor’s note: There are no sections in Article 127 MMC. This article has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 


Article 129       CITY ASSESSOR*

(Reserved)

*Editor’s note: There are no sections in Article 129 MMC. This article has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.


Article 131       DEPARTMENT OF LAW

Sections:

131.01  Supervision by city solicitor – Council meeting attendance – Qualifications and duties.


131.01       Supervision by city solicitor – Council meeting attendance – Qualifications and duties.

(A) The department of law shall be under the direction of the city solicitor, assisted by the assistant city solicitor when the position is authorized by council. 

(B) The city solicitor, or the assistant city solicitor, when required, shall attend all regular and special meetings of council in their entirety, for the purpose of providing legal counsel.

(C) The city solicitor and the assistant city solicitor, when authorized, shall possess the qualifications and perform the duties as prescribed in city ordinances and in the Third Class City Code and all amendments thereto. (Ord. 2683 § 13, 1968) 


Article 133       DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS – CITY ENGINEER

Sections:

133.01  Director and duties – Duties and qualifications of city engineer.

133.02  Organization and supervision of divisions.


133.01       Director and duties – Duties and qualifications of city engineer.

(A) City Engineer. The city engineer shall:

(1) Be appointed by the city manager; and

(2) Be a person or firm of persons registered as professional engineers in the commonwealth of Pennsylvania; and

(3) Be full- or part-time as may be determined by the city manager; and

(4) Perform such duties as may, from time to time, be assigned by the city manager which may include any of the duties imposed upon third class city engineers by the Third Class City Code or custom or such other duties defined by the city manager; and

(5) Be assisted by such special or consulting engineers and by such assistants and staff as may, from time to time, be approved by the city manager; and

(6) Be compensated upon such terms as may, from time to time, be approved by motion or other action of the city council.

(B) Public Works Director. The director of public works shall:

(1) Be appointed by the city manager; and

(2) Be responsible for all matters relating to the construction, management, maintenance and operation of the physical properties of the city and the supervision of the various public works departments and divisions which may, from time to time, be established by the city manager; and

(3) Perform such duties as may, from time to time, be assigned by the city manager; and

(4) Be compensated upon such terms as may, from time to time, be approved by motion or other action of the city council. (Ord. 3293, 1991)


133.02       Organization and supervision of divisions.

The department of public works shall be organized into such departments or divisions, as may, from time to time, be established by the city manager. At the option of the city manager, each department or division shall be under the supervision of a superintendent and such assistants who shall be appointed by the city manager. Any and all superintendents shall report and be immediately responsible to the director of public works. (Ord. 3293, 1991) 


Article 135       DEPARTMENT OF RECORDS

Sections:

135.01  Supervision by city clerk – Qualifications and duties.


135.01       Supervision by city clerk – Qualifications and duties.

(A) The department of records shall be under the direction of the city clerk, who shall also serve as clerk of council. 

(B) The city clerk shall possess the qualifications and perform the duties as prescribed in the Third Class City Code. 

(C) The city clerk shall: 

(1) Be responsible for the recording, filing, indexing and safekeeping of all proceedings of the council;

(2) Record in full, uniformly and permanently, all ordinances after authenticating the same;

(3) Publish all adopted ordinances and resolutions of council, as may be required by law;

(4) Cause to be published in the prescribed manner, all legal notices required by law or ordinance;

(5) Be the custodian of the official seal of the city;

(6) Notify the appointing authority, at least 30 days before, of the impending expiration of the term of office of a member of any board, commission, etc.;

(7) Keep and maintain a file system for all official city business;

(8) Keep and maintain a personnel file on all city employees;

(9) Administer the oath of office to all elected and appointed officers of the city. (Ord. 2683 § 7, 1968) 


Article 137       DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE

Sections:

137.01  Supervision by director – Duties and control function.

137.02  Procedure for control functions.

137.03  Other duties of director.


137.01       Supervision by director – Duties and control function.

(A) The department of finance shall be under the direction of the director of finance. In all cases, where the duty is not expressly charged to any other officer by the Charter, it shall be the duty of the director of finance to act to promote, secure and preserve the financial and property interests of the city. 

(B) The director of finance shall assist the controller to establish and maintain a control function, in conformance with Section 519 of the Optional Third Class City Charter Law (council-manager plan). For the purposes of this function, the director of finance shall be under the direction of the city controller. (Ord. 2683 § 8, 1968) 


137.02       Procedure for control functions.

The operations of the finance department shall be governed by the Third Class City Code, consistent with the Optional Third Class City Charter Law and this administrative code. Control functions of the finance department shall be as follows: 

(A) Upon receipt of a properly executed purchase order, the director of finance shall properly record such encumbrance and reduce the available budget balance indicated. 

(B) Upon certification by the city manager of satisfactory performance or satisfactory receipt and delivery in good condition of the item or items referred to in the purchase order at the indicated price, the director of finance shall cause a disbursement to be prepared in payment of this obligation and upon execution of such check, shall record the actual charge against the budget item and reduce the initial amount remaining by the amount of the original encumbrance. 

(C) The pre-audit of all claims and demands against the city prior to payment is indicated by the controller’s signature on the check or, in the case of an electronic funds transfer, on an appropriate predisbursement electronic funds transfer authorization form as from time to time is approved by the city manager.

(D) All disbursements of the city shall be approved by signature of the mayor and the city controller or their duly appointed deputy. (Ord. 3441 § 1, 1996; Ord. 2683 § 8, 1968) 


137.03       Other duties of director.

In addition to other duties which may, from time to time, be assigned by the city manager, the director of finance shall: 

(A) Exercise general supervision over all officers of the city regarding the proper management of the fiscal concerns of their respective offices; 

(B) Examine the books of each department from time to time to see that they are being kept in order; 

(C) Require that officers receiving money pay the same into the city treasury, when required thereto, and that all required financial reports are made by officers. Any delinquency in such payments or reports shall be reported immediately to the city manager; 

(D) Report the default of any officer of the city to the city manager, who shall direct the city solicitor to take immediate legal measures to recover the amount for which such officer is in default; 

(E) Deposit the proceeds from the sale of notes or bonds with the city treasurer immediately after he shall have received the same. Until such deposit, he shall be responsible for the full amount thereof; 

(F) Advise the city manager in the preparation of the annual budget; 

(G) Prepare the city payroll; 

(H) Supervise the billing and collection for all city services, except fines, taxes and assessments; 

(I) Prepare payment vouchers for all goods and services furnished to the city, only after certification by the department head concerned that such goods and services have been received, approval of the city manager, and subject to audit by the city controller;

(J) To make such payments to and withdraw from the City of Meadville unemployment compensation reserve account as may be necessary to comply with any and all federal and state laws governing the provision of unemployment compensation to municipal employees. Contributions to said account shall be subject to approval by the city council of the City of Meadville. 

The receiver of taxes and the operations of his office shall be under the direction and supervision of the city manager. (Ord. 2947 § 2, 1978; Ord. 2683 § 8, 1968) 


Article 139       DEPARTMENT OF POLICE*

Sections:

139.01  Supervision by police chief – Qualifications and duties.

139.02  Department composition – Designation of officers.

139.03  VASCAR.

*Editor’s note: The City of Meadville through collective bargaining contracts with the Fraternal Order of Police Lodge in respect to rates of pay, wages, hours of employment and other conditions of employment for employees of the police department, except for probationers and the police chief, insofar as it is practicable and legal under the present Third Class City Code and the council-manager charter plan. Copies of the current labor relations agreement are available at the office of the city clerk.


139.01       Supervision by police chief – Qualifications and duties.

(A) The police department shall be under the direction of the chief of police. 

(B) The members of the police department shall possess the qualifications and perform the duties as prescribed in the Third Class City Code. 

(C) In addition to other duties which may be assigned by the city manager, the chief of police shall: 

(1) Be responsible for the preservation of the public peace and order, the prevention and detection of crime, the apprehension of offenders of law and ordinances, the protection of persons and property and the enforcement of the criminal laws of the United States, the commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the penal ordinances of the city as are applicable and within the jurisdiction of the police department. 

(2) Assign officers to shifts, and make any other work assignments when he shall deem it necessary for the proper operation of the department. Special work assignments of a permanent nature shall be issued in writing with a copy filed with the city manager.

(3) Designate a qualified officer of the department to act as police instructor, who shall conduct such schools as the chief shall order. (Ord. 2683 § 9, 1968)


139.02       Department composition – Designation of officers.

The police department of the City of Meadville shall consist of one police officer to be designated as the chief of police; two police officers to be designated as lieutenants of police; two police officers to be designated as investigative sergeants; one police officer to be designated as safety patrol officer; three police officers to be designated as sergeants of police; three police officers to be designated as corporal of police and 14 police officers who shall serve as patrolmen. The police department of the City of Meadville shall consist of not more than 26 members, exclusive of extra patrolmen. The compensation of all members of the police department of the City of Meadville shall be fixed by the city council of the City of Meadville from time to time in budget ordinances. (Ord. 2955 § 1, 1978)


139.03       VASCAR.

(A) The police department of the City of Meadville is hereby authorized and directed to use the electro-mechanical timing system known as "VASCAR" for the enforcement of the speed and traffic laws of the City of Meadville on all streets, highways, and other public ways within the city.

(B) Use of the VASCAR system hereinabove authorized shall be at the direction and control of the chief of police.

(C) The police department is hereby authorized to direct the placement of such signs as may be necessary or appropriate to announce the use of the said VASCAR system within the city. (Ord. 3024, 1982) 


Article 141       DEPARTMENT OF FIRE*

Sections:

141.01  Organization and components.

141.02  Volunteers performing duties as city employees for workmen’s compensation purposes.

141.03  Operation, control and conduct of the Meadville fire department and of qualified volunteer companies.

*Editor’s note: The City of Meadville through collective bargaining contracts with the International Association of Fire Fighters Local Union in respect to rates of pay, wages, hours of employment and other conditions of employment for employees of the fire department, except for probationers and the fire chief and battalion chiefs, insofar as it is practicable and legal under the present Third Class City Code and the council-manager charter plan. Copies of the current labor relations agreement are available at the office of the city clerk. 


141.01       Organization and components.

The fire department of the City of Meadville shall consist of one paid department to be known and denominated as the "Meadville fire department". Whenever the term "Meadville fire department" is used in this article, it shall mean the paid fire department of the City of Meadville. The Meadville fire department may be assisted in the performance of its duties by such volunteer companies as may, from time to time, be recognized by the fire chief as qualified city volunteer companies in accord with the terms and provisions of this article. (Ord. 3274, 1991)


141.02       Volunteers performing duties as city employees for workmen’s compensation purposes.

Volunteer firefighters who are members in good standing of currently qualified city volunteer companies and regular firefighters shall be authorized to perform the following duties and for the purpose of the Workmen’s Compensation Act, such persons will be considered as in the employ of the city and acting in the course of their duty (for workmen’s compensation coverage purposes only) if any of such persons are assisting or doing any of the following acts: 

(A) Going to or returning from a fire or fire alarm or other emergency, such as tornados, floods, or any other "unusual occurrence", either within or outside the City of Meadville, to which the fire chief has ordered a response. 

(B) Performing rescue work of persons, animals or property whether connected with fires, floods, or other unusual circumstances, with the prior approval of the fire chief. 

(C) Performing acts of mercy, or assistance, in a conflagration, epidemic, fire, bombing, wreck, accident, or any other unusual occurrence where public policy would require additional services to the services now in existence or services not provided for by the city government at the present time within the city or under mutual aid, with the prior approval of the fire chief. 

(D) Performing incidental duties usually performed by fire or fire/police agencies and not classified above including participation in exhibitions and display of fire prevention and equipment either within or outside the City of Meadville with the prior approval of the fire chief. 

(E) Performing fire police duties of any kind including traffic control and keeping order. (Ord. 3274, 1991)


141.03       Operation, control and conduct of the Meadville fire department and of qualified volunteer companies.

The following provisions are hereby adopted for the control, operation and conduct of the Meadville fire department and of qualified volunteer companies.

(A) Organization.

(1) The organization of the Meadville fire department shall consist of one chief, and as many officers and firefighters as may be needed for the safety and welfare of the city as may, from time to time, be determined by the city manager and as may be within budget and maximum authorized personnel ordinances of the city from time to time adopted by the city council. 

(2) The organization of each qualified city volunteer company shall consist of the following: one captain and such lieutenants and volunteer active firefighters as may be necessary to the safe and proper operation of each such company as may be established in accord with the standard operating procedures from time to time adopted by the fire chief with the approval of the city manager. Separate qualified city volunteer companies may be organized and operated for firefighting, fire/police, rescue and other proper purposes as may be determined in accord with the standard operating procedures from time to time adopted by the fire chief with the approval of the city manager. 

(B) Fire Chief.

(1) The fire chief shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager and shall be responsible to the city manager for the conduct and management of the Meadville fire department. 

(2) In addition to any and all other duties and tasks which may be assigned by the city manager, the fire chief shall:

(a) Devote his/her time to the discharge of the duties of his/her office, and shall have and exercise command at all times, over the officers and firefighters of the Meadville fire department. 

(b) Have the power, and it shall be his/her duty to summarily suspend, at any time from duty, any firefighter or active volunteer firefighter under his/her command for a flagrant violation or disregard of law, ordinance, standard operating procedures, rules, regulation or direction in all cases where the interest of the people or the reputation of the department would suffer if such prompt action should not be taken.

(c) See that all laws, ordinances, standard operating procedures, rules and regulations of the city and all orders and directions from the city manager are promptly enforced and obeyed, and that all dereliction or transgressions that may come to his/her knowledge are promptly investigated and reported to the city manager.

(d) Have police power at all times as ex officio fire marshall; the fire chief shall also have full charge and absolute control, authority and command over the fire and city police or any officer thereof during the time and continuance of any fire, and all orders issued to the police forces or officers thereof shall be explicitly obeyed and performed. 

(e) Have the power to protect property during fires through causing the demolition of structures. If it shall appear necessary to tear down a building before it has caught fire in order to save another property or for the safety of people, before acting in such case, the chief shall first consult with the city manager, if available. After such consultation with the city manager (or without such consultation if the city manager is not reasonably available), the chief shall have full and complete discretion as to the final decision relating to this matter. 

(f) Report all accidents and loss of life by fire which shall happen in the city, with the cause thereof as well as can be ascertained, and the name of the owners and occupants of the property destroyed or the lives lost. 

(g) Have the power to designate work shifts, duties and assignments of the respective officers, firefighters and companies set forth herein, subject to any contrary provisions of any collective bargaining agreement between the city and the firefighter’s union. 

(h) Have the authority to call special meetings of the officers and firefighters of the Meadville fire department or of any qualified city volunteer company at any time.

(i) Have full control of the board of engineers and shall be the president of the board.

(j) Have power to take charge of the building occupied by any volunteer company and all property of the city therein when a disturbance has occurred or if a company does not maintain its status as a qualified city volunteer company or which is otherwise determined by the chief to not be in compliance with the standard operating procedures from time to time adopted by the fire chief and approved by the city manager. He shall turn the same over to the city manager to be held by him until the difficulty is settled or adjusted. 

(k) Have power to take charge of the meeting of any qualified city volunteer company called as a special meeting to settle arguments and to act with the president and captain of such qualified city volunteer company as a board to settle any grievances or arguments. The decision of any such board shall be final and the members of such company will abide by their decision. This rule will apply where the argument or grievance is confined to any one volunteer company.

(l) Have power to take charge of any meeting called to settle any grievances or arguments between qualified city volunteer companies or between such companies and the Meadville fire department. In all such cases, the determinations and decisions of the grievance board shall be final and binding upon all parties. The grievance board shall consist of the fire chief (as chairman), the captains, and the presidents of the qualified volunteer companies involved.

(C) Other Management Officers.

(1) The officers of the Meadville fire department shall be appointed by the city manager.

(2) The duties of the officers of the Meadville fire department shall be as designed by the city manager, with consultation and input from the fire chief.

(D) Captains of the Meadville Fire Department.

(1) In addition to such other officers as may be authorized by the city council and appointed by the city manager, there shall be at least three captains in the Meadville fire department.

(2) The captains of the Meadville fire department shall be in full command of the shift.

(3) It shall be the duty of the captains to make all necessary reports and to keep all necessary records.

(4) It shall be the duty of captains to do such additional tasks and work as may be from time to time assigned by the fire chief.

(E) Standard Operating Procedures.

(1) The fire chief shall, from time to time, make and promulgate additional and detailed rules and regulations in the form of standard operating procedures for the Meadville fire department and the qualified volunteer companies. No such standard operating procedures shall be in contravention of any term or provision of this article or of any state or federal law, rule or regulation. No standard operating procedures or amendments thereto shall become effective until approved in writing by the city manager. Copies of all standard operating procedures, and all amendments thereto, shall be provided to each member of the city council promptly upon approval thereof by the city manager. In addition to such other matters as the fire chief may elect, the standard operating procedures shall provide that:

(a) All members of the Meadville fire department and of all qualified city volunteer companies shall be furnished with a copy of the standard operating procedures for governing the Meadville fire department and qualified city volunteer companies and each member shall become acquainted with such standard operating procedures and abide by them.

(b) The paid firefighters on duty shall wear the uniform of the day as ordered by the fire chief and shall be dressed neat and clean at all times. Uniforms shall be worn on fire inspections and when ordered by the fire chief.

(c) Any member of the Meadville fire department appearing at any fire station for duty or at fires, under the influence of liquor or drugs, shall be subject to suspension.

(d) No off-duty jobs of any employee of the Meadville fire department shall adversely affect his mental or physical ability to perform his job as a firefighter. All employees must be immediately available for emergency duty while performing said off-duty jobs.

(e) All officers and firefighters not on duty shall respond promptly to any call for duty issued by the fire chief or by his/her authority or by general alarm or any special signal. Any member of the Meadville fire department known to have heard a general alarm or to have been called by telephone and to have not responded shall be subject to discipline and possible expulsion from the service of the Meadville fire department.

(f) No internal, non-union information relating to the business, operations or other affairs of the fire department shall be furnished to anyone except when authorized by the fire chief or city manager.

(g) No member of the Meadville fire department shall be a delegate at any city election or take part in city political matters other than to exercise the right to suffrage.

(h) No member of the Meadville fire department shall directly or indirectly in any manner or for any purpose invite, solicit, suggest or request contributions, subscriptions or donations without the permission of the fire chief or the city manager.

(i) Officers of the Meadville fire department are expected to set an example to subordinates in the matter of due regard and respect for the rules of discipline. Any infraction of regulations, neglect to enforce rules or orders, or other acts of indifference on the part of officers that may tend to operate against the good reputation of the fire department shall be considered as an aggravated offense and treated with corresponding severity.

(j) All members of the Meadville fire department shall, at all times during their employment, establish and maintain a bona fide, factual and legal residence within the limits of the City of Meadville. It shall be the duty of the fire chief and all members of the Meadville fire department to report and make known to the fire chief or city manager any information they may have or learn regarding violations of this section.

(k) Officers and firefighters of the Meadville fire department and of the qualified city volunteer companies will respond to mutual aid calls, as authorized by the fire chief.

(F) Qualified City Volunteer Companies.

(1) The fire chief may, from time to time, and with the express approval of the city manager, recognize as "qualified city volunteer companies" associations of uncompensated volunteers interested in fire safety, firefighting, fire police, rescue and related activities; provided, that such associations meet and maintain the qualifications stated in this article and in the standard operating procedures from time to time adopted by the fire chief and approved by the city manager. Each qualified city volunteer company shall:

(a) Be incorporated as a nonprofit corporation for fire prevention, safety, rescue or other similar purpose or as a nonprofit volunteer fire company under the laws of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania; and

(b) Have and maintain a minimum membership of 10 active firefighters; and

(c) Be committed by article of incorporation or bylaw to not unlawfully discriminate against any person on the basis of race, sex, age, religion, handicap or national origin; and

(d) Be committed by its articles of incorporation, bylaws or other regulation satisfactory to the fire chief to assure that no person shall become a member of that qualified city volunteer company unless such person is a resident of the city or a surrounding municipality at a location within such surrounding municipality which is within 10 statute miles of the nearest corporate boundary of the city; and

(e) Have an adequate organization structure to assure that officers of the qualified city volunteer company shall set an example to subordinates in the matter of due regard and respect for the standard operating procedures from time to time adopted by the fire chief and approved by the city manager and all related and relevant rules of discipline and to assure that infraction of any standard operating procedures or other relevant regulations, neglect to enforce rules or orders, or other act of indifference on the part of officers, that may tend to operate against the good reputation of the city, the Meadville fire department or its qualified city volunteer companies, shall be considered as an aggravated offense and treated with corresponding severity, including removal from office; and

(f) Agree to be bound by and strictly comply with all standard operating procedures which may, from time to time, be promulgated by the fire chief with the approval of the city manager; and

(g) Meet and maintain minimum firefighting qualification, training and performance standards as may, from time to time, be established in the standard operating procedures by the fire chief with the approval of the city manager.

Upon recognition, qualified city volunteer companies shall be provided with such quarters, equipment or facilities, if any, as the fire chief may, from time to time, designate.

(2) With the prior approval of the city manager, the fire chief may withdraw recognition of any qualified city volunteer company if any such company fails to maintain the standards set forth and referenced in the preceding subsection or if the chief for any other reason determines the withdrawal of recognition to be necessary or appropriate to the provision of fire and safety services within the city. The chief shall evidence the withdrawal of recognition in a writing addressed to the captain of the subject organization. Upon withdrawal of recognition, all items and rights provided by the city to the former qualified city volunteer company shall be immediately returned to the city at such place and time and in such manner as the fire chief shall elect. From and after withdrawal of recognition, the subject volunteer organization shall no longer be considered to be a qualified city volunteer company and any such organization and all of its members shall cease to be covered by the provisions of MMC 141.02.

(3) Board of Engineers. The line officers of each qualified city volunteer company and the fire chief shall constitute a board of engineers which shall meet upon the call of the fire chief for the purpose of assuring the proper operation and coordination of the qualified city volunteer companies and the coordination of the work of the qualified city volunteer companies with that of the Meadville fire department. The purpose of the board of engineers shall be to provide a forum for consultation among its members and shall not be for the establishment of policy, procedures, rules or regulations. The fire chief shall, through his/her standard operating procedures and all amendments thereto as authorized under this article, be solely responsible for the establishment of policy, procedures, rules and regulations for the governance of the qualified city volunteer companies.

(4) Volunteer Officers.

(a) The captain of each qualified city volunteer company shall be in complete charge of his/her company’s truck room and activities pertaining to firefighting duties, and training, all under the authority of the fire chief.

(b) At a fire the captain and other officers and members of qualified city volunteer companies will take orders from the fire chief or the officer in charge.

(c) The captain of each qualified city volunteer company shall be responsible for implementation and enforcement of all standard operating procedures from time to time adopted by the fire chief with the approval of the city manager. (Ord. 3498 § 1, 1998; Ord. 3274, 1991)


Article 143       DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL

Sections:

143.01  Supervision by city manager – Guidelines.

143.02  Basic personnel policy.


143.01       Supervision by city manager – Guidelines.

The department of personnel shall be under the supervision of the city manager, who shall be guided by the Charter, laws of the commonwealth, this administrative code and other applicable ordinances of the city relating to personnel policies and procedures. (Ord. 2683 § 11, 1968) 


143.02       Basic personnel policy.

The basic personnel policy of the city shall be as follows: 

(A) It is the policy of the government of the City of Meadville to provide equal opportunity in municipal employment for all qualified persons, to prohibit discrimination in employment because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin or political considerations, and to promote the full realization of equal employment opportunity through a positive continuing program in each municipal department and agency. This policy of equal employment opportunity applies to every aspect of municipal employment policy and practice. 

(B) Recruitment shall be conducted on a broad basis in order to secure an adequate field of selection. 

(C) Just and equitable conditions of employment shall be established and maintained in order to promote efficiency and economy in the operation of the city government. 

(D) Positions having similar duties and responsibilities shall be classified and compensated on a uniform basis. 

(E) Appointments, promotions and other personnel actions shall be made on merit, systematic tests and evaluations. 

(F) Tenure of employees and appointive officers shall be subject to good behavior, satisfactory performance of work, requirements of the city and availability of funds. 

(G) Additional personnel policies shall be established by the city manager with the approval of council. (Ord. 2874 § 1, 1975; Ord. 2683 § 11, 1968)


Article 145       DEPARTMENT OF PURCHASING

Sections:

145.01  Compliance with Third Class City Code – Supervision by director.

145.02  Purchases and sales by director – Requisitions and informal bids.

145.03  Formal bidding procedures.

145.04  Purchase order for informal bidding.

145.05  Inspection of deliveries – Certification of conformance.

145.06  Purchases from federal government.

145.07  Formal bidding and contractual agreements.


145.01       Compliance with Third Class City Code – Supervision by director.

(A) All purchases shall be made in accordance with the Third Class City Code.

(B) The department of purchasing shall be under the direction of the director of purchasing. (Ord. 2683 § 12, 1968)


145.02       Purchases and sales by director – Requisitions and informal bids.

The director of purchasing shall act as purchasing agent for the city, making all purchases required by the various departments and selling unused, worn out, surplus or obsolete equipment and materials. The sale of such property and equipment shall be governed by the provisions of the Third Class City Code. Specific operating procedures shall be established by the city manager for department heads to follow for requisitioning of necessary supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services. Informal bids shall be solicited for all items whose cost is less than that specified for informal bids under the Third Class City Code. The contract may then be awarded to the supplier offering the lowest and best bid among the informal bidders. (Ord. 2683 § 12, 1968) 


145.03       Formal bidding procedures.

(A) Whenever formal bidding regarding purchasing is required by the Third Class City Code, the director of purchasing shall observe the following procedures: 

(1) Request permission and approval from the city manager to advertise for bids. 

(2) Specifications for bids shall be prepared by a qualified person and such specifications shall be approved prior to advertising by the head of the department requiring the equipment, goods, property or services and by the city manager. 

(3) Advertising for bids shall be made in accordance with the Charter and the Third Class City Code. 

(4) Prior to advertising for formal bids, council shall be advised of the contemplated advertisement and such other information as council may request. 

The annual appropriation ordinance shall be sufficient authority for the expenditure without the passage of any supplementary or specific ordinance by council. However, if the contemplated purchase was not included in the annual appropriation ordinance, a supplementary appropriation ordinance shall be required prior to advertising for bids. 

(B) When formal bidding is employed, the bids shall be opened and tabulated publicly by the director of purchasing and the city clerk at the time and place specified in the advertisement for bids. An investigation of the responsibility of the bidders shall be made as the city manager may deem necessary, and the city manager shall then award the contract to the lowest and best responsible bidder, after council approval, unless council determines that the interest of the city would be better served by rejecting all bids and ordering a new advertisement, in which case the council shall so order. Before the contract is signed, it shall be submitted to the director of finance for encumbrance and certification and approved as to form and manner of execution by the city solicitor. (Ord. 2683 § 12, 1968) 


145.04       Purchase order for informal bidding.

Whenever informal bidding is followed pursuant to this article, the director of purchasing shall prepare a purchase order addressed to the successful bidder, directing him to supply the goods or services required in accordance with the terms agreed upon. Such purchase order shall be submitted to the director of finance for encumbrance and certification. (Ord. 2683 § 12, 1968) 


145.05       Inspection of deliveries – Certification of conformance.

The director of purchasing and the department head concerned shall inspect or supervise the inspection of all deliveries of supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in or referred to in the order of contract, and certify such conformance. (Ord. 2683 § 12, 1968)


145.06       Purchases from federal government.

The director of purchasing may, with the approval of the city manager, purchase any personal property costing less than $1,500 from the federal government whenever such property is offered, if he finds that such purchase can be made at prices less than would be obtained by taking bids as provided by law for purchases from private individuals. It shall not be necessary for him to advertise for bids, but he may make such purchase upon such formalities and such terms as are required by the federal government. (Ord. 2683 § 12, 1968)


145.07       Formal bidding and contractual agreements.

The director or purchasing in conjunction with the department of public works is hereby authorized and directed to compile a standard set of general contract conditions, provisions and specifications for city work including, but not limited to, earth work, street construction, drainage, water systems, and sanitary sewerage facilities. The standard set of general contract conditions, provisions and general specifications shall be printed by the city with copies available for all bidders when formal bidding is employed. Copies of said standard contract provisions and standard specifications, as amended from time to time, shall be kept on file at all times with the city clerk and the city solicitor. All such standard contract conditions and specifications shall be a part of all city formal bidding and contractual agreements as is set forth in full in said contracts. (Ord. 2775 § 2, 1971) 


Article 147       OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY

Sections:

147.01  Social Security deductions.

147.02  Vacations and holidays.

147.03  Sick leave.

147.04  Fidelity bonds required.


147.01       Social Security deductions.

(A) The city is hereby authorized to execute and deliver to the state agency (the Secretary of Labor and Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania) a plan, or plans, and agreement, required under Section 6 of Act 491 of the 1951 Session of the Pennsylvania Assembly and the Social Security Act, to extend coverage to employees and officers of the city and do all other necessary things to effectuate coverage of employees and officers under the old age and survivors’ insurance system.

(B) The city clerk is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll deduction to be matched by payments by the city to be made into the contribution fund of the Social Security Act through the office of the state agency, and to make charges of this tax to the fund from which wage or salary payments are issued to employees of the city. Such payments are to be made in accordance with the provisions of the laws and regulations promulgated by the state agency and the Federal Security Administrator. Payments which are delinquent shall bear interest at the rate of one-half percent per month until such time as payments are made.

(C) Appropriation is hereby made from the municipal employees pension fund of the city in the necessary amount to pay into the contribution fund as provided in Section 4 of the enabling Act and in accordance with the plan or plans, and agreement. Authority is given to the mayor and the city clerk to enter into an agreement with the state agency, which agreement shall be in accordance with Act 491 and with Paragraph 218 of the Social Security Act. Such plan and agreement shall provide that the participation of the city shall commence as of January 1, 1951. (Ord. 2306 §§ 1 – 3, 1952)


147.02       Vacations and holidays.

Vacation and holiday provisions for all city employees except members of the police and fire departments shall be governed by the provisions of this section. 

(A) The vacation year shall be January 1st to December 31st. 

(B) The periods and length of vacation of city employees shall be as follows:

(1) Employees with service of more than one year but less than 15 years shall be entitled to an annual vacation of two weeks. The first year’s vacation shall be taken after the anniversary date.

(2) Employees with service of more than 15 years but less than 20 years shall be entitled to an annual vacation of three weeks during the year in which the anniversary occurs. 

(3) Employees with service of more than 20 years shall be entitled to an annual vacation of four weeks during the year in which the anniversary occurs. 

(4) The computation of service shall be from the date of last hire to the date the vacation is to be taken. 

(C) All vacation periods specified herein shall be without diminution of salary or compensation as fixed by ordinance for the period during which such vacation is taken. 

(D) It shall be mandatory that all employees take this allotted vacation time up to a total of two weeks. Vacation periods in excess of two weeks may be taken in the form of extra pay upon recommendation of the department head and approval of the director of finance. One week’s vacation shall be calculated to be one-fifty-second of the annual salary for salaried employees or the wages earned during a standard work week for hourly employees. Such payment in lieu of vacation shall not be authorized before December 1st for any calendar year.

(E) All vacation periods permitted and specified herein shall not be cumulative from year to year. The vacation periods or schedule shall be within the discretion of the department head and subject to review by council. 

(F) Upon termination of employment, vacation earned or vacation earned and accrued shall be paid as follows: 

(1) Voluntary termination shall receive earned vacation.

(2) Involuntary termination shall receive earned vacation.

(3) Furloughed employees shall receive earned and accrued vacation.

(4) Termination for retirement shall receive earned and accrued vacation. 

(5) Employment terminated by death shall receive earned and accrued vacation, payable to the widow or legal survivors. 

(6) Termination for military leave shall receive earned and accrued vacation. 

(7) Termination for maternity leave shall receive earned and accrued vacation. 

(G) Earned vacation shall be that vacation due the employee for work done during the previous calendar year. Accrued vacation shall be that vacation that has accrued during the present calendar year and shall be calculated by determining what percentage of the year the employee has worked and multiplying this percentage times the vacation due if the employee worked the entire year. 

(H) The following holidays shall be observed: New Year’s Day, Washington’s Birthday, Good Friday, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, General Election Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. In case of emergency or because of the nature of the work, the employee may be required by the department head to work on a holiday. When this occurs the employee shall be entitled to a compensating day off. Such compensating day off will be arranged at the convenience of the employee and department head. If a holiday falls in the vacation period on a day that would normally be a working day for the employee, he shall be entitled to a compensating day off. Such compensating day off will be arranged at the convenience of the employee and the department head. (Ord. 2485 §§ 1 – 8, 1960) 


147.03       Sick leave.

(A) All city employees, except firemen and policemen but including the fire chief and battalion chiefs and the police chief, shall be entitled to a maximum of 10 working days’ sick leave in each calendar year without diminution of their salary or compensation. It is the intention of this amendatory provision to exclude policemen and firemen, except the fire chief and battalion chiefs and the police chief, from the provisions of this section, as amended, since such provisions as sick leave and the compensation therefor are now covered between the city and policemen and firemen under the terms and conditions of collective bargaining agreements as executed from time to time. 

(B) As used in this section, certain terms are defined as follows:

(1) "Calendar year" means January 1st to December 31st each year.

(2) "Sick leave" means absence from work for one-half day or more due to the illness of the employee or absence from work due to sickness of a member of an employee’s immediate family. Absence of an employee due to a death in the immediate family shall be considered sick leave and shall be limited to a maximum credit against sick leave of three days for each request. Absence due to required attendance of personal business shall be considered sick leave and shall be limited to a maximum credit against sick leave of two days per calendar year; provided, that for credit against sick leave for the purpose of attending personal business, prior approval must be obtained from the employee’s department head. 

(3) "Immediate family" means the parents, spouse, children or brothers or sisters of the city employee concerned. 

(C) Employees with less than one full calendar year of employment shall be allowed one day of sick leave for each month of service. After such employee has accrued one full year of service, this subsection will not apply. (Clarification further retroactive.)

(D) At the end of each calendar year, all unused sick leave shall be canceled. Sick leave shall not be cumulative from year to year and there shall be no compensation paid in lieu of unused sick leave upon termination of employment. However, a maximum of one-half of an employee’s unused sick leave shall be considered as additional paid vacation increment during and for the following year only. Such vacation increment shall not be cumulative and there shall be no compensation paid in lieu of unused sick leave vacation increment upon termination of employment. 

(E) Employees shall present a medical report or certificate from an accredited medical doctor for any absence due to sickness of the employee or sickness of a member of the employee’s immediate family extending for more than three consecutive days. Such medical report or certificate shall be filed by the department head with the city clerk or finance clerk for inclusion with the employee’s payroll records. 

(F) All absences for sick leave in excess of the amount allowed under this section shall be reported to the city clerk or finance clerk by the respective department head in charge of each department. Reports shall be filed at least five days prior to the payroll period date. 

(G) Absence due to injury incurred in the line of duty shall not be charged against any employee’s sick leave. 

(H) Council may, by resolution, promulgate and adopt such regulations permitted by law concerning and governing city sick leave policy.

(I) Upon an accumulation of 60 days of sick leave in any one calendar year, council shall review the employment status of such employee. 

(J) In addition to the maximum sick leave provided in this section, for extended and serious illness, all city employees may, upon proper application, submitted to and approved by council, be entitled to one additional day of sick leave for each year of their employment by the city. It is the intention of this subsection to grant such additional sick leave to all employees only in cases where the ordinary sick leave has been exhausted, and where there is a bona fide serious illness requiring additional sick leave. This provision shall not alter or change any other part of this section, and shall be retroactive to January 1, 1962. (Ord. 2749 §§ 1, 2, 1970; Ord. 2550 § 1, 1962; Ord. 2542 §§ 2 – 9, 1962)


147.04       Fidelity bonds required.

(A) The city treasurer shall give lawful fidelity bond to the commonwealth of Pennsylvania with a surety company authorized by law to act as surety, to be approved by council, in the amount of $251,000, or in such amount as shall be established by law as a statutory minimum. In addition, the city treasurer shall furnish adequate insurance protection against any and all losses of city funds through fire, burglary, larceny, theft, robbery or forgery. Such insurance shall be approved by council and shall be in the amount of $10,000. 

(B) The city engineer, city solicitor, city controller and finance director shall each give lawful bond to the city with a surety or other company authorized by law to act as surety, to be approved by council, in the amount of $10,000 each, conditioned for the faithful performance of their respective individual official duties.   

(C) The receiver of taxes shall give lawful bond to the city with a surety or other company authorized by law to act as surety, to be approved by council, in the amount of $150,000, conditioned for the faithful performance of his official duties. (Ord. 2751 §§ 1 – 6, 1970)


Article 151       POLICE MAGISTRATE

Sections:

151.01  Levy and collection of court costs.

151.02  Duties of police magistrate.

151.03  Monthly payment to city treasurer and report to council.

151.04  Issuance of complaint – Contents and amendment.

151.05  Complaint dismissal or adjudication of guilt – Judgment.

151.06  Executive process to collect fine and costs.


151.01       Levy and collection of court costs.

(A) The costs of prosecutions for violations of any city ordinance brought in and before the city magistrate’s court shall be $5.00 as court costs. Any costs accrued by an arresting officer for serving warrants, mileage or items other than the aforesaid court costs shall be in addition thereto. 

(B) In default of payment of any costs imposed by the magistrate, the person so defaulting shall be committed to the county jail, one day for each $1.00 of such costs, or until such costs are paid. Time spent in jail as partial serving of a sentence under any city ordinance or by this section for fine or costs shall in no way reduce such fine and costs so imposed by the police magistrate.

(C) Any costs collected under this section shall be collected for such use of the city as council may direct. (Ord. 2593 §§ 1 – 3, 1964)


151.02       Duties of police magistrate.

It shall be the duty of the police magistrate to hear and dispose of all such cases according to law, without unnecessary delay, and to keep a record of the same which shall include the name, age and nationality of the party arrested, the cause of arrest, and final disposition of the case, together with the amount of fines imposed and paid. (Ord. 145 § 3, 1976) 


151.03       Monthly payment to city treasurer and report to council.

It is hereby made the duty of the police magistrate to pay to the city treasurer, monthly, all fines collected by him, taking the treasurer’s receipt therefor, and to present to council at the first regular meeting of each month a full report of the number of cases heard by him, the amount of fines imposed and paid, and the amount paid to the city treasurer. In no case shall the city be liable to the magistrate for any fees or other compensation for any services performed pursuant to the provisions of this article. (Ord. Unkn., 1880) 


151.04       Issuance of complaint – Contents and amendment.

Whenever complaint is made under oath before the mayor or any alderman charging any person with a violation of any city ordinance, it shall be the duty of such officer to enter the same on his docket, and in his discretion, having regard to the exigency of the case, to issue a summons or warrant to bring the alleged offender before him for trial. Every such complaint should set forth some specific act done or omitted at a definite time within the city limits by the accused in violation of some provisions of a city ordinance, which should be described both by number and section and briefly by giving its substance or purpose. However, this shall not be construed to prevent such official from having and disposing of all cases of persons arrested on view and brought before him by any policeman or constable of the city, nor to prevent the magistrate from causing any complaint to be amended on the hearing of any case in accordance with the facts as developed on such hearing. (Ord. 293 § 1, 1888) 


151.05       Complaint dismissal or adjudication of guilt – Judgment.

If upon the hearing of any complaint before the mayor or any alderman the evidence is not deemed sufficient, the complaint shall be dismissed and the accused released without delay. If the evidence be deemed sufficient, the magistrate shall adjudge the accused guilty and assess the penalty, and enter judgment for the penalty provided in the city ordinance, together with judgment that the defendant, in default of payment of such fine or penalty, and costs, shall be imprisoned for a definite time, to be specified in the judgment, not exceeding 30 days in the county jail. (Ord. 293 § 2, 1888) 


151.06       Executive process to collect fine and costs.

Executive process or any judgment for fine or penalty imposed by any city ordinance may issue forthwith unless the defendant, being a resident of the city, gives notice of an appeal, in which case such process shall not issue for five days after the judgment. Such process shall command the officer to whom it is directed to collect the amount of fine, penalty and costs from the defendant, and in default of payment that he take the body of the defendant into custody and convey him to jail, there to be imprisoned for the period fixed by judgment, unless the fine, penalty and costs are sooner paid. (Ord. 293 § 4, 1888) 


Article 153       

JOINT ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY COUNCIL*

Sections:

153.01  Creation and membership.

153.02  Compensation and expenses.

153.03  Chair.

153.04  Advisory function and limitation.

153.05  Meetings.

153.06  Duties of the council.

153.07  Funds and accounting.

*Code reviser’s note: Section 4 of Ordinance No. 3511 set out as follows:

Section 4. Sunset. The Environmental Advisory council created pursuant to this Ordinance shall cease to exist and the terms of all members thereof shall terminate as of January 1, 2008 unless prior to that date the governing bodies of the three forming municipalities shall take proper governmental action to extend the existence thereof for an additional term to be defined in such action.


153.01       Creation and membership. 

(A) The City of Meadville hereby creates an environmental advisory council, jointly with the municipalities of the township of Vernon and the township of West Mead.

(B) The environmental advisory council shall be composed of six members, two residents representing each of the three municipalities.

(C) Council members shall be appointed in accordance with the following procedures:

(1) Each governing body shall appoint two members of the council, each of whom shall be a resident of the appointing municipality.

(2) Whenever possible, one member appointed by each participating municipality shall also be a member of the municipal planning board of commission of that municipality.

(3) Council members’ terms of office shall expire on the first Monday in January following the last year of their term of office; provided, however, that members shall continue to serve until their successors are appointed by the appropriate municipality(ies) in the event successors are not appointed as of the first Monday in January following the last year of their term.

(4) Members of the council shall serve terms of three years, except that the terms of the initial members shall be so staggered that the terms of one-third of the membership shall expire each year. Terms of the initial members shall be staggered after the appointment of the initial six members of the council through the drawing of lots among them or other method acceptable to the members at their organizational meeting. Members shall continue to serve until their successors are duly appointed by the appropriate participating municipality(ies). (Ord. 3511 § 1, 1998)


153.02       Compensation and expenses.

Members shall receive no compensation for their services but may be reimbursed for the expenses actually and necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their duties when, as and to the extent that the environmental advisory council may have funds available for such purposes. The participating municipalities may, from time to time, elect in their sole discretion to make appropriations to or on behalf of the environmental advisory council. The environmental advisory council may accept funding from public or private sources to further its activities. The adoption of the ordinance codified in this article does not in any way commit the adopting municipality to make any appropriation or payment to or for the benefit of the environmental advisory council. (Ord. 3511 § 1, 1998)


153.03       Chair.

A chair of the environmental advisory council shall be elected annually during the month of January by the members of the council. (Ord. 3511 § 1, 1998)


153.04       Advisory function and limitation.

(A) The environmental advisory council is to be advisory to and shall coordinate its activities with the elected officials of the participating municipalities and with appropriate agencies of the participating municipalities, including, but not limited to, their planning commissions and their park and recreation boards, on matters dealing with protection, conservation, management, promotion and use of natural resources, relating to French Creek and its tributaries.

(B) The environmental advisory council shall not exercise any powers or perform any duties which by law are conferred or imposed upon a commonwealth agency. (Ord. 3511 § 1, 1998)


153.05       Meetings.

Meeting of the council shall be held at the call of the chair and at such other times as the council shall determine. All meetings of the council shall be open to the public, except for meetings which may be held in executive session under applicable law for the purpose of preparing and delivering advice to the governing bodies of the participating municipalities concerning the acquisition or disposition of real estate. The council shall keep records of its meetings and activities and shall make a written annual report to the governing bodies of the three municipalities. To the extent that any of the municipalities publish or file annual reports of their activities, the annual report of the environmental advisory council shall be included in that municipality’s annual report. If any of the participating municipalities do not publish or file an annual report, such municipality(ies) shall make appropriate arrangements to have the annual report of the environmental advisory council made known and available to its citizens. (Ord. 3511 § 1, 1998)


153.06       Duties of the council.

The environmental advisory council shall have the following duties relating to French Creek and its tributaries:

(A) To advise the appropriate governmental agencies concerning the benefits of, potential for, methods of accomplishing and other facts relevant to the creation of a "greenway" adjacent to French Creek and its tributaries in each of the participating municipalities; and

(B) To identify environmental problems, issues, and trends affecting the participating municipalities; and

(C) To recommend plans and programs to the appropriate agencies of the municipalities for the promotion and conservation of the natural resources and for the protection and improvement of the quality of the environment within the corporate boundaries of the three municipalities; and

(D) To make recommendations as to the appropriate use of open land areas; and

(E) To develop, recommend, and, when authorized, promote a community environmental program designed to enhance public awareness of environmental issues affecting the municipalities, the alternatives available to address such issues and the impact each alternative may have upon the environment and the development of the region; and

(F) To work cooperatively with public, private, commercial, and industrial entities in the area to develop a better understanding of the potential environmental impacts of public and private sector actions and to coordinate activities to minimize any negative impact arising therefrom; and

(G) To keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned, including but not limited to flood-prone areas, wetlands, and other unique natural areas; and

(H) To advise the appropriate local government agencies in the acquisition of property, both real and personal, whether by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, easement, devise or lease; and

(I) To undertake such additional environmental tasks as requested by the joint action of the governing bodies of the three participating municipalities. (Ord. 3511 § 1, 1998)


153.07       Funds and accounting.

To the extent that the environmental advisory council receives public or private funding, all such funds shall be held, administered, and paid on behalf of the environmental advisory council by the finance officials of (municipality) under and in accord with the (hold for agency name which covers city/township combinations) generally accepted accounting practices applicable to municipalities. (Ord. 3511 § 1, 1998)


Article 155       

FRENCH CREEK COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS

Sections:

155.01  Title.

155.02  Purpose.

155.03  Membership and term of agreement.

155.04  Approval of bylaws.

155.05  Appropriation of funds.

155.06  Authority to act.

155.07  Organizational structure to implement agreement.

155.08  Real or personal property.

155.09  No entity created by this agreement.


155.01       Title.

This article shall be known as the French Creek council of governments organizational ordinance. (Ord. 3571 § 1, 2000)


155.02       Purpose. 

The purpose of this article is to promote the order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the City of Meadville through its participation in the French Creek council of governments and its cooperative programs as authorized by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Law of 1996, as may in the future be amended. (Ord. 3571 § 2, 2000)


155.03       Membership and term of agreement.

The City of Meadville hereby accepts membership into the French Creek COG and shall remain a member unless and until such time as the city council of the City of Meadville shall repeal the ordinance establishing its membership and provide notice in writing to the remaining member governments of the French Creek COG. (Ord. 3571 § 3, 2000)


155.04       Approval of bylaws. 

The city council of the City of Meadville is authorized to approve future bylaws and, from time to time, amended bylaws for the COG on behalf of the City of Meadville by resolutions, duly adopted. (Ord. 3571 § 4, 2000)


155.05       Appropriation of funds. 

The city council of the City of Meadville is hereby authorized to appropriate moneys from the governmental funds of the City of Meadville as approved by resolution duly adopted to: (A) pay any membership fees and/or dues in the COG; (B) pay the City of Meadville proportionate share of any other miscellaneous administrative fees and costs; and (C) pay the City of Meadville proportionate share of any program assessments for projects or programs undertaken through the COG in which the City of Meadville participates. (Ord. 3571 § 5, 2000)


155.06       Authority to act. 

The city council of the City of Meadville is authorized to take all actions required to effectuate this article. (Ord. 3571 § 6, 2000)


155.07       Organizational structure to implement agreement.

No new or custom organizational structure shall be required to implement the agreement except as may be provided in bylaws of the French Creek COG as may, from time to time, be approved by the city council of the City of Meadville by resolutions duly adopted in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 3571 § 7, 2000)


155.08       Real or personal property. 

No real or personal property shall be acquired, managed, licensed or disposed by the French Creek council of governments except as may be authorized from time to time by action of the city council of the City of Meadville by resolution duly adopted in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 3571 § 8, 2000)


155.09       No entity created by this agreement. 

There is no intent for the French Creek COG to act as a separate entity or to have direct employees at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this article, therefore there is no need for that entity to be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits, including Social Security, for its employees. If and to the extent that the French Creek COG may hereafter have direct employees pursuant to authority granted by the city council of the City of Meadville pursuant to resolutions duly adopted in the manner provided by law, the French Creek COG shall have the full authority and power to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits to the full extent permitted by law. (Ord. 3571 § 9, 2000)


Article 160 APPLICABLE PROVISIONS OF THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE

Sections:

160.01    Definitions.

160.02    Leased employees and independent contractors.

160.03    Limit on compensation.

160.04    Maximum annual benefit.

160.05    Limit on annual additions.

160.06    Direct rollovers.

160.07    Minimum required distributions.

160.08    Approved domestic relations orders.

160.09    Credit for qualified military service.

160.10    Vesting upon plan termination.

160.11    Consent for lump-sum distributions.

160.12    Pick-up contributions.

160.13    PPA and HEART Act.

160.14    Pension fund for exclusive benefit of participants.

160.15    No reversion to employer.

160.16    Heroes Earnings Assistance Tax Relief Act of 2008 (HEART Act). 

160.17    Vesting at normal retirement age.


160.01 Definitions.

(a) The following definitions apply for purposes of this article only:

(i) “Leased employee” shall mean, effective as of January 1, 1997, any person (other than an employee of the recipient) who pursuant to an agreement between the recipient and any other person (“leasing organization”) has performed services for the recipient (or for the recipient and related persons determined in accordance with IRC Section 414(n)(6)) on a substantially full-time basis for a period of at least one year, and such services are performed under primary direction or control by the recipient.

(ii) “Limitation year” shall mean the plan year. (Ord. 3655 § 1, 2008)


160.02 Leased employees and independent contractors.

(a) Leased employees and independent contractors are not eligible to participate in this plan. Any person whom the council does not regard as being an employee shall not be eligible to participate. (Ord. 3655 § 1, 2008)


160.03 Limit on compensation.

(a) Compensation is subject to the limitation under IRC Section 401(a)(17), which is $230,000 for the plan year beginning in 2008. The limit is automatically adjusted periodically, without formal amendment, for changes in the law and cost-of-living adjustments under IRC Section 401(a)(17). (Ord. 3655 § 1, 2008)


160.04 Maximum annual benefit.

(a) General Rule. Except as otherwise provided, this plan shall at all times comply with the provisions of IRC Section 415 and the regulations thereunder, the terms of which are specifically incorporated herein by reference. If a benefit payable to a participant under this plan would otherwise exceed the limit under IRC Section 415, the benefit will be reduced to the maximum permissible benefit.

(b) Effective Date. If there is more than one permissible effective date for any required change in the IRC Section 415(b) provisions, then the change shall be effective as of the latest permissible effective date; however, any adjustment in the dollar limit under IRC Section 415(b)(1)(A), whether required or permissible, shall take effect automatically as of the earliest permissible effective date. The “applicable mortality table” in Rev. Rul. 2001-62 is effective from December 31, 2002, through December 31, 2007. Effective as of January 1, 2008, the “applicable mortality table” and “applicable interest rate” are found in Rev. Rul. 2007-67.

(c) No Reduction in Accrued Benefits. Notwithstanding the above, no change in the limits under this article shall reduce the benefit of any participant.

(d) Multiple Plans. If a participant also participates in one or more other plans that are required to be aggregated with this plan for purposes of determining the limits under IRC Section 415(b) or (e), and if the aggregated benefits would otherwise exceed the limit under IRC Section 415(b) or (e), then benefits shall be reduced first under this plan. [Historical Note: IRC Section 415(e) applied for limitation years beginning prior to 2000.]

(e) Mandatory Contributions. Participant contributions are annual additions, and any benefit attributable to participant contributions is not included in the benefit subject to the limits of IRC Section 415(b) or (e). This subsection does not apply to contributions “picked up” in accordance with IRC Section 414(h) including contributions to the City of Meadville city employees retirement and pension fund which are treated as pick-up contributions under IRC Section 414(h).

(f) Permissive Service Credit. Effective as of January 1, 1998, if a participant makes a purchase of permissive service credit (within the meaning of IRC Section 415(n)) under the plan, the benefit derived from the contributions made to purchase the service credit shall be treated as part of the benefit subject to the limitations under this section.

(g) To the extent applicable, the above provisions and limitations shall be subject to IRC Section 415(b)(2)(G). (Ord. 3741 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 3655 § 1, 2008)


160.05 Limit on annual additions.

(a) Annual Additions. Except as otherwise provided, annual additions (which include participant contributions) under this plan shall at all times comply with the provisions of IRC Section 415(c) and the regulations thereunder, the terms of which are specifically incorporated herein by reference. If an annual addition would otherwise exceed the limit under IRC Section 415(c), the excess annual addition will be eliminated in accordance with methods permitted under Rev. Proc. 2008-50 (Rev. Proc. 2006-27 prior to 2009) or its successor.

(b) Multiple Plans. If a participant also participates in one or more other plans that are required to be aggregated with this plan for purposes of determining the limits under IRC Section 415(c), and if the annual additions would otherwise exceed the limit under IRC Section 415(c), annual additions will first be reduced under the other plan. If there is more than one other plan, annual additions will first be reduced under the plan with the greatest amount of annual additions.

(c) Effective Date. The limits under which IRC Section 415(c) are adjusted periodically in accordance with changes in the law or cost-of-living adjustments without the need for a plan amendment. If there is more than one permissible effective date for any required change relating to IRC Section 415(c), then the change shall be effective as of the earliest permissible effective date. (Ord. 3741 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 3655 § 1, 2008)


160.06 Direct rollovers.

(a) Effective as of January 1, 1993, if a participant, a spousal beneficiary, or an alternate payee (who is a spouse or former spouse of a participant) is entitled (under other provisions of this plan) to receive an “eligible rollover distribution” of at least $200.00, the distributee may elect that the plan administrator transfer all or part (provided, that the part is at least $500.00) to any “eligible retirement plan” capable of accepting such a transfer.

(b) For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:

(i) An “eligible rollover distribution” is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: (i) any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee’s designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of 10 years or more; (ii) any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under IRC Section 401(a)(9); (iii) the portion of any distribution that is not includible in gross income (determined without regard to the exclusion for net unrealized appreciation with respect to employer securities), and (iv) effective as of January 1, 2002, any hardship distribution. Effective as of January 1, 2002, clause (iii) does not apply to any after tax participant contributions that are paid to an individual retirement account or annuity described in IRC Section 408(a) or (b), or to a qualified defined contribution plan described in IRC Section 401(a) or 403(a) or effective January 1, 2007, a 403(b) annuity contract that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so includible.

(ii) An “eligible retirement plan” is an individual retirement account described in IRC Section 408(a), an individual retirement annuity described in IRC Section 408(b), an annuity plan described in IRC Section 403(a), or a qualified trust described in IRC Section 401(a), that accepts the distributee’s eligible rollover distribution. However, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to a surviving spouse, prior to January 1, 2002, an eligible retirement plan was an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity. Effective as of January 1, 2002, an “eligible retirement plan” includes an annuity contract described in IRC Section 403(b) and an eligible plan under IRC Section 457(b) which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this plan. Effective January 1, 2008, an eligible retirement plan shall include a Roth IRA as that term is defined in IRC Section 408A(b) that agrees to separately account for amounts transferred from this plan.

(iii) A distributee includes an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee’s or former employee’s surviving spouse and the employee’s or former employee’s spouse or former spouse who is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations order, as defined in IRC Section 414(p)(11), are distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse or former spouse.

(iv) Effective as of January 1, 2002, an employee may, in accordance with IRC Section 457(e)(17), make a trustee-to-trustee transfer from an eligible deferred compensation plan (as defined in IRC Section 457(b)) to this plan for the purpose of purchasing service credit (to the extent that such purchases are permitted under the terms of the plan) or repaying a cash-out of contributions refunded under the plan.

(v) Effective as of January 1, 2007, if a distribution to a non-spouse beneficiary would otherwise be an “eligible rollover distribution” the distribution may be transferred to an individual retirement account or individual retirement plan to the extent permitted by IRC Section 402(c)(11). (Ord. 3655 § 1, 2008)


160.07 Minimum required distributions.

(a) Notwithstanding any provision in this plan to the contrary, the distribution of a participant’s benefits shall be made in accordance with the requirements and conditions of and shall otherwise comply with IRC Section 401(a)(9). For purposes of complying with IRC Section 401(a)(9), life expectancies shall be determined in accordance with the 1987 proposed regulations prior to January 1, 2003, and with the final regulations (Section 1.401(a)(9)-1 through Section 1.401(a)(9)-9) on or after January 1, 2003.

(b) Effective as of January 1, 1997, distribution of a participant’s benefits shall begin not later than April 1st of the calendar year following the later of:

(1) The calendar year in which the participant attains age 70 and one-half; or

(2) The calendar year in which the participant retires.

Distributions must be made over a period not exceeding the life of the participant or the joint lives of a participant and his beneficiary.

(c) Distributions to a participant and his beneficiaries shall only be made in accordance with the incidental death benefit requirements of IRC Section 401(a)(9)(G) and the regulations thereunder.

(d) This section does not authorize the payment of any benefit in any form not permitted under another provision of the plan. (Ord. 3655 § 1, 2008)


160.08 Approved domestic relations orders.

(a) All rights and benefits, including elections, provided to a participant in this plan shall be subject to the rights afforded to any “alternate payee” under what is recognized pursuant to state law support provisions as an “approved domestic relations order.” (Ord. 3655 § 1, 2008)


160.09 Credit for qualified military service.

(a) Effective as of December 12, 1994, notwithstanding any provision of this plan to the contrary, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service will be provided in accordance with IRC Section 414(u). (Ord. 3655 § 1, 2008)


160.10 Vesting upon plan termination.

(a) Upon the termination of this plan, or complete discontinuance of contributions (within the meaning of pre-ERISA IRC Section 401(a)(7)) to this plan, each employee as of the date of such termination or discontinuance shall become vested to the extent that the plan is funded. (Ord. 3655 § 1, 2008)


160.11 Consent for lump-sum distributions.

(a) Effective January 1, 2006, notwithstanding any other provision of the plan, any distribution to a participant made prior to the earlier of age 62 or normal retirement age of an amount in excess of $1,000 that is an eligible rollover distribution as set forth in the plan and the IRC shall be made only upon consent of the participant. (Ord. 3655 § 1, 2008)


160.12 Pick-up contributions.

All mandatory employee contributions made to the City of Meadville city employees pension fund on or after passage of an appropriate resolution by the employer shall be paid or “picked up” by the employer in lieu of contributions by the employees and thereafter treated as employer contributions for federal income taxation purposes within the meaning of Section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. The contributions may be paid or picked up by a reduction in the cash salary, by an offset against future salary increases or a combination of both. Affected employees shall not have the option of choosing to receive the picked up contributions directly in lieu of having them paid by the employer to the plans. Employee contributions made to the plan prior to the passage of an appropriate resolution by the employer shall not be affected by the pick up. Notwithstanding the foregoing, contributions so picked up shall continue to be treated as employee contributions for all purposes of state and local law in the same manner and to the same extent as employee contributions made prior to the date of the pick up; including, by way of illustration and not limitation, being treated as part of the affected employee’s compensation for both Pennsylvania and local income tax laws and for purposes of computing any benefits under the affected employee’s pension plan. (Ord. 3655 § 1, 2008)


160.13 PPA and HEART Act.

The following provisions are added to the plan. Any prior provisions that are inconsistent with the provisions in this amendment are hereby superseded.

(1) The purpose of these plan amendments is to comply with the Pension Protection Act of 2006 (PPA) and the Heroes Earnings Assistance Relief Tax Act (HEART Act). Notwithstanding anything in this plan to the contrary, this plan shall be interpreted so as to comply with the applicable required provisions of the PPA and the HEART Act.

(2) For the purposes of IRC Section 415(b)(1)(A), effective as of January 1, 2008, the “applicable mortality table” and “applicable interest rate” are found in Rev. Rul. 2007-67. The “applicable mortality table” in Rev. Rul. 2001-62 was effective from December 31, 2002, through December 31, 2007.

(3) 415(c) Compensation. For the purposes of this section, “compensation” includes only those items specified in Treas. Reg. Section 1.415(c)-2(b)1 or (2) and excludes all items listed in Treas. Reg. Section 1.415(c)-2(c), the terms of which are specifically incorporated herein by reference. Effective as of January 1, 2009, to the extent required by the Heroes Earnings Assistance Relief Tax Act of 2008 (HEART Act), differential wage payments shall be included in compensation.

(4) Effective as of January 1, 2007, an “eligible rollover distribution” shall include any eligible rollover distribution (including distributions containing after tax contributions) that is transferred in a direct trustee-to-trustee transfer to a 403(b) annuity contract or a qualified trust under IRC Section 401(a) that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so includible.

(5) Effective as of January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA is an “eligible retirement plan.”

(6) Nonspousal Rollover. Effective January 1, 2007, if a beneficiary who is not a surviving spouse is entitled to receive what would otherwise be an “eligible rollover distribution,” the beneficiary may, in accordance with IRC Section 402(c)(11), make a trustee-to-trustee transfer of that amount to an IRA or individual retirement annuity (other than an endowment contract); provided, that:

(a) The transfer is made not later than the end of the fourth year after the year of the participant’s death; and

(b) The account or annuity to which the amount is transferred is treated as an inherited IRA or individual retirement annuity in accordance with IRC Section 408(d)(3)(C).

(7) HEART Act. Effective for participant deaths occurring while performing qualified military service (as defined in IRC Section 414(u)) on or after January 1, 2007, the plan will provide retirement benefits and service credit to the extent required by the HEART Act. (Ord. 3693 § 1 (Exh. A), 2011)


160.14 Pension fund for exclusive benefit of participants.

Pension Fund for Sole Benefit of Participants. The income and principal of the pension fund are for the sole use and benefit of the participants and beneficiaries of this plan. (Ord. 3700 § 1, 2012)


160.15 No reversion to employer.

At no time shall it be possible for the plan assets to be used for, or diverted to, any purpose other than for the exclusive benefit of the participants and their beneficiaries, except that contributions made by the employer may be returned to the employer if:

(a) The contribution was made due to a mistake of fact and the contribution is returned within one year of the mistaken payment of the contribution; or

(b) The plan is terminated. (Ord. 3700 § 2, 2012)


160.16 Heroes Earnings Assistance Tax Relief Act of 2008 (HEART Act). 1

Except where otherwise specifically provided to the contrary in this plan, effective for deaths occurring on or after January 1, 2007, the plan will provide retirement benefits and service credit to the extent that the plan is required and mandated by the Heart Act to provide said benefits and/or service credit. (Ord. 3741 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015)


160.17 Vesting at normal retirement age.2

Upon attainment of normal retirement age a participant shall be 100 percent vested in his normal retirement benefit. (Ord. 3741 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015)1

Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 3741 adds the provisions of this section as 160.13. The section has been editorially renumbered to prevent duplication of numbering. 2

Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 3741 adds the provisions of this section as 160.14. The section has been editorially renumbered to prevent duplication of numbering. 


Article 161 FIREMEN’S PENSION FUND

Sections:

161.01    Creation of fund.

161.02    Monthly contribution by firemen – Exception for leave of absence.

161.03    Gifts, bequests or donations for fund.

161.04    Annual appropriation by council for fund.

161.05    Fund for benefit of association members only.

161.06    Fund control by firemen’s pension board – Composition, term and vacancy.

161.07    Board records, meetings and procedure.

161.08    Surety bond for board treasurer – Premium payment.

161.09    Board reports to council and association.

161.10    Investments authorized – Mortgage limitations.

161.11    Creation of association – Eligibility for membership.

161.12    Duties of association members.

161.13    Expulsion from association membership.

161.14    Qualifications to retire on pension.

161.15    Mandatory retirement at age 65.

161.16    Retiree subject to reserve service until unfit.

161.17    Pension for service-incurred disability.

161.18    Pensions, widows’ pensions and service increments.

161.19    Refund of contributions to widow, children or estate.

161.20    Payment of disability pension subject to state law.

161.21    Benefit payments chargeable only to pension fund.

161.22    First paid workday as effective date for commencing accrued time.

161.23    Severability – Validity of remaining provisions.

161.24    Vesting.

161.25    Transferred participants.

161.26    Distributions for health insurance.

161.27    Pensions of members hired after January 30, 2013.


161.01 Creation of fund.

Pursuant to the provisions of the Act of June 23, 1931, P.L. 932, as amended, the city created a paid firemen’s pension and retirement system, which is known and designated as the paid firemen’s pension fund, and is hereafter referred to in this article as the “fund”. On February 10, 1968, pursuant to proceedings lawfully taken under and pursuant to the Act of July 15, 1957, P.L. 901, No. 399, as amended, the Optional Third Class City Charter Law, the City of Meadville became an optional charter city operating as a council-manager form of government. Since February 10, 1968, the fund has been maintained, administered and continuously operated as a pension fund of the city as an optional charter city under and pursuant to the terms of the Act of July 15, 1957, P.L. 901, No. 399, as amended. (Ord. 3562 § 1, 2000; Ord. 2362 § 1, 1954) 


161.02 Monthly contribution by firemen – Exception for leave of absence.

(A) Except as has been heretofore (and may hereafter from time to time be) otherwise provided in an applicable labor relations agreement approved by the city council of the City of Meadville, no participant contributions shall be required to be made to the firemen’s pension fund (“fund”) during the last six months of 1997 other than any contribution required pursuant to 53 P.S. Section 39322(b)(2) (which shall not exceed $1.00 per month per member). In each year thereafter, contributions by the fund members employed in the fire department will be set at zero (other than any contribution required pursuant to 53 P.S. Section 39322(b)(2) (which shall not exceed $1.00 per month per member), unless according to an annual study performed by the actuary selected by the city, participant contributions are necessary to ensure that no contributions from the city’s general fund are required to keep the fund actuarially sound or otherwise required pursuant to state laws, including for this purpose the Third Class City Code. If contributions are required pursuant to the previous sentence, participant contributions will be set at that percent of compensation necessary to ensure no contributions from the city’s general fund are necessary to the fund. No participant contributions shall be required that shall be in excess of the Third Class City Code, 53 P.S. Section 39320 et seq. In the above determination of the city contribution to the fund there shall be allocated to the fund the general municipal pension system state aid received by the city as a result of financial requirements of the fund pursuant to Act 205, 53 P.S. Section 895.101 et seq. The above allocation formula shall not be binding on the city in its actual split of general municipal pension system state aid between pension plans. (This means that in determining the firefighters’ annual contribution, if any, the maximum contribution shall not exceed that amount necessary to make up the difference between the moneys attributable to the number of firefighters pursuant to Section 402(e)(2)(ii) subject to the limitation contained in Section 402(f)(2) (calculated separately for the firefighters) of Act 205 of 1984, 53 P.S. Sections 895.402(e)(2)(ii) and 402(f)(2), and the financial requirements of the fund pursuant to Act 205. The firefighters’ annual contribution, if any, shall not exceed the maximum contribution in the Third Class City Code.) Said sum shall be inclusive of all required payments to the fund pursuant to any and all provisions of this section. The city treasurer, or such person as he or she may designate, is hereby authorized to deduct such sum from the pay, salary or compensation of each paid fireman, which sum shall be applied to the purpose of this article. The city treasurer, or such person as he or she may designate, is hereby authorized and directed to make such deductions and to pay the same to the treasurer of the firemen’s pension fund board.

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this subsection (A), members’ contributions shall be as follows: three percent of annual salary retroactive to January 1, 2012, for the period January 1, 2012, through December 31, 2012; four percent of annual salary for the period January 1, 2013, through December 31, 2013; and five percent of annual salary for the period January 1, 2014, through December 31, 2014.

(B) The payment of the monthly sum or contribution hereinbefore provided shall cease and determine at the time the member commences to receive the pension hereinafter provided. Such payment shall continue even though such member would qualify for pension benefits, if the member has not elected to retire or has not been involuntarily retired by the city.

(C) Any member of the association who has been granted a leave of absence from the fire department by council shall be excused from any contribution to the fund during such absence. The leave of absence shall not interrupt the continuity of service of such member and the first six months of any leave of absence shall not be deducted from the years of service of the member; however, any months in excess of six months spent on leave of absence shall not count towards credit for years of service. Any leave of absence shall not be granted for a period exceeding one year, except in the case of a member being granted such leave of absence to engage in military service during war or time of emergency. (Ord. 3713 § 1, 2013; Ord. 3657 § 1, 2008; Ord. 3488 § 1, 1998; Ord. 3439 § 1, 1996; Ord. 3174 § 1, 1988; Ord. 2732 §§ 1, 2, 1970) 


161.03 Gifts, bequests or donations for fund.

All gifts, testimonials, bequests, legacies or donations made to the fund or to anyone in trust for the benefit of the fund shall become and be a part of the fund. (Ord. 2362 § 3, 1954) 


161.04 Annual appropriation by council for fund.

There shall be paid to the firemen’s pension fund by council an appropriation made of such sum of money not less than one-half percent nor more than three percent of all city taxes levied by the city, other than taxes levied to pay interest on or to extinguish the debt of the city or any part thereof. However, council shall annually pay to the fund not less than one-half percent of all city taxes levied by the city, other than taxes levied to pay interest on or to extinguish the debt of the city or any part thereof. (Ord. 2732 § 3, 1970) 


161.05 Fund for benefit of association members only.

The fund shall be maintained, directed, applied and distributed only pursuant to provisions herein contained and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto for the benefit only of the members of the association herein created. (Ord. 2362 § 5, 1954) 


161.06 Fund control by firemen’s pension board – Composition, term and vacancy.

The firemen’s pension fund shall be under the care, direction, control and administration of the firemen’s pension board, (hereinafter referred to as the board) which shall consist of the following city officers: the mayor, finance director, city manager, city controller, chief of the fire department and two members of the association. The mayor shall be the president of the board. The membership on the board of the above-named city officers and the fire chief shall be concurrent with their tenure in office. Of the two members of the board chosen by the members of the association, one shall be chosen for a term of two years and one for a term of four years. Biannually thereafter, one member shall be chosen for a term of four years in the place of the member whose term expires. In case of vacancy on the board, exceeding one month by reason of one or more of the above-named city offices not being filled, council shall fill such vacancy by the appointment of another city officer to fill the unexpired term of the office so vacant, except in the case of a vacancy on the board with respect to the offices held by one or both of the two members of the fire department, the fire chief shall hold an election of the members of the association to fill the unexpired term of the office so vacated. The members of the board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed from the fund for any necessary expenditures.   (Ord. 2732 § 4, 1970) 


161.07 Board records, meetings and procedure.

The board shall keep full and accurate accounts of all of its transactions. It shall have full power to make rules for the transaction of its business, application of its funds, its time and place of meeting, etc., subject to the special provisions and regulations contained in this article, and in conformity with the provisions of the acts of assembly hereby applicable. The board shall meet at least every three months at a stated time, or at such times as it by resolution may designate, or upon call of the president, for the transaction of such business as may properly come before it. Special meetings shall also be called by the president at any time upon written request of the majority of the board or of 51 percent of the members of the association. At least 10 days’ written notice shall be given to each member of the board of the time and place of the annual or any special meeting. The notice of a special meeting shall state briefly the special business to come before the meeting and only the business so stated shall be considered at such meeting. A quorum shall consist of four members of the board for the transaction of business. Robert’s Rules of Order shall govern the procedure of business before the board. (Ord. 2362 § 7, 1954)   


161.08 Surety bond for board treasurer – Premium payment.

The treasurer of the board shall give a surety bond to the city for the faithful performance of his duties, in a sum to be set by the board, the premium of such bond to be paid from the fund. (Ord. 2362 § 8, 1954) 


161.09 Board reports to council and association.

The board shall make an annual report to council and to the association on the second Tuesday of February and on November 1st each year of all receipts, disbursement of the fund and such other matters as should properly be embodied in such report. (Ord. 2362 § 9, 1954) 


161.10 Investments authorized – Mortgage limitations.

The board is authorized to invest any money accumulated in the fund in such investments as are authorized under and pursuant to the laws of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania for fiduciaries; including mortgages of one or more individuals or corporations, securing bonds or other obligations; such mortgages shall be a first lien upon improved real estate within this commonwealth, including improved farm lands. The mortgages or the unpaid principal amounts of the obligations shall not exceed two-thirds of a fair value of the real estate as fixed by two persons familiar with real estate values in the vicinity who have actually inspected it and shall so verify by written appraisement preserved among the records of the fiduciary. The principal debt evidenced by the obligations shall be payable in not more than five years after the date of acquisition by the association, or be amortized within a period of not exceeding 20 years from the date of the acquisition, in installments totaling each year not less than three percent thereof. (Ord. 2362 § 10, 1954) 


161.11 Creation of association – Eligibility for membership.

(A) An association is hereby created which shall be known and designated as the paid firemen’s pension fund association, hereinafter referred to as “the association”. 

(B) The membership of the association shall consist of all persons now regularly appointed or now employed by the city, as paid firemen, and such persons hereinafter employed as paid firemen, who shall, within 30 days of the enactment of this section (May 25, 1954) or within 30 days following their appointment elect in writing to accept the provisions hereof. However, no person who is over the age of 40 years shall be employed as a paid fireman, and no clerk or other person shall be eligible for membership in the association unless he is a member of the city fire department, has been appointed as a fireman, has first passed the physical tests required for appointment as fireman, or such physical tests as may from time to time be prescribed by the board, and has been duly qualified and approved by the city civil service commission. 

(C) Each paid fireman who files a written acceptance of the terms and provisions of this article within the period of 30 days as provided for in subsection (B) of this section shall be automatically admitted to full benefits of this system, subject to the qualifications and limitations herein and any present or future acts or laws of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Each paid fireman who fails to file such written acceptance within such period of 30 days shall be admitted to membership only by a majority vote of the members of the association. (Ord. 2362 § 11, 1954)


161.12 Duties of association members.

The members of the association, subject to the limitations of this article and of law, shall: 

(A) Establish rules and regulations for the administration and transaction of business;

(B) Elect officers in accordance with established rules and regulations to represent the association; 

(C) Certify to the board annually a list of the members in good standing, the amount of wages and salaries paid to each member in the city fire department, together with the list of the membership of the association who, during the year, were dismissed, resigned or terminated their service and the date thereof; and 

(D) Furnish to the board, upon request, such information relative to the subject of this article as the board shall require. (Ord. 2362 § 12, 1954) 


161.13 Expulsion from association membership.

A member of the association may be expelled from membership and be deprived of the right of participation in the fund by the two-thirds vote of the association membership for failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article or any general regulation adopted pursuant thereto relating to the management of the fund, or the transaction of the business of the association. No member shall be expelled pursuant to this section without due notice and a hearing at which he shall be afforded the opportunity to present witnesses and be represented by counsel if he so desires. (Ord. 2362 § 13, 1954) 


161.14 Qualifications to retire on pension.

(A) Any member of the association in good standing who has served in the city fire department for 20 years prior to the adoption of this section (February 24, 1970), or who has rendered and completed 20 years’ continuous service as a paid fireman and has attained the age of 50 years shall be entitled to be honorably discharged and retired at his request on a pension from active duty. The pension shall date from the time the member shall have filed his application with the board. However, the city in its sole discretion may require an employee to be retired and to go on pension provided he has at least 20 years of service and has attained the age of 55 years. 

(B) Fifty percent of unused accumulated sick leave for which the member does not receive compensation may be credited as continuous service for the purposes of calculating years of service under the fund to a maximum of 1,296 hours. (Ord. 3657 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2732 § 5, 1970) 


161.15 Mandatory retirement at age 65.

Every member of the association who is regularly employed by the city fire department and reaches the age of 65 years shall be honorably discharged and retired by the board on a pension, to date from the time such member attained the age of 65 years. (Ord. 2362 § 15, 1954) 


161.16 Retiree subject to reserve service until unfit.

Members of the paid fire department who are retired as provided above shall be subject to service from time to time as a firemen’s reserve in cases of emergency until unfit for such service, when they may be finally discharged by reason of age or disability. (Ord. 2362 § 16, 1954) 


161.17 Pension for service-incurred disability.

(A) Any active member of the city fire department and a member of the association who has become permanently and totally disabled by reason of injuries or sickness incurred in the line of duty may, upon his application, be placed on the retired list and be entitled to the full benefits of this article. Such benefits shall become effective and payable as of the date such total and permanent disability is certified, subject nevertheless to the provisions of existing and future laws of Pennsylvania. 

(B) Before any benefits become due or payable under this section, the application and fact of total and permanent disability shall be certified to the board by two reputable physicians, one to be chosen by the board and the other by the applicant. These physicians shall make a physical examination and file their opinion in writing with the board. In case of dispute a third physician shall be chosen by the board. 

(C) The board shall have the authority to order subsequent examinations, from time to time, by physicians in the same manner as set forth above to ascertain if the disability of the pensioner has been removed, and if it has, the board shall terminate the pension and the pensioner shall be reinstated as an active member of the city fire department with the same rank and rating that he had upon retirement. The fees of the first two physicians shall be paid by the board and the third, if necessary, shall be paid by the applicant. 

(D) Any member of the association who becomes permanently and totally disabled by reason of injuries or sickness incurred not in the line of duty shall, after examination and certification as above, be entitled to a pro rata share of the full benefits hereunder as his number of years of service indicates as follows: 

	Service Years (Inclusive)	Pension Benefits

	0 to 11	None 

	12 to 15	3/5 

	16 to 19	4/5 

	20 or over	Full 

(Ord. 2732 § 6, 1970) 


161.18 Pensions, widows’ pensions and service increments.

(A) Payments of pensions shall not be a charge on any fund in the treasury of the city or under its control save the firemen’s pensions fund herein provided for. The basis of the pension of a member shall be determined by the monthly salary of the member at the date of retirement, or the highest average annual salary which he received during any five years of service preceding retirement, whichever is the higher, whether for disability, or by reason of age or service, and except as to service increments provided for in subsection (C) of this section, shall be 55 percent of the annual salary of such member at the time of retirement computed at such monthly or average annual rate, whichever is the higher. In the case of the payment of pensions to members for permanent injury incurred in service, and to families of members killed or who die in service, the amount and commencement of the payment of pensions shall be fixed by regulations of the board or by other provisions of this article. Such regulations shall not take into consideration the amount and duration of workmen’s compensation allowed by law.

(B) From and after January 1, 1972, each active member of the city fire department and a member of the association shall contribute one percent of his monthly wage or salary for the purpose of providing a pension for widows or orphans of such members as set forth hereunder. This contribution shall be in addition to contributions for basic pensioning and servicing as hereinafter provided in this article. This additional contribution shall be paid at the same time and in the same manner as retirement contributions, and may be withdrawn in full, without interest, by persons who leave the employment of the city, subject to the same conditions by which basic retirement contributions may be withdrawn under this article.

Effective for retirements or deaths after August 30, 1992, the widow of an active member of the city fire department or a member who retires on pension or who is killed in service or who dies in the service, or if no widow survives, or if she survives and subsequently dies, then the child or children under the age of 18 years of a member shall, during her lifetime in the case of a widow, or until reaching the age of 18 years in the case of a child or children, be entitled to receive a pension in the amount payable to the member or which would have been payable had he been retired at the time of his death.

(C) In addition to the pension which is authorized to be paid from the firemen’s pension fund by this Act and notwithstanding the limitations therein placed upon such pensions and upon contributions, every contributor who shall become entitled to the pension shall also be entitled to the payment of a “service increment” in accordance with and subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth:

(1) Service increment shall be the sum obtained by computing the number of whole years after having served the minimum 20-year service during which a contributor has been employed by the city and paid out to the city treasury, and multiplying the said number of years so computed by an amount equal to one-fortieth of the retirement allowance which has become payable to such contributor in accordance with the provisions of this article. In arriving at the minimum 20-year service, all members of the firemen’s pension fund who are contributors and who served in the armed forces of the United States subsequent to September 1, 1940, and who were not members of the firemen’s pension fund prior to such military service, shall be entitled to have full credit for each year or fraction thereof, not to exceed five years of such service, upon their payment to the firemen’s pension fund of an amount equal to that which they would have paid had they been members during that period of time equal in length to the period for which they desire credit, and ending with the date of their employment by the city, and their payment to such fund of an additional amount as the equivalent of the contributions of the city, plus any interest the city would have been required to pay on the contributions on account of such military service. In computing the service increments, no employment after the contributor has reached the age of 65 years shall be included, and no service increment shall be paid in excess of $100.00 per month.

(2) Each contributor, from and after the effective date of this amendment, shall pay into the pension fund a monthly sum in addition to his pension contribution, which shall not exceed the sum of $1.00 per month; and provided, that such service increment contribution shall not be paid after a contributor has reached the age of 65 years.

(3) Service increment contributions shall be paid at the same time and in the same manner as pensions, and may be withdrawn in full, without interest, by persons who leave the employment of such city, subject to the same conditions by which retirement contributions may be withdrawn, or by persons who retire before becoming entitled to any service increment.

(4) All members of the fire department who are now contributors to the pension fund and all those employed by the city after the effective date of this amendment, if required to become contributors to the pension fund, shall be subject to the provisions of this Act. However, such payments shall be made by the contribution retroactively from July 20, 1968, or from the date of employment if employed after July 20, 1968.

(D)(1) Entitlement to Special Ad Hoc Adjustment. For so long as such adjustments are mandated by state law, retirees who meet the following qualifications shall be entitled to payment of special ad hoc post-retirement pension adjustments from the firemen’s pension fund effective January 1, 1989, in accord with the provision of this section:

(a) The retiree has terminated active employment with the city as a fireman;

(b) The retiree is receiving a retirement or disability pension benefit from the city on the basis of active employment with the city as a fireman; and

(c) The retiree began receiving the retirement or disability pension benefits before January 1, 1985.

(2) Amount of Special Ad Hoc Adjustment. The special ad hoc post-retirement adjustment under subsection (D)(1) of this section shall be paid to retired firemen as follows:

(a) The sum of $25.00 per month, if on January 1, 1989, the retiree has been retired at least five years but less than 10 years.

(b) The sum of $50.00 per month, if on January 1, 1989, the retiree is totally disable and has been retired less than 10 years.

(c) The sum of $75.00 per month, if on January 1, 1989, the retiree has been retired at least 10 years but less than 20 years.

(d) The sum of $150.00 per month, if on January 1, 1989, the retiree has been retired at least 20 years.

(3) Payment of Special Ad Hoc Adjustment. The special ad hoc adjustment shall apply to a retiree’s retirement of disability pension benefits payable after December 31, 1988. (Ord. 3643 § 1, 2007; Ord. 3562 § 2, 2000; Ord. 3475 § 1, 1997; Ord. 3212 § 1, 1989; Ord. 2796 § 2, 1972) 


161.19 Refund of contributions to widow, children or estate.

(A)  If a member of the association contributing to the fund shall be dismissed from the city fire department or for any other reason ceases to be a member of the department before he becomes entitled to a pension hereunder, the total amount of the contribution paid into the fund by such member shall, upon his request, be refunded in full, without interest. 

(B) In the event of the death of a member of the association before he becomes entitled to the pension herein provided for, the total of the contributions paid into the fund by such member shall be paid, without interest, to the widow of the member, if living, otherwise to his children equally if any, otherwise to his estate. 

(C) In the event of the death of a member of the association while receiving a pension hereunder, but before the amount of pension received shall equal the total of the amount of contributions paid into the fund by the member on his behalf, the difference between the amount of pension paid and the amount contributed to the fund by the deceased member shall be paid to his estate if the widow pension provisions of this article are not applicable. (Ord. 2796 § 3, 1972) 


161.20 Payment of disability pension subject to state law.

In the case of the payment of pensions to members for permanent injury or disability incurred, the amount and commencement of the payment of pension shall be as established in this article or regulations of the board approved by council, but subject to applicable state laws which are binding on optional third class cities. (Ord. 2732 § 7, 1970) 


161.21 Benefit payments chargeable only to pension fund.

Payment for pension and allowances hereunder shall not be a charge on any other fund of the city treasury or of any fund under its control, except the fund as provided for herein. (Ord. 2362 § 21, 1954) 


161.22 First paid workday as effective date for commencing accrued time.

For the purpose of determining the effective date that city firemen shall commence to accrue time towards pension eligibility hereunder, it is hereby ordained that the first day such firefighter actually worked and was paid by the city shall be the effective date of commencing employment hereunder and that the probationary period, after final acceptance by the city, shall be considered as accrued time for pension purposes hereunder. (Ord. 2732 § 8, 1970) 


161.23 Severability – Validity of remaining provisions.

The provisions of this article as amended shall be severable and if any section or subsection is held to be unconstitutional or invalid, the decision shall not be construed to affect the validity of any of the remaining sections or subsections. It is hereby declared as the intent of council that this article would have been adopted as if such unconstitutional or invalid provisions had not been included herein. (Ord. 2732 § 11, 1970; Ord. 2362 § 22, 1954) 


161.24 Vesting.

Each member who completes 12 years of eligible employment as defined in MMC 161.11, and any otherwise qualified dependent of any such member, shall be eligible to receive benefits from the pension fund at such time as the member attains age 50, or would have attained age 50, as follows: 

(A) A member who is a member of the firemen’s pension fund, who for any reason ceases to be employed as a full-time member for the City of Meadville before completing the minimum age and minimum period of continuous service requirements of said pension fund, if any, but after having completed 12 years of full-time service, shall be eligible to vest his retirement benefit subject to the following conditions:

(1) The member must file with the firemen’s pension board a written notice of his intent to vest;

(2) The member must include in the notice the date he intends to terminate his service as a full-time member;

(3) The termination date shall be at least 30 days later than the date of notice to vest;

(4) The member must be in good standing with the fire department on the date of notice to vest; and

(5) The firemen’s pension board shall indicate on the notice to vest the rate of the monthly pay of the member as of the date of the notice to vest or the highest average annual salary which the member received during any five years of service preceding the date, whichever is the higher.

(B) Upon reaching the date which would have been the member’s retirement date had the member continued his full-time employment with the fire department, the member shall notify the firemen’s pension board in writing that the member desires to collect his pension. The amount of retirement benefits the member is entitled to receive shall be computed as follows: 

(1) The initial determination of the member’s base retirement benefits shall be computed on the pay or salary indicated on the notice to vest; and

(2) The portion of the base retirement benefits due the member shall be determined by applying to the base amount the percentage that his years of service actually rendered bears to 20. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, in no event shall the percentage exceed 100 percent. (Ord. 3598 § 1, 2003; Ord. 3439 § 2, 1996)


161.25 Transferred participants.

(A) For employee transfers from the City of Meadville fire department to the City of Meadville police department on or after July 1, 2005, an active participant in the City of Meadville firemen’s pension fund (firemen’s pension fund) immediately prior to transfer, who is transferred to the City of Meadville police department and who, as of the date of transfer, is otherwise eligible to participate in the City of Meadville police pension plan (police pension plan), may, within one year of commencing participation in the police plan, elect to have his years of credited service in the firemen’s pension fund transferred to the police pension plan. Said election shall be made by executing an election form provided by the city and shall be irrevocable. If no election is made within the one-year period specified in this subsection, the participant shall be deemed to have elected not to have his credited service in the firemen’s pension fund transferred to the police pension plan and shall have no further rights to make an election under this section. A participant making such election shall be termed for the purposes of this section as a “transferring participant.”

(B) The consequences of making the election to transfer credited service from the firemen’s pension fund to the police pension plan described in subsection (A) of this section shall be the following:

(1) A transferring participant shall receive service credit in the police pension plan for his or her accumulated years of credited service as a participant in the firemen’s pension fund and, upon transfer of service credit to the police pension fund, the transferring participant’s years of credited service in the firemen’s pension plan shall be zero.

(2) A transferring employee shall not be entitled to any service credit in the firemen’s pension fund for any service rendered as a participant in the police pension plan.

(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in either the police pension plan or the firemen’s pension fund, a transferring participant (as well as his survivor or beneficiary) shall be entitled to no benefits of any kind from the firemen’s pension fund including, but not limited to, a return of accumulated employee contributions.

(4) Upon election of a transferring employee to transfer his credited service from the firemen’s pension fund to the police pension plan, the transferring employee’s participant contributions made to the firemen’s pension fund shall be transferred to the police pension plan.

(5) Upon election of a transferring employee to transfer his credited service from the firemen’s pension fund to the police pension plan, the city shall transfer the amount of funds it allocated to the firemen’s pension fund attributable to the participation of the transferring employee in the firemen’s pension fund to the police pension plan.

(6) An election made under this section shall be binding on the transferring participant, his survivors, beneficiaries, heirs and estate. (Ord. 3636 § 1, 2006)


161.26 Distributions for health insurance.

Effective upon adoption of this amendment, a retired member may elect, in accordance with IRC Section 402(l), that a portion of his retirement benefit, that would otherwise be paid to him may instead be used to purchase health insurance, subject to the following conditions:

(a) Only a member who: (i) has terminated employment with the city after the attainment of normal retirement age or on account of a disability, (ii) is entitled to benefit payments under this article, and (iii) is covered by a health insurance plan sponsored by the city or (iv) is covered by a health plan that the city has determined would be administratively feasible for the city to make payments to, may make this election.

Any member who terminated employment prior to normal retirement age for any reason other than a disability is not eligible to make the election. No persons receiving benefits under this article other than members are eligible to make the election.

(b) A member may not elect to have more than $3,000 of his benefit used to pay insurance premiums per calendar year. The dollar amount is periodically adjusted, without formal amendment, in accordance with IRC Section 402(l).

(c) Payments shall be made only for “qualified health insurance premiums” as that term is used in IRC Section 402(l). Furthermore, payments shall be used only to pay premiums under a health insurance plan described in subsections (a)(iii) and (a)(iv) of this section. The city may nullify a member’s election if the city determines, in its sole discretion, that complying with the election would be administratively infeasible.

(d) For the purposes of this section, “disability” shall mean qualification of the member for an in-service disability pursuant to MMC 163.16. (Ord. 3657 § 3, 2008)


161.27 Pensions of members hired after January 30, 2013.

Effective January 30, 2013, the pension of any member hired on or after January 30, 2013, shall be calculated pursuant to the method set forth in MMC 161.18(A) at a rate of 50 percent of the annual salary of such member at the time of retirement, computed at such monthly or annual rate, whichever is higher. (Ord. 3713 § 2, 2013) 




Article 163 POLICE PENSION FUND

Sections:

163.01    Creation of fund.

163.02    Monthly retirement contribution by policemen – Exception for leave of absence – Partial refund of contribution.

163.03    Gifts, bequests or donations for fund.

163.04    Annual appropriation by council for fund.

163.05    Fund for benefit of association members only.

163.06    Fund control by police pension board – Composition, term and vacancy.

163.07    Board records, meetings and procedure.

163.08    Surety bond for board treasurer – Premium payment.

163.09    Annual report of board to council and association.

163.10    Investments authorized – Mortgage limitations.

163.11    Creation of association – Eligibility for membership.

163.12    Duties of association members.

163.13    Expulsion from association membership.

163.14    Qualifications to retire on pension – Vesting.

163.15    Mandatory retirement at age 65 – Contract exception by council.

163.16    Pension for service-incurred disability – Reinstatement.

163.17    Pension computation – Cost of living adjustment– Not subject to attachment or assignment.

163.18    Refund of contributions to widow, children or estate.

163.19    Pension benefit payments chargeable only to pension fund.

163.20    Service increment payments chargeable only to pension fund – Maximum pension allowance.

163.21    Service increment allowance additional to retirement.

163.22    Computation of and maximum service increment allowance.

163.23    Monthly service increment contribution – Limitations.

163.24    Computation of service increment allowances.

163.25    Payment and refund of service increment contributions.

163.26    Pension fund contributions subject to service increment provisions.

163.27    Back contributors for service increment allowances.

163.28    Retirees eligible for service increment allowance upon payment of contributions.

163.29    Monthly contributions for widows or orphans – Payment and refund.

163.30    Allowances for widows or orphans – Eligibility and termination.

163.31    Pension fund contributors subject to widows and orphans provisions.

163.32    First paid workday as effective date for commencing accrued time.

163.32-1    Benefits for death or total disability not in the line of duty.

163.33    Reserved.

163.34    Repealed.

163.35    Increase in retirement benefits of certain defined classes of retirees.

163.36    Deferred retirement option program (D.R.O.P.).

163.37    Transferred participants.

163.38    Distributions for health insurance.

163.39    Defined contributions provisions.

Annex A    Repealed.


163.01 Creation of fund.

Pursuant to the provisions of the Act of June 23, 1931, P.L. 932, as amended, the city created a police pension and retirement fund, which is known and designated as the police pension fund, and is hereafter referred to in this article as the “fund.” On February 10, 1968, pursuant to proceedings lawfully taken under and pursuant to the Act of July 15, 1957, P.L. 901, No. 399, as amended, the Optional Third Class City Charter Law, the City of Meadville became an optional charter city operating as a council-manager form of government. Since February 10, 1968, the fund has been maintained, administered, and continuously operated as a pension fund of the city as an optional charter city under and pursuant to the terms of the Act of July 15, 1957, P.L. 901, No. 399, as amended. (Ord. 3637 § 1, 2006; Ord. 3602 § 1, 2004; Ord. 2242 § 1, 1949) 


163.02 Monthly retirement contribution by policemen – Exception for leave of absence – Partial refund of contribution.

(A) Except as has heretofore (and may hereafter from time to time be) otherwise provided in an applicable labor relations agreement approved by city council of the City of Meadville, no participant contributions shall be required to be made in 2000, 2001, 2002, or 2003. In each year thereafter, contributions by the fund members employed in the city police department will be set at zero, unless according to an annual study performed by the actuary selected by the city, participant contributions are necessary to ensure that no contributions from the city’s general fund are required to keep the fund actuarially sound or otherwise required pursuant to state law, including for this purpose the Third Class City Code. If contributions are required pursuant to the previous sentence, participant contributions will be set at the percent of compensation necessary to ensure no contributions from the city’s general fund are necessary to the fund. No participant contributions shall be required that shall be in excess of the Third Class City Code, 53 P.S. Section 39301, et seq. In the above determination by the actuary as to whether or not member contributions to the fund are necessary, there shall be allocated to the fund the general municipal pension systems unit credit state aid attributable to the police officers and received by the city as a result of the financial requirements of the fund pursuant to the provisions of Act 205, 53 P.S. Section 895.101, et seq. The above allocation formula shall not be binding on the city in its actual split of general municipal pension system state aid between pension plans. 

(B) The payment of the monthly sum or contribution hereinbefore provided for shall cease and determine at the time the member receives the pension hereinafter provided for.

(C) Any member of the association who has been granted a leave of absence from the city police department by council shall be excused from any contribution to the fund during such leave of absence. The leave of absence shall not interrupt continuity of service with such member nor shall such leave of absence be deducted from the years of service of the member. Any leave of absence shall not be granted for a period exceeding one year, except in the case of a member being granted such leave of absence to engage in military service during war or time of emergency. 

(D) Any and all accumulated contributions made by each member of the association, who are employees on the payroll as of January 1, 2000, into the fund since 1990, and not already withdrawn or paid out, shall be returned to each contributing member plus six percent interest to the extent permitted by law by August 11, 2000. (Ord. 3605 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3567 § 1, 2000; Ord. 3448 § 1, 1996; Ord. 3438 § 1, 1996; Ord. 2821-A § 1, 1973; Ord. 2750 §§ 1, 2, 3, 1970)   


163.03 Gifts, bequests or donations for fund.

All gifts, testimonials and emoluments that may be presented, paid or given to any member of the association on account of police services, except compensation received for special detail work, and all bequests, legacies, gifts or donations made to the fund or to anyone in trust for the benefit of the fund, shall become and be a part of such fund. (Ord. 2242 § 3, 1949) 


163.04 Annual appropriation by council for fund.

Council shall annually set aside and appropriate to the fund a sum of money sufficient to meet the requirements of and to maintain such fund which sum in no year shall be less than one-half percent of all city taxes levied by the city, other than taxes levied to pay interest on or extinguish the debt of the city or any part thereof. (Ord. 2750 § 4, 1970) 


163.05 Fund for benefit of association members only.

The fund shall be maintained, directed, applied and distributed only pursuant to the provisions herein contained and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto for the benefit only of the members of the association herein created. (Ord. 2242 § 5, 1949)   


163.06 Fund control by police pension board – Composition, term and vacancy.

The police pension fund shall be under the care, direction, control and administration of a police pension board (hereinafter referred to as “the board”), which shall consist of the following city officers: the mayor, city manager, city controller, finance director and the chief of police, all of whose membership on such board shall be concurrent with their tenure of office, and two members of the police department to be chosen by the members of the association. Of the first members of the board so chosen by members of the association, one shall be chosen for a term of two years and one for a term of four years. Biannually thereafter, one member shall be chosen for a term of four years to take the place of the member whose term expires. In case of a vacancy on the board, exceeding one month by reason of one or more of the above-named city offices not being filled, council shall fill such vacancy by the appointment of another city officer to fill the unexpired term of the office so vacant, except in the case of a vacancy on the board with respect to the offices held by one or both of the two members of the police department, the chief of police shall hold an election of the members of the association to fill the unexpired term of the office so vacated. The members of the board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed from the fund for any necessary expenditures.   (Ord. 2750 § 5, 1970)


163.07 Board records, meetings and procedure.

The board shall keep full and accurate accounts of all its transactions. It shall have full power to make rules for the transaction of its business, application of its funds, its time and place of meeting, etc., subject to the special provisions and regulations contained in this article. The board shall meet at least once every three months at a stated time, or at such times as it by resolution may designate, or upon call of the president, for the transaction of such business as may properly come before it. Special meetings shall also be called by the president at any time upon the written request of a majority of the board or 51 percent of the association. At least 10 days’ written notice shall be given to each member of the board of the time and place of the annual or any special meeting. Notice of a special meeting shall state briefly the special business to come before the meeting and only the business so stated shall be considered at such meeting. A quorum shall consist of four members for the transaction of business. (Ord. 2242 § 7, 1949) 


163.08 Surety bond for board treasurer – Premium payment.

The city treasurer shall give a surety bond to the city for the faithful performance of his duties, in a sum to be set by the board, the premium on such bond to be paid from the fund. (Ord. 2242 § 8, 1949) 


163.09 Annual report of board to council and association.

The board shall make an annual report to council and to the association on the second Tuesday of February in each year of all receipts and disbursements of the fund and such other matters as should properly be embodied in such report. (Ord. 2242 § 9, 1949) 


163.10 Investments authorized – Mortgage limitations.

The board is authorized to invest any money accumulated in the fund in such investments as are authorized under and pursuant to the laws of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania for fiduciaries; including mortgages of one or more individuals or corporations, securing bonds or other obligations; such mortgages shall be a first lien upon improved real estate within this commonwealth, including improved farm lands, and shall not exceed two-thirds of the fair value of such real estate. Such mortgage shall be payable not more than five years after the date thereof, or the date of any renewal or extension thereof, or it shall be amortized in installments totaling in each year not less than three percent per annum of the face amount of the bond or other obligation secured thereby, over a period not exceeding 20 years from the date thereof, or the date of any renewal or extension thereof. (Ord. 2307 § 1, 1952) 


163.11 Creation of association – Eligibility for membership.

(A) An association is hereby created which shall be known and designated as the police pension fund association, hereinafter referred to as the association. 

(B) The membership of the association shall consist of all persons now regularly appointed or now employed by the city as policemen, detectives, sergeants and chiefs, and such persons hereinafter employed as policemen, detectives, sergeants or chiefs, who shall, within 30 days of the enactment of this section (August 4, 1970) or within 30 days following their appointment elect in writing to accept the provisions hereof and file application for membership in the association. However, no person hereafter employed as a policeman, detective, sergeant or chief who is over the age of 40 years shall be admitted to membership in the association, and no clerk or other person shall be eligible for membership in the association unless he is a member of the city police department, has been appointed as a patrolman, detective, sergeant or chief and has first passed the physical tests required for appointment as patrolman, or such physical tests as may from time to time be prescribed by the board. 

(C) Each policeman, detective, sergeant or chief who files an application within the period of 30 days as provided for in subsection (B) of this section shall automatically be admitted to membership. Each policeman, detective, sergeant or chief who fails to file an application within such period of 30 days shall be admitted to membership only by a majority vote of the members of the association. (Ord. 2750 §§ 6, 7, 1970; Ord. 2242 § 11, 1949)


163.12 Duties of association members.

The members of the association, subject to the limitations of this article and of law, shall: 

(A) Establish rules and regulations for the administration and transaction of its business; 

(B) Elect officers in accordance with established rules and regulations to represent the association;   

(C) Certify to the board annually a list of the members in good standing, the amount of wages and salaries paid to each member in the city police department, together with a list of members of the association who, during such year, were dismissed, resigned or terminated their service and the date thereof; and 

(D) Furnish to the board, upon request, such information relative to the subject of this article as the board shall require. (Ord. 2242 § 12, 1949) 


163.13 Expulsion from association membership.

A member of the association may be expelled from membership and be deprived of the right of participation in the fund by a two-thirds vote of the association membership for failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article or any general regulation adopted pursuant thereto relating to the management of the fund, or the transaction of the business of the association. No member shall be expelled pursuant to this section without due notice and a full hearing at which he shall be afforded the opportunity to present witnesses and be represented by counsel, if he so desires. (Ord. 2242 § 13 1949)


163.14 Qualifications to retire on pension – Vesting.

(A) Any member of the association in good standing who has served in the city police department for 20 years prior to the adoption of this section (August 4, 1970), or who has rendered 20 years’ continuous service and in each instance has reached 50 years of age may be retired at his own request on a pension. The pension shall date from the time the member shall have filed his application with the board.

(B) Effective for police officers who terminate employment on or after January 1, 1996, a limited vested benefit shall be available pursuant to the Third Class City Code, 53 P.S. Section 39302.1. As such, should a member of the police pension and retirement fund (“fund”), before completing the minimum age and minimum period of continuous service requirements but after having completed 12 years of full-time service with the City of Meadville police department (“service”), the member shall be entitled to vest his pension benefit subject to the following conditions:

(1) The member must file with the police pension board (“board”) of the fund a written notice of his or her intention to vest;

(2) The member must include in the notice the date the member intends to terminate his or her service;

(3) The termination date shall be at least 30 days later than the date of notice to vest;

(4) The member must be in good standing with the police department on the date of notice to vest; and 

(5) The board shall indicate on the notice to vest the rate of the monthly pay of the member as of the date of said notice to vest or the highest average annual salary which the member received during any five years of service preceding said date, whichever is the higher.

(C) Upon reaching the date which would have been the member’s retirement date had the member continued his full-time employment with the police department, the member shall notify the board, in writing, that the member desires to collect his or her pension. The amount of retirement benefits the member is entitled to receive pursuant to this provision shall be computed as follows:

(1) The initial determination of the member’s base retirement benefits shall be computed on the salary or pay indicated on the notice to vest; and 

(2) The portion of the base retirement benefit due the member shall be determined by applying to the base amount the percentage that his or her years of service actually rendered bears to 20. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, in no event shall the percentage exceed 100 percent.

(D) Purchase of Prior Military Service. Any member of the fund who served in the armed forces of the United States subsequent to September 1, 1940, and who was not a member of the fund prior to such military service, shall be entitled to have full credit for each year, or fraction thereof, not to exceed five years of such service upon his payment to the police pension fund of an amount equal to that which he would have paid had he been a member during the period for which he desires credit, and his payment to such fund for an additional amount as the equivalent of the contribution of the city on account of such military service. The above amounts to be paid by the member shall be determined by the methodology customarily utilized by the city.

(E) Unused accumulated sick leave for which the member does not receive compensation may be credited as continuous service for purposes of calculating years of service under the fund at a rate of one hour of continuous service for every two hours of unused accumulated sick leave up to a maximum credit of 448 hours. (Ord. 3688 § 1, 2011; Ord. 3658 §§ 1, 2, 2008; Ord. 3448 § 2, 1996; Ord. 3438 § 2, 1996; Ord. 2750 § 8, 1970) 


163.15 Mandatory retirement at age 65 – Contract exception by council.

Council in its sole discretion may require any member of the association who has at least 20 years’ service and who has attained the age of 55 years to be retired by the board on a pension, to date from the time such member is mandatorily retired by council. However, in every case, any member of the association, who is regularly employed by the city police department and has reached the age of 65 years, shall be honorably discharged and retired by the board on a pension, to date from the time such member attains the age of 65 years. However, any chief, superintendent, captain or lieutenant, after reaching such age, may continue as a member of the city police department provided a contract of employment is entered into between such officer and council. In such case the officer shall not be granted a pension until the contract has expired. (Ord. 2750 § 9, 1970) 


163.16 Pension for service-incurred disability – Reinstatement.

Any active member of the city police department and a member of the association who has become permanently disabled may, upon his application, be placed upon the retired list, if in the opinion of the board, and in the opinion of two reputable physicians (one to be selected by the board and the other by the applicant, and in the case of a dispute a third physician to be selected by the board) who shall make a physical examination and file their opinion in writing with the board, the applicant is physically or mentally incapacitated through injury received by reason of the performance of his duty as a policeman or detective. However, the board shall have the authority to order subsequent examination from time to time, but not more often than 60 days, by physicians chosen in the same manner as set forth above, to ascertain if the disability of the pensioner has been moved and if it has, the board shall terminate the pension and the pensioner shall be reinstated as an active member of the police department with the same rank and rating that he had upon retirement. If reinstated the pensioner shall file with the board a release duly executed and acknowledged of any right or claim to the pension during the period which he shall serve after such retirement. The fees of the first two physicians shall be paid by the board and the fees of the third physician, if necessary, shall be paid by the applicant. (Ord. 2242 § 16, 1949)   


163.17 Pension computation – Cost of living adjustment– Not subject to attachment or assignment.

(A) The pension that shall be paid to all pensioned or retired members of the association shall be determined and computed by the rate of the monthly pay of the member at the date of injury, death, honorable discharge or retirement, or the highest average annual salary which the member received during any five years of service preceding injury, death, honorable discharge or retirement, whichever is higher. Except as to service increments as herein provided, for any member of the association who retires on or after January 1, 2000, the pension shall not in any case exceed in any year 60 percent of the annual pay of such member computed at such monthly or average annual rate, whichever is higher. Effective January 1, 1998, the minimum monthly pension allowance for all retirees will be $500.00 per month. 

(B) Any represented employee who first receives pension payments after January 1, 1998, by reason of injury, death, honorable discharge, vesting under 53 P.S. Section 39302.1 or retirement shall at the completion of the third year after actual payment of that employee’s pension allowance is first due and payable receive an annual cost of living adjustment in the amount of two percent of the pension actually paid to such employee in the prior year including any cost of living adjustment paid in such prior year, if any. Cost of living adjustments to an individual pension payments shall be made on the annual anniversary of the month in which each employee first received payment of benefits from the pension fund. Qualified employees shall continue to receive the applicable cost of living adjustments provided by this section for so long as the city’s police pension plan is, in the opinion of a qualified actuary selected by the city, able to make such payments without contribution of any funds by the city other than the funds received by the city from the commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a result of police participation in the police pension plan. 

(C) Beginning in the year 2001, all retirees, spouses or dependents receiving pension allowances before January 1, 1998, shall receive an annual cost of living adjustment in the amount of two percent of the pension paid to such employees in the prior year; provided, that an annual study performed by the actuary selected by the city determines that the fund can make such annual cost of living allowance payments and remain actuarially sound without any contribution to the fund by the city. The cost of living provision shall continue to be subject to the availability of funding, and is to be implemented at the sole discretion of the city. Cost of living adjustments to individual pension payments shall be made on the annual anniversary of the month in which each employee first received payment of benefits from the pension fund. 

(D) The pension shall be paid in addition to any workmen’s compensation or benefits which the member shall receive by reason of disability. 

(E) The pension herein provided for shall not be subject to attachment or execution, and shall be payable only to the beneficiary designated and shall not be subject to assignment or transfer. (Ord. 3567 § 2, 2000; Ord. 3509 § 1, 1998; Ord. 2750 § 10, 1970)   


163.18 Refund of contributions to widow, children or estate.

(A) If a member of the association contributing to the fund shall be dismissed from the city police department, or for any other reason ceases to be a member of the department before he becomes entitled to a pension hereunder, the total amount of the contributions paid into the fund by such member shall, upon his request, be refunded in full, without interest. 

(B) In the event of the death of a member of the association before he becomes entitled to the pension herein provided for, the total of the contributions paid into the fund by such member shall be paid, without interest, to the widow of such member, if living, otherwise to his children, otherwise to his estate. 

(C) In the event of the death of a member of the association or in the event of the death of the widow or the death of the children of a member, while receiving a pension hereunder, but before the amount of pension received shall equal the total amount of contributions paid into the fund by the member on his behalf, the difference between the amount of pension paid to the member or to the widow or to the children of the member, and the amount contributed to the fund by the deceased member shall be paid without interest to his widow, if living, otherwise to his children, otherwise to his estate, as the case may be. (Ord. 2750 § 11, 1970; Ord. 2242 § 18, 1949) 


163.19 Pension benefit payments chargeable only to pension fund.

Payments for pension and allowance hereunder shall not be a charge on any other fund of the city treasurer or of any fund under its control, except the fund as provided for herein. (Ord. 2242 § 19, 1949) 


163.20 Service increment payments chargeable only to pension fund – Maximum pension allowance.

Payments for service increment allowances shall not be a charge on any other fund of the city treasury or any fund under its control except the police pension fund herein provided for. The basis of the apportionment of the pension shall be determined by the provisions of this article as amended, and, except as to service increments provided herein, the apportionment of the pension shall not in any case exceed in any one year one-half the annual pay of members computed at the monthly rate. (Ord. 2750 § 13, 1970)


163.21 Service increment allowance additional to retirement.

In addition to the retirement allowance which is authorized to be paid from the police pension fund by this article, and notwithstanding the limitations therein placed upon such retirement allowances and upon contributions, every contributor who shall become entitled to the retirement allowance shall also be entitled to the payment of a service increment in accordance with and subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 2750 § 13, 1970)   


163.22 Computation of and maximum service increment allowance.

Service increment shall be the sum obtained by computing the number of whole years after having served the minimum 20-year service during which a contributor has been employed by the city and paid out to the city treasury, in multiplying the number of years so computed by an amount equal to one-fortieth of the retirement allowance which has become payable to such contributor in accordance with the provisions of this article. In arriving at the minimum 20-years service, credit shall be given a contributor for service in the Armed Forces of the United States subsequent to September 1, 1940, provided the contributors were not members of the police pension fund prior to such military service, such credit not to exceed five years of service. In computing the service increments, no employment after the contributor has reached the age of 65 years shall be included, and no service increment shall be paid in excess of $100.00 per month.   (Ord. 2871 § 1, 1975) 


163.23 Monthly service increment contribution – Limitations.

Each contributor shall pay into the retirement fund a monthly sum in addition to his retirement contribution, which shall be equal to one-half percent of his salary. However, such payments shall not exceed $1.00 per month and such service increment contribution shall not be paid after a contributor has reached the age of 65 years. (Ord. 2750 § 13, 1970)   


163.24 Computation of service increment allowances.

Persons who are contributors on the effective date of this amendment (July 13, 1954), who have already reached the age of 65 years, shall have his service increment computed on the years of employment prior to the date of reaching his 65th birthday. (Ord. 2750 § 13, 1970) 


163.25 Payment and refund of service increment contributions.

Service increment contributions shall be paid at the same time and in the same manner as retirement contributions, and may be withdrawn in full, without interest, by persons who leave the employment of the city, subject to the same conditions by which the basic retirement contributions may be withdrawn under this article. (Ord. 2750 § 13, 1970) 


163.26 Pension fund contributions subject to service increment provisions.

All members of the police department who are now contributors to the retirement fund and all those employed by the city after July 13, 1954, if required to become contributors to the retirement fund, shall be subject to the service increment provisions of this article. (Ord. 2750 § 13, 1970) 


163.27 Back contributors for service increment allowances.

Each contributor who is presently employed as a member of the city police department and who was so employed on January 1, 1952, or who has been employed since that date, shall be required to make a contribution to the fund in accordance with the rates and terms specified in MMC 163.23. However, such payment shall be made retroactively from January 1, 1952, or from the date of employment as the case may be. (Ord. 2750 § 13, 1970)   


163.28 Retirees eligible for service increment allowance upon payment of contributions.

Any contributor who has been retired since January 1, 1952, and who is eligible to receive payment of a service increment in accordance with the terms hereof, shall be entitled to receive such increment allowance upon payment of the required contribution for the period served between January 1, 1952, and his date of retirement. (Ord. 2750 § 13, 1970) 


163.29 Monthly contributions for widows or orphans – Payment and refund.

From and after July 1, 1966, each member of the police pension fund association shall contribute one percent of his monthly wage or salary for the purpose of providing a pension for widows or orphans of such members as set forth below. This contribution shall be in addition to contributions for basic pensioning and servicing as heretofore provided in this article. This additional contribution shall be paid at the same time and in the same manner as retirement contributions, and may be withdrawn in full, without interest, for persons who leave the employment of the city, subject to the same conditions by which the basic retirement contribution may be withdrawn under this article. (Ord. 2821-A § 2, 1973)   


163.30 Allowances for widows or orphans – Eligibility and termination.

From and after December 12, 1994, the widow of a member of the police department or a member who retires on pension and who dies, or if no widow survives or if she survives and subsequently dies, then the child or children under the age of 18 years of a member of the police department or a member who retires on pension and who dies on or after December 12, 1994, shall, during her lifetime in the case of a widow, or until reaching the age of 18 years in the case of a child or children, be entitled to receive the pension the member of the police department was receiving or would have been receiving had he been retired at the time of his death. (Ord. 3474 § 1, 1997; Ord. 2871 § 1, 1975) 


163.31 Pension fund contributors subject to widows and orphans provisions.

All members of the police department who are now contributing to the retirement fund and all those employed by the city after July 1, 1966, if required to become contributors to the retirement fund, shall be subject to the widows and orphans provisions of this article. (Ord. 2750 § 14, 1970) 


163.32 First paid workday as effective date for commencing accrued time.

For the purposes of determining the effective date that a police officer shall commence to accrue time towards pension eligibility hereunder, it is hereby ordained that the first day such officer actually worked and was paid by the city shall be the effective date of commencing employment hereunder and that the probationary period, after final acceptance by the city, shall be considered as accrued time for pension purposes hereunder. (Ord. 2750 § 14, 1970) 


163.32-1 Benefits for death or total disability not in the line of duty.

(A) Any police officer who has at least two years of service but less than three years of service and who dies or is totally disabled due to injuries or mental incapabilities not in the line of duty and is unable to perform the duties of a police officer shall be entitled to a pension of one-eighth of his annual compensation. For death or injuries not in the line of duty to a member of the police department, not in the line of duty with at least three years of service but less than four years of service, said employee shall be entitled to receive one-quarter of his annual compensation. For death or injuries to a member who has at least four years of service but less than five years of service, said employee shall be entitled to receive three-eights of his annual compensation. For death or injuries received after five years of service, and not in the line of duty, said employee shall be entitled to receive one-half of his annual compensation.

(B) The disability pension shall be payable to the employee during his lifetime, and if he shall die, 50 percent of the pension payment that he was receiving shall continue to be paid to his widow, if she survives, or if she subsequently dies or remarries, then to the child or children under 18 years of age of the police officer. The benefits enumerated in this section shall only apply to otherwise eligible members who have not yet completed 20 years of service and attained age 50. (Ord. 3438 § 3, 1996; Ord. 2821-A § 3, 1973) 


163.33 Reserved.


163.34 Repealed.

(Ord. 3180, 1988)


163.35 Increase in retirement benefits of certain defined classes of retirees.

(A) Entitlement to Special Ad Hoc Adjustment. For so long as such adjustments are mandated by state law, retirees who meet the following qualifications shall be entitled to payment of special ad hoc post-retirement pension adjustments from the police pension fund effective January 1, 1989, in accord with the provisions of this section: 

(1) The retiree has terminated active employment with the city as police officers; 

(2) The retiree is receiving a retirement or disability pension benefit from the city on the basis of active employment with the city as a police officer; and 

(3) The retiree began receiving the retirement or disability pension benefits before January 1, 1985.

(B) Amount of Special Ad Hoc Adjustment. The special ad hoc post-retirement adjustment under this section shall be paid to retired police officers as follows: 

(1) The sum of $25.00 per month, if on January 1, 1989, the retiree has been retired at least five years but less than 10 years. 

(2) The sum of $50.00 per month, if on January 1, 1989, the retiree is totally disabled and has been retired less than 10 years. 

(3) The sum of $75.00 per month, if on January 1, 1989, the retiree has been retired at least 10 years but less than 20 years. 

(4) The sum of $150.00 per month, if on January 1, 1989, the retiree has been retired at least 20 years. 

(C) Payment of Special Ad Hoc Adjustment. The special ad hoc adjustment shall apply to a retiree’s retirement or disability pension benefits payable after December 31, 1988. 

(D) Integration with Previous Increases. Increased allowances payable under and pursuant to MMC 163.34 (prior section based on Ordinance No. 3180 of 1988, rendered obsolete by the provisions of this article) shall be integrated with the special ad hoc adjustment payable under this section so that no retiree receives any pension benefit increase or adjustment in any year which exceeds the applicable adjustment required by the terms of subsection (B) of this section. To the extent required by law or by any appropriate authority, any employee entitled to receive any benefit under both MMC 163.34 and this section shall be deemed to receive benefits under this section. (Ord. 3211 § 1, 1989)


163.36 Deferred retirement option program (D.R.O.P.).

(A) Eligibility. Effective July 1, 2000, members of the association may enter into the D.R.O.P. on the first day of any month following completion of 20 years of credited service and age 50. 

(B) Written Election. A member of the association electing to participate in the D.R.O.P. must complete and execute the proper forms prepared by the city, which shall evidence the member’s participation in the D.R.O.P. and establish the member’s resignation from employment with the City of Meadville police department effective on a specific date not more than 36 months from the effective date of the D.R.O.P. option. Such forms must be signed by the member and notarized and submitted to the city manager prior to the date on which the member wishes the D.R.O.P. option to be effective. Election in the D.R.O.P. is irrevocable. The D.R.O.P. option notice shall include an irrevocable notice to the city by the member that the member shall resign from employment with the City of Meadville police department effective on a specific date not more than 36 months from the effective date of the D.R.O.P. option. 

(C) Limitation and Disqualification for Other Benefits. After the effective date of the D.R.O.P. option, the member shall no longer earn or accrue additional years of continuous service and shall not be eligible for disability or preretirement death benefits. 

(D) Benefit Calculation. For all retirement fund purposes, continuous service of a member participating in the D.R.O.P. shall remain as it existed on the effective date of commencement of participation in the D.R.O.P. Service thereafter should not be recognized or used for the calculation or determination of any benefits payable by the retirement fund. The average monthly pay of the member for pension calculation purposes shall remain as they existed on the effective date of commencement of participation in the D.R.O.P. Earnings or increases in earnings thereafter shall not be recognized or used for the calculation or determination of any benefits payable by the retirement fund. The pension benefit payable to the members shall increase only as a result of the cost of living adjustment in effect on the effective date of the member’s participation in the D.R.O.P. 

(E) Payments to D.R.O.P. Account. The monthly retirement benefits that would have been payable had the member elected to cease employment and receive a normal retirement benefit upon commencing participation in the D.R.O.P. shall be paid into the member’s deferred retirement option account. 

(F) D.R.O.P. Account Earnings. Each member’s deferred retirement option account shall accrue interest at the rate of six percent per annum. 

(G) Payout. Upon the termination date set forth in the member’s notice of participation in the D.R.O.P., the retirement benefits payable to the member or the member’s beneficiary, if applicable, shall be paid to the member or beneficiary and shall no longer be paid to the member’s deferred retirement option account. Within 60 days following termination of a member’s employment pursuant to their election of the D.R.O.P. option, the balances in the member’s deferred retirement option account shall be paid to the member in full in a single lump sum payment. 

(H) Death. If a D.R.O.P. member dies before the D.R.O.P. account balances are paid, the participant member’s designated beneficiary shall have the same rights as the member. 

(I) Amendment. The police pension board can amend the D.R.O.P. at any time. Such amendments shall be consistent with the provisions covering deferred retirement option plans set forth in any applicable collective bargaining agreement and shall be binding upon all future D.R.O.P. participants and upon all D.R.O.P. participants who have balances in their accounts. In addition, this D.R.O.P. shall be amended to conform with any and all applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 3567 § 3, 2000)


163.37 Transferred participants.

(A) For employee transfers from the City of Meadville fire department to the City of Meadville police department on or after July 1, 2005, an active participant in the City of Meadville firemen’s pension fund (firemen’s pension fund) immediately prior to transfer, who is transferred to the City of Meadville police department and who, as of the date of transfer, is otherwise eligible to participate in the City of Meadville police pension fund (police plan), may, within one year of commencing participation in the police plan, elect to have his years of credited service in the firemen’s pension fund transferred to the police pension plan. Said election shall be made by executing an election form provided by the city and shall be irrevocable. If no election is made within the one-year period specified in this subsection, the participant shall be deemed to have elected not to have his credited service in the firemen’s pension fund plan transferred to the police pension plan and shall have no further rights to make an election under this section. A participant making such election shall be termed for the purposes of this section as a “transferring participant.”

(B) The consequences of making the election described in subsection (A) of this section shall be the following:

(1) A transferring participant shall receive service credit in the police pension plan for his or her accumulated years of credited service as a participant in the firemen’s pension fund and, upon transfer of service credit to the police pension fund, the transferring participant’s years of credited service in the firemen’s pension fund shall be zero.

(2) A transferring employee shall not be entitled to any service credit in the firemen’s pension fund for any service rendered as a participant in the police pension plan.

(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in either the police pension plan or the firemen’s pension fund, a transferring participant (as well as his survivor or beneficiary) shall be entitled to no benefits of any kind from the firemen’s pension fund including but not limited to a return of accumulated employee contributions.

(4) Upon election of a transferring employee to transfer his credited service from the firemen’s pension fund to the police pension plan, the transferring employee’s participant contributions made to the firemen’s pension fund shall be transferred to the police pension fund.

(5) Upon election of a transferring employee to transfer his credited service from the firemen’s pension fund to the police pension plan, the city shall transfer the amount of funds it allocated to the firemen’s pension fund attributable to the participation of the transferring employee in the firemen’s pension fund to the police pension fund. 

(6) An election made under this section shall be binding on the transferring participant, his survivors, beneficiaries, heirs, and estate. (Ord. 3637 § 2, 2006)


163.38 Distributions for health insurance.1

Effective upon adoption of this section, a retired member may elect, in accordance with IRC Section 402(l), that a portion of his retirement benefit, that would otherwise be paid to him may instead be used to purchase health insurance, subject to the following conditions:

(a) Only a member who: (i) has terminated employment with the city after the attainment of normal retirement age or on account of a disability, (ii) is entitled to benefit payments under this article, and (iii) is covered by a health insurance plan sponsored by the city or (iv) is covered by a health plan that the city has determined would be administratively feasible for the city to make payments to, may make this election.

Any member who terminated employment prior to normal retirement age for any reason other than a disability is not eligible to make the election. No persons receiving benefits under this article other than members are eligible to make the election.

(b) A member may not elect to have more than $3,000 of his benefit used to pay insurance premiums per calendar year. The dollar amount is periodically adjusted, without formal amendment, in accordance with IRC Section 402(l).

(c) Payments shall be made only for “qualified health insurance premiums” as that term is used in IRC Section 402(l). Furthermore, payments shall be used only to pay premiums under a health insurance plan described in subsections (a)(iii) and (a)(iv) of this section. The city may nullify a member’s election if the city determines, in its sole discretion, that complying with the election would be administratively infeasible.

(d) For the purposes of this section, “disability” shall mean qualification of the member for and receipt of an in-service disability pursuant to MMC 163.16. (Ord. 3658 § 3, 2008) 


163.39 Defined contributions provisions.

DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PLAN

(A) Eligibility for Participation in Defined Contribution (DC) Features. In general, this section applies only to police employees (including those collectively bargained) hired after December 31, 2014, on the first day of employment; provided, that all prerequisites to participation under the plan have been fulfilled, including, but not limited to, completion of any probationary status and grant of regular full-time (at least 35 hours per week) employee status and after any completion of any forms required by the plan administrator. Such persons shall be referred to as participants. Any employee who participates (or is eligible to participate) in the defined contribution provisions of this section shall not be eligible to participate in the defined benefit features of this article for the same period of service.

(B) The defined contribution provisions contained in MMC 165.19(B) through (Q) are incorporated herein and made a part hereof such that police full-time new hires after December 31, 2014, participate in the defined contribution provisions and not in the defined benefit features of this article. All mandatory employee contributions made after December 31, 2014, by such employees continue to be “picked up” by the employer in lieu of contributions by the employees as set forth in MMC 165.19(C)(2).

(C) Normal Retirement. Normal retirement for this section shall be after meeting the requirements set forth in MMC 163.14(A). (Ord. 3754 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


Annex A Waiver of pension contributions.

Repealed by Ord. 3438.1

Code reviser’s note: Ord. 3658 added this section as MMC 163.37. It has been editorially renumbered to avoid duplication. 


Article 165 CITY EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT AND PENSION FUND

Sections:

165.01    Creation of fund and board.

165.02    Board composition – Duties and investments.

165.03    Pension entitlement – Retirement and service increment allowances.

165.04    Contributions to fund – Refunds and determination of continuous service.

165.05    Optional contribution of laborers on per diem wage.

165.06    Repealed.

165.07    Department heads to certify records to board.

165.08    Annual appropriation by city.

165.09    Persons entitled to benefits – Definitions.

165.10    Computation of time of service.

165.11    Pension not subject to attachment or assignment.

165.12    Compensation or pension involving other political subdivisions.

165.13    Repealed.

165.14    Eligible persons to indicate total acceptance of coverage.

165.15    Benefit payments chargeable only to pension fund.

165.16    Severability – Validity of remaining provisions.

165.17    Deferred vested benefit.

165.18    Exclusion of employees and officials after May 21, 2014.

165.19    Defined contribution provisions.


165.01 Creation of fund and board.

Pursuant to the provisions of the Act of May 23, 1945 (P.L. 903), as amended, (53 P.S. Section 39371 et seq.), and the provisions of the Optional Third Class City Charter Law (53 P.S. Section 41101 et seq.), there is hereby created an employees pension fund and pension board. (Ord. 2745 § 1, 1970)


165.02 Board composition – Duties and investments.

The pension board shall consist of the city manager, city controller, finance director and two employees to be chosen by the employees contributing to the pension fund. It shall be the duty of the board to register all persons employed by the city and to administer the collection and distribution of the fund herein provided for, and to make such reasonable rules in the premises as the board may deem necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this article. It shall be the duty of the pension board to receive and retain and when deemed advisable, to invest the funds in accordance with the provisions of this article and by such methods as are authorized under and pursuant to the laws of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania for fiduciaries, and including mortgages of one or more individuals or corporations, securing bonds or other obligations; such mortgages shall be a first lien upon improved real estate within this commonwealth and shall not exceed two-thirds of the fair value of such real estate. Such mortgage shall be payable not more than five years after the date thereof, or the date of any renewal or extension thereof, or it shall be amortized in installments totaling in each year not less than three percent per annum of the face amount of the bond or other obligations secured thereby, over a period not exceeding 20 years from the date thereof, or the date of any renewal or extension thereof. (Ord. 2745 § 2, 1970) 


165.03 Pension entitlement – Retirement and service increment allowances.*

(A) Every person now or hereafter elected or appointed to an office of or employed by the city who has attained the age of 60 years or over and who has served as an officer or employee for a period of 20 years or more shall, upon application to the board, be retired from service, and shall during the remainder of his life receive the compensation fixed by this article, subject to such qualifications as are hereinafter contained.

If any person has served 20 years and voluntarily retires, he shall be entitled to the compensation provided in this article at the age of 60 years. During the lifetime of any such person, he shall be entitled to receive as compensation annually from the fund set aside for the purpose, 50 percent which would constitute the highest average annual salary of wages which he earned during any five years of his service to the city, or which would be determined by the rate of the monthly pay of such person at the date of retirement, whichever is the higher. Such compensation shall be paid in monthly payments.

(B) Where an officer or employee has served for 12 years or more and has attained the age of 60 years, and his tenure of office or employment shall be terminated without his voluntary action before the expiration of 20 years of service, he shall, in such event, during the remainder of his life, be entitled to receive such portion of the full compensation as the period of his service, up to date of his termination, bears to the full 20-year period of service. Where an officer or employee has served for 12 years or more and has not attained the age of 60 years, and his tenure of office or employment shall be terminated without his voluntary action before the expiration of 20 years of service, he shall, in such event, during the remainder of his life, after attaining the age of 60 years, be entitled to receive such portion of the full compensation as the period of his service up to the date of his termination, bears to the full 20-year period of service. Where an officer or employee has served for 20 years or more and his tenure of office or employment shall be terminated without his voluntary action, he shall be entitled to full compensation for the remainder of his life, after attaining the age of 55 years, conditioned upon his continuing his contributions into the fund at the same rate as when he was dismissed until he attains the age of 55 years. 

(C) In addition to the retirement allowance which is authorized to be paid from the pension fund by this article and notwithstanding the limitations therein placed upon such retirement allowances and upon contributions, every officer or employee who becomes entitled to the retirement allowance as provided under this article shall also be entitled to the payment of a service increment under the following conditions:

(1) Service increment shall be the sum obtained by computing the number of whole years after having served 20 years, required by this article, during which a contributor has been employed by the city and multiplying such number of years so computed by an amount equal to one-fortieth of the retirement allowance which has become payable to such contributor in accordance with the provisions of this article. In computing this service increment, no employment after the contributor reached the age of 65 years shall be included.

(2) Each contributor who so chooses to become entitled to the service increments provided by this article shall pay into the retirement fund a monthly sum, in addition to his retirement contribution, which shall be equal to one-half percent of his salary. However, such service increment contribution shall not be paid after a contributor has reached the age of 65 years.

(3) Service increment contributions shall be paid at the same time and in the same manner as retirement contributions, and may be withdrawn in full without interest, by persons who leave the employment of the city, subject to the same conditions by which retirement contributions may be withdrawn, or by persons who retire before becoming entitled to any service increment.

(4) Every contributor who chooses to become entitled to the service increment and is presently employed by the city shall be required to make a contribution to the fund in accordance with the rates and terms hereinbefore specified. However, such payment shall be made by the contributor retroactively from October 19, 1967, or from the date of employment if employed after October 19, 1967.*

(D) Spousal Benefits – Entitlement to Allowance for Spouse or Children – Eligibility and Termination. From and after the effective date of this amendment, the surviving spouse of a city employee who retires on pension after attaining age 60 and 20 years of completed service and who dies (or who is eligible for such retirement) shall, during such spouse’s lifetime or for so long as he or she does not remarry, be entitled to receive the pension the employee was receiving or would have been receiving had the employee been retired at the time of his or her death. Upon remarriage, a spouse drawing such pension shall immediately notify the city of such remarriage. If no spouse survives or survives and subsequently dies or remarries, then the children of such employee under the age of 18 years shall, until reaching the age of 18 years, be entitled to receive such pension.

(E) Disability and Early Death Benefits – Benefits for Death or Total Disability Not in the Line of Duty. Any city employee who is a member of the pension fund and who is totally disabled due to injuries or mental incapabilities sustained or arising other than in the line of duty and who is unable to perform the duties of his or her city office or position as the result thereof shall be entitled to a pension in accord with the following schedule:

(1) One-eighth of his or her annual compensation if such employee has less than five years of completed service at the time of his or her death or disability; or

(2) One-fourth of his or her annual compensation if such employee has less than 10 but more than five years of completed service at the time of his or her death or disability;

(3) One-half of his or her annual compensation if such employee has more than 10 years of completed service at the time of his or her death or disability.

The disability pension hereby shall continue for the duration of the total disability of the disabled employee and, should such disability continue for the balance of the life of such employee, shall continue during such employee’s life. Payment of such pension shall commence immediately as of the date such total disability is established. Proof of such total disability shall consist of a sworn statement of three practicing physicians, designated by the board, that the employee is in the condition of health which would totally disable him from performing the duties of his position or office. Such person shall thereafter be subject to physical examination at any reasonable time upon order of the board, and upon his refusal to submit to any such examination, his compensation shall cease.

Any pension which would be payable under the terms of this section to a city employee in the event of a total disability shall be payable to the surviving spouse of any city employee who dies; provided, that such spouse is not entitled to benefits under subsection (D) of this section. If any such spouse shall die or remarry, the pension payable under the terms of this section shall be payable to the child or children of the deceased employee until such child or children attain the age of 18 years. In all events, the spousal pension provided herein shall end upon the death or remarriage of the surviving spouse or upon the date on which the youngest of the deceased employee’s children shall attain 18 years of age.

(F) Return of Contributions. If a person entitled to pension benefits under this article shall be dismissed from city employment or for any other reason ceases to be an employee of the city before he or she becomes entitled to a pension hereunder, the total amount of the contribution paid into the fund by such person shall, upon his or her request, be refunded in full, without interest.

In the event of the death of such person before he or she becomes entitled to the pension herein provided for, the total of the contributions paid into the fund by such person shall be paid, without interest, to his or her spouse, if living; otherwise in equal shares to his or her children, if any, otherwise to his or her estate.

(G) Employee Contribution. In consideration of the grant of the spousal and disability benefits required by this article, each employee shall pay to the pension fund a special assessment equal to one percent of the gross compensation of such employee from city employment. Such contribution shall be made by payroll deduction. 

(H) In-Service Disability Benefit. A member who has completed at least 15 years of service and who is totally disabled due to injuries or mental incapacities sustained in the line of duty and who is unable to perform the duties of his or her city office or position as the result thereof, shall be entitled to a pension in the amount of one-half of his or her annual compensation.

The disability pension hereby shall continue for the duration of the total disability of the disabled employee and, should such disability continue for the balance of the life of such employee, shall continue during such employee’s life. Payment of such pension shall commence immediately as of the date such total disability is established. Proof of such total disability shall consist of a sworn statement of three practicing physicians, designated by the board, that the employee is in the condition of health which would totally disable him from performing the duties of his position or office. Such person shall thereafter be subject to physical examination at any reasonable time upon order of the board, and upon his refusal to submit to any such examination, his compensation shall cease.

Any pension which would be payable under the terms of this section to a city employee in the event of a total disability shall be payable to the surviving spouse of any city employee who dies; provided, that such spouse is not entitled to benefits under subsection (D) of this section. If any such spouse shall die or remarry, the pension payable under the terms of this section shall be payable to the child or children of the deceased employee until such child or children attain the age of 18 years. In all events, the spousal pension provided herein shall end upon the death or remarriage of the surviving spouse or upon the date on which the youngest of the deceased employee’s children shall attain 18 years of age. (Ord. 3633 § 6, 2006; Ord. 3515 § 1, 1998; Ord. 3440 § 1, 1996; Ord. 3341 § 2, 1993; Ord. 3213 §§ 1 – 4, 1989; Ord. 2745 §§ 3 – 6, 1970)

*Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 3728 adds Section 165.18 to the code excluding employees and elected officials hired, elected or appointed after May 21, 2014, from participating in the defined benefit provisions of the city of Meadville employees’ retirement and pension fund.


165.04 Contributions to fund – Refunds and determination of continuous service.

(A) Except as has been heretofore (and may hereafter from time to time be) otherwise provided in an applicable labor relations agreement approved by the city council of the City of Meadville, each officer and employee of the city shall contribute to the fund monthly during his employment by the city until retirement a sum equal to five percent of such officer’s or employee’s monthly wage, salary or such other compensation due to any such employee. The city treasurer, or such person as he or she may designate, is hereby authorized to deduct such sum from the pay, salary or compensation of each officer and employee required to make payment hereunder and to pay the same over to the treasurer of the city employees’ retirement and pension fund, to be applied to the purposes of this article.

(B) Said sums shall be inclusive of all required payments of the fund pursuant to any and all provisions of this section.

(C) If for any cause a person contributing to the fund has served less than 12 years and ceases to be in the service of the city, he shall become entitled to the total amount of the contributions paid into the fund by him, with simple interest at five percent per annum if he is not a member of a bargaining unit or without interest if he is a member of a bargaining unit.

(D) If for any cause any person contributing to the fund ceases to be in the service of the city before he has become entitled to any compensation (including for this purpose failure of a member to timely file a notice to vest), the total amount of the contributions paid by him into the fund shall be refunded, in full, with five percent simple interest per annum if he is not a member of a bargaining unit or without interest if he is a member of a bargaining unit. However, if any person has the amount contributed returned to him as aforesaid, and shall afterward re-enter the service of the city, he shall not be entitled to the compensation designated, unless he returns to the fund the amount withdrawn, in which event the required period of service under this article shall be computed from the time he first entered the service of the city omitting only the time absent from city employment, otherwise, the date of his period of service shall commence upon his re-entering city service. In the event the reason for leaving the city employment is due to service in the armed forces of the United States by enlistment or otherwise, and if upon honorable discharge from the service, an employee returns to city employment, upon payment into the fund of the same contributions he would have been required to make for the period of his time spent in the armed forces, and provided such service is not in excess of six years, the period of service shall be included in his period of service of the city for pension purposes. The required contributions for time spent in the armed forces shall be calculated at the same rate paid by other employees during the same period and calculated on the rate of pay drawn by such employee at the time of leaving city employment, time spent in the service of the United States armed forces and return to city employment shall be continuous, except that a period of 30 days after discharge from the armed forces and return to city employment may be considered as continuous time.

(E) In the event of the death of any person after he becomes entitled to the compensation and has not elected to retire, the total amount of contributions paid into the fund by him shall be paid over to his widow first, if she survives him; if his widow does not survive him then to his children equally; and if there be no widow or children, then to his estate with interest at five percent simple interest per annum if he was not a member of a bargaining unit or without interest if he was a member of a bargaining unit. 

(F) In the event of the death of any person after he becomes entitled to the compensation herein and after he has commenced receiving retirement payments hereunder, the total amount of his contributions paid into the fund less the retirement benefits paid to him shall be paid over to his widow first, if she survives him; if she does not survive him, then to his children equally; and if there be no widow or children, then to his estate with five percent simple interest per annum if he was not a member of a bargaining unit or without interest if he was a member of a bargaining unit. It is the intent of this section that an employee, whether dying before or after he has commenced to receive retirement benefits, be entitled to a return of all the contributions made by him to the fund. This section shall also be applicable insofar as a return of the employee’s service increment contribution is concerned.

(G) Unused accumulated sick leave of up to a maximum of 110 days for which the member does not receive compensation may be credited as continuous service for purposes of calculating years of service under the plan at a rate of one day of continuous service for every two days of unused accumulated sick leave. (Ord. 3656 § 1, 2008; Ord. 3633 §§ 1 – 4, 2006; Ord. 3440 § 2, 1996; Ord. 3341 § 3, 1993; Ord. 3173 § 1, 1988; Ord. 2745 § 7, 1970)   


165.05 Optional contribution of laborers on per diem wage.

No person holding a position in the city as a laborer, at a per diem wage, shall be compelled to pay or contribute toward the fund herein provided for, but he shall have the option or choice of so doing, and shall only, upon electing to contribute to the fund, become entitled to the compensation provided by this article. However, he shall be required to contribute three percent of his wages and the same percentage upon any amount of compensation he receives after his retirement. (Ord. 2361 § 5, 1954) 


165.06 Mandatory retirement age.

Repealed by Ord. 3758. (Ord. 2361 § 6, 1954) 


165.07 Department heads to certify records to board.

The head of every department and office, employing persons entitled under the provisions of this article to receive compensation, shall certify from department or office records to the board all persons so employed, the amount of salary or wages which is paid to such employee, together with dismissals, resignations or terminations of service, and such other relative information as the board may require. (Ord. 2361 § 7, 1954) 


165.08 Annual appropriation by city.

Council shall annually set aside, apportion and appropriate out of the taxes and income of the city and give over to the board a sum sufficient to maintain the compensation due under this article. (Ord. 2745 § 8, 1970) 


165.09 Persons entitled to benefits – Definitions.

The benefits conferred by this article shall apply to all persons employed in any capacity, by or holding positions in the city, in accordance with the provisions of this article and in following and keeping with the definitions set forth as follows: 

(A) “Person” means an officer or employee of the city. 

(B) “Employee” means a person in the service of the city, who is either or not now adequately protected under all circumstances by pension authorized by the laws of this commonwealth and in force at the time of the passage of this article (May 25, 1954). 

(C) “Officer” means a person elected or appointed to city service. 

(D) “Board” means the officers’ and employees’ retirement board. 

(E) “Fund” means the officers’ and employees’ retirement fund. 

(F) “Joint coverage member” means an officer or employee of the city who is a member of the retirement system or fund and who has filed with the board a written statement that he elects Social Security coverage under an agreement with the Federal Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare entered into by the commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(G) “Involuntary retirement” means a retirement without the voluntary action of the employee, including but not limited to a dismissal by the city or a loss of an election, but does not include a retirement because of disability nor a retirement caused by the willful misconduct of an employee. (Ord. 2745 § 9, 1970) 


165.10 Computation of time of service.

The time of service herein specified shall be computed from the time of the first or original service to the city, and need not be continuous. (Ord. 2361 § 10, 1954) 


165.11 Pension not subject to attachment or assignment.

The pension herein provided shall not be subject to attachment or execution, and shall be payable only to the beneficiary designated by this article, and shall not be subject to assignment or transfer. (Ord. 2361 § 11, 1954)   


165.12 Compensation or pension involving other political subdivisions.

Any person holding a position in the city, whether elective or appointed, who receives salaries or wages from other political subdivisions shall be entitled to the same provisions of this article as though they received all of their salaries or wages from the City of Meadville; provided, that they contribute or pay into the fund monthly an amount equal to three percent of their combined salaries or wages, or, if they so choose, only on that portion of their salary or wages paid by the city, in which case they shall be entitled to receive the benefits provided by this article, based on that portion only. If they receive a pension from another political subdivision they shall be entitled to receive the benefits provided herein only on that portion of their salary or wages paid by the City of Meadville. (Ord. 2361 § 12, 1954) 


165.13 Beneficiaries prohibited from city employment.

Repealed by Ord. 3599. (Ord. 2361 § 13, 1954) 


165.14 Eligible persons to indicate total acceptance of coverage.

By the passage of this article the city elects to establish a retirement system and agrees to accept the provisions of law covering such retirement system as is provided for herein. It is hereby ordained that all persons defined as being eligible to be covered by this retirement system shall so elect in writing to become covered by this retirement system and shall indicate in writing that they thereby elect to accept and agree to the terms of this article in its entirety. (Ord. 2361 § 14, 1954) 


165.15 Benefit payments chargeable only to pension fund.

Payments for pension and allowances hereunder shall not be a charge on any other fund of the city treasury or of any fund under its control, except the fund as provided for herein. (Ord. 2361 § 15, 1954) 


165.16 Severability – Validity of remaining provisions.

The provisions of this article shall be severable and if any section or subsection is held to be unconstitutional or invalid, the decision shall not be construed to affect the validity of any of the remaining sections or subsection. It is hereby declared as the intent of council that this article would have been adopted as if such unconstitutional or invalid provisions had not been included herein. (Ord. 2361 § 16, 1954)


165.17 Deferred vested benefit.

Members who satisfy the following conditions shall be eligible for the deferred vested benefits described herein:

(A) Where a member shall have served for 12 years, or more, and shall have not attained the age of 60 years, and his tenure of office or employment shall be terminated without his voluntary action before the expiration of 20 years of service, after attaining the age of 60 years (pension entitlement date), the member shall be entitled to vest his retirement benefits subject to the conditions described in subsection (D) of this section.

(B) Where a member who has served for 20 years or more and his tenure of office or employment shall be terminated, then the member:

(1) After attaining the age of 55 years when his employment termination was not voluntary (pension entitlement date); or

(2) After attaining the age of 60 years, when his employment termination was voluntary (pension entitlement date); and

(3) Conditioned upon his continuing his contributions into the fund at the same rate as when he was last employed until he attains the age of 55 years;

shall be entitled to vest his retirement benefits subject to the conditions described in subsection (D) of this section.

(C) A member who voluntarily terminated his employment after 12 years of service without entitlement to a deferred vested benefit pursuant to subsections (A) or (B) of this section and before reaching the date which would have been the member’s normal retirement date (as defined in subsection (F) of this section), the member shall be entitled to vest his retirement benefits subject to the conditions described in subsection (D) of this section.

(D) The deferred vested pension benefits described in subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this section are specifically conditioned upon the following:

(1) The member must file with the city employees’ retirement and pension board a written notice of his intent to vest;

(2) The member must include in the notice the date he intends to terminate his service as an employee;

(3) The termination date shall be at least 30 days later than the date of notice to vest;

(4) The member must be in good standing with the city on the date of notice to vest; and

(5) The city employees’ retirement and pension board shall indicate on the notice to vest the member’s compensation (as defined in subsection (G) of this section).

(E) Upon reaching the member’s pension entitlement date in the case of member’s qualifying under subsections (A) or (B) of this section or upon reaching the date which would have been the member’s normal retirement date had the member continued his employment with the city, the member shall notify the city employees’ retirement and pension board, in writing, that the member desires to collect his pension. The amount of retirement benefits the member is entitled to receive shall be computed as follows:

(1) The initial determination of the member’s base retirement benefits shall be computed on the compensation indicated on the notice to vest; and 

(2) In the case of a member qualifying under subsection (A) of this section, the portion of the base retirement benefits due the member shall be determined by applying to the base amount the percentage that his years of service bears to 20 years of service;

(3) In the case of a member qualifying under subsection (B) of this section, the member shall be entitled to the base retirement benefit;

(4) In the case of members qualifying under subsection (C) of this section, the portion of the base retirement benefits due the member shall be determined by applying to the base amount the percentage that his years of service actually rendered bears to 20.

(F) Normal Retirement Date. For the purposes of this section, “normal retirement date” shall be the later of 20 years of service or reaching 60 years of age.

(G) Compensation. For the purposes of this section, “compensation” shall mean the rate of the monthly pay of the member as of the date of the notice to vest or the highest average annual salary which the member received during any five years of service preceding said date, whichever is higher. (Ord. 3633 § 5, 2006; Ord. 3489 §§ 1, 2, 1998; Ord. 3454 §§ 1, 2, 3, 1997)


165.18 Exclusion of employees and officials after May 21, 2014.

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in MMC 165.01 through 165.17, no person, including but not limited to an appointed official, elected official or a non-uniformed employee of the City of Meadville who is hired, appointed or elected on or after May 21, 2014, shall have any rights and/or be entitled to any benefits under MMC 165.01 through 165.17. The previous sentence does not apply to those employees who are members of a bargaining unit at the city. (Ord. 3728 § 1, 2014)


165.19 Defined contribution provisions.*

DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PLAN

(A) Eligibility for Participation in Defined Contribution (DC) Features. In general, this section applies only to non-uniformed persons on the first day of employment; provided, that all prerequisites to participation under the plan have been fulfilled, including, but not limited to, completion of any probationary status and grant of regular full-time (at least 35 hours per week) employee status on or after May 21, 2014, and completion of any forms required by the plan administrator. Such persons shall be referred to as participants. Any participant who participates in the defined contribution provisions of this section shall not be eligible to participate in the defined benefit features of this article for the same period of service.

(B) Definitions. 

“Account balance” means the balance of a participant’s account held under this section. A participant’s account balance shall be composed of all amounts allocated under this section (including the employer contribution participant account, the employee pre-tax and post-tax contribution participant account) and all related earnings thereon net of expenses thereon.

“Administrator” or “plan administrator” means the individual or firm appointed by the city to administer the plan. ICMA Retirement Corporation is appointed plan administrator. If ICMA shall resign or otherwise fail to serve, the administrator shall be the city manager.

“Normal retirement” means termination of employment of a participant after age 60. 

“Plan year” means the calendar year.

“Trustee” means the individual or entity selected by the city to hold the assets of this section in trust for the participants. Unless and until another appointment is made, the city shall be trustee of the assets of the plan.

“Valuation date” means the last day of the calendar year and any other date selected by the city. However, to the extent any assets are invested with an insurance or other investment company, valuation dates shall be determined in accordance with the investment contract or arrangement.

(C) Contributions.

(1) Employer. For each calendar year, the city as employer shall make a contribution to the plan that will be sufficient to satisfy the requirements of subsection (D) of this section.

(2) Employee. Participants shall make a mandatory contribution of five percent of base salary into the employee pre-tax contribution participant account. Participants may also make voluntary contributions into employee post-tax contribution participant account up to 10 percent of base salary or such lesser amount as may be permitted under the Internal Revenue Code (“Code”). All mandatory employee contributions designated as such made on or after the first payroll after this plan is adopted shall be paid or “picked up” by the employer in lieu of contributions by the employees and thereafter treated as employer contributions for federal income taxation purposes within the meaning of Section 414(h)(2) of the Code. The contributions may be paid or picked up by a reduction in the cash salary, by an offset against future salary increases or a combination of both. Affected employees shall not have the option of choosing to receive the picked up contributions directly in lieu of having them paid by the employer to the plans. Notwithstanding the foregoing, contributions so picked up shall continue to be treated as employee contributions for all purposes of state and local law in the same manner and to the same extent as employee contributions made prior to the date of the pick up, including, by way of illustration and not limitation, being treated as part of the affected employee’s compensation for both Pennsylvania and local income tax laws and for purposes of computing any benefits under the affected employee’s pension plan.

(D) Allocation of Contributions.

(1) Separate Accounts. The administrator shall maintain a separate participant account for each participant setting forth the participant’s account balance. The administrator shall make the allocations among such participant accounts as set forth in this section.

(2) Employer contributions (made under subsection (C) of this section) shall be allocated as of each allocation date among the employer contribution participant accounts of eligible participants in the amount of seven percent of the base salary that was paid to each such participant since the previous allocation date. The last day of the plan year and any interim date chosen by the city and the administrator shall be allocation dates. The amount of the employer contribution may be amended or stopped all together subject to any collective bargaining requirements.

In order for an employer contribution for a calendar year to be allocated to a participant account, the participant must not have accrued any other benefit under this article for the same period of time.

(E) Vesting. A participant who ceases to be an employee in employment for any reason other than death, total and permanent disability, or normal retirement, and who has completed the following years of service shall vest in his employer contribution participant account balance in accordance with the following schedule. A participant who renders 12 full months in employment with the city shall have recorded a year of service. 

	Years of Service	Percentage Vested

	Less than 5 Years	0%

	5 Years or More	100%

Employee contributions are always 100 percent vested.

A participant shall immediately vest upon death, total and permanent disability or normal retirement.

Any portion of a participant’s account balance which is not vested upon termination of employment for a reason other than death, disability or normal retirement shall be forfeited. Forfeitured amounts shall be held in a suspense account until used to reduce the employer’s contributions.

If a participant terminates employment and is later rehired, his years of service shall begin upon his rehire date.

(F) Allocation of Gain or Loss.

(1) General Pooled Assets. As of each valuation date, the administrator shall determine the fair market value of all assets in the plan that are not held in suspense accounts, segregated accounts or insurance contracts. Any gain or loss on such assets since the previous valuation date shall be allocated among all participant accounts (except those accounts held in segregated accounts) in proportion to account balances as of the previous valuation date. 

(2) Segregated Accounts (Including Participant-Directed Investment Accounts). As of each valuation date, the administrator shall determine the market value of all assets held in each segregated account. A separate allocation of gain or loss shall be made for each segregated account. If there is more than one participant account within a segregated account, the gain or loss since the previous valuation date for that segregated account shall be allocated in proportion to the account balances as of the previous valuation date.

(3) Holding Account. Contributions made between allocation dates (under subsection (D) of this section) shall be allocated to a holding account which shall also hold any related earnings all of which shall be allocated to participant accounts pursuant to the process established by the administrator and the city. 

(4) Investment Contracts. Notwithstanding subsections (F)(1), (2), and (3) of this section, if any plan assets are invested through any arrangement with an insurance company or other investment organization, accounts shall be valued and gains, losses, costs, and expenses shall be allocated (but not less frequently than annually) in accordance with the terms of the applicable investment contract or arrangement.

(G) Participant-Directed Investments. Notwithstanding the provisions or the other sections of this section, if the administrator establishes such a policy, any participant, beneficiary, or alternate payee with an account balance under this article may direct how to invest all, or a certain portion, of his participant account. The city or administrator shall have sole discretion to determine what investment options will be made available to the participants. All contributions, expenses, income or losses shall be allocated in accordance with the policies established under this section. To the extent that the participants do not exercise their rights under this section, the allocation of expenses, income or losses may be made pursuant to subsection (F) of this section or such other provisions set forth by the plan administrator and the city and the investment of their accounts may be made pursuant to subsection (F) of this section or such other provisions set forth by the plan administrator and the city. To the extent permitted by law, the trustee and administrator shall be relieved of any fiduciary responsibility for investment decisions made pursuant to this section; provided, however, that the plan administrator or trustee has followed the instructions of the participant and that said instructions are in accordance with applicable law. Upon the death or incapacity of the participant, the powers granted to the participant under this section shall inure to the benefit of the participant’s beneficiary, trustee or legal representative.

(H) Distributions.

(1) Applicability. This section governs the distribution of vested account balances. Furthermore, distributions are subject to the requirements of the applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code as set forth in this plan document.

(2) General Rule. Distribution of a participant’s vested account balance shall be made in a lump sum as soon as it is administratively feasible to make distribution following a participant’s termination of employment with the employer and subject to such limitations and conditions utilized by the administrator. A participant’s account balance shall be valued as of the valuation date coincident with or immediately preceding the date of distribution. 

(3) Annuity Option. Notwithstanding subsection (H)(2) of this section, if a participant has a vested account balance in excess of $5,000 and the participant desires to convert his lump-sum benefit into an annuity, he may do so under the rules and conditions established by the city and the administrator. This annuity shall be purchased from a third-party insurance firm selected by the city or the administrator.

(4) Death Benefit. Each participant shall complete a beneficiary designation form designating the person to whom his account balance shall be paid upon his death. If no beneficiary form has been completed, the participant’s account balance shall be paid to his spouse, or if no spouse to his estate. All payments shall be made in a lump sum payment. 

(5) Loans and Hardship Distributions. Loans and hardship distributions of plan assets are not permitted.

(I) Administration.

(1) Powers of the Employer. The employer shall have the following powers and duties:

(a) To appoint and remove, with or without cause, the plan administrator;

(b) To amend or terminate the plan;

(c) To appoint a committee to facilitate administration of the plan and communications to participants;

(d) To decide all questions or eligibility (i) for plan participation, and (ii) upon appeal by an participant, employee or beneficiary, for the payment of benefits;

(e) To engage professionals with regard to plan matters and plan’s operation;

(f) To take all actions and to communicate to the plan administrator in writing all necessary information to carry out the terms of the plan and trust; and

(g) To notify the plan administrator in writing of the termination of the plan.

(2) Duties of the Plan Administrator. The plan administrator shall have the following powers and duties:

(a) To construe and interpret the provisions of the plan;

(b) To maintain and provide such returns, reports, schedules, descriptions, and individual account statements, as are required by law within the times prescribed by law; and to furnish to the employer, upon request, copies of any or all such materials, and further, to make copies of such instruments, reports, descriptions, and statements as are required by law available for examination by participants and such of their beneficiaries who are or may be entitled to benefits under the plan in such places and in such manner as required by law;

(c) To obtain from the employer such information as shall be necessary for the proper administration of the plan;

(d) To determine the amount, manner, and time of payment of benefits hereunder;

(e) To appoint and retain such agents, counsel, and accountants for the purpose of properly administering the plan;

(f) To distribute assets of the trust to each participant and beneficiary in accordance with the terms of this section;

(g) To pay expenses from the trust; and

(h) To do such other acts reasonably required to administer the plan in accordance with its provisions or as may be provided for or required by law.

(3) Protection of the Employer. The employer shall not be liable for the acts or omissions of the plan administrator, but only to the extent that such acts or omissions do not result from the employer’s failure to provide accurate or timely information as required or necessary for proper administration of the plan.

(4) Protection of the Plan Administrator. The plan administrator may rely upon any certificate, notice or direction purporting to have been signed on behalf of the employer which the plan administrator believes to have been signed by a duly designated official of the employer. 

(5) Resignation or Removal of Plan Administrator. The plan administrator may resign at any time effective upon 60 days’ prior written notice to the employer. The plan administrator may be removed by the employer at any time upon 60 days’ prior written notice to the plan administrator. Upon the resignation or removal of the plan administrator, the employer may appoint a successor plan administrator; failing such appointment, the employer shall assume the powers and duties of plan administrator. Upon the resignation or removal of the plan administrator, any trust assets invested by or held in the name of the plan administrator shall be transferred to the trustee in cash or property, fair market value, except that the return of trust assets invested in a contract issued by an insurance company shall be governed by the terms of that contract.

(6) No Termination Penalty. The plan administrator shall have no authority or discretion to impose any termination penalty upon its removal.

(7) Decisions of the Plan Administrator. All constructions, determinations, and interpretations made by the plan administrator pursuant to this section or by the employer pursuant to this section shall be final and binding on all persons participating in the plan, given deference in all courts of law to the greatest extent allowed by applicable law, and shall not be overturned or set aside by any court of law unless found to be arbitrary or capricious, or made in bad faith. 

(J) Miscellaneous.

(1) Nonguarantee of Employment. Nothing contained in this plan shall be construed as a contract of employment between the employer and any employee, or as a right of an employee to be continued in the employment of the employer, as a limitation of the right of the employer to discharge any of its employees, with or without cause.

(2) Rights to Trust Assets. No employee or beneficiary shall have any right to, or interest in, any assets of the trust upon termination of his/her employment or otherwise, except as provided from time to time under this plan, and then only to the extent of the benefits payable under the plan to such employee or beneficiary out of the assets of the trust. All payments of benefits as provided for in this plan shall be made solely out of the assets of the trust and none of the fiduciaries shall be liable therefor in any manner. 

(3) Nonalienation of Benefits. Except as provided in subsections (J)(4) and (6) of this section, benefits payable under this plan shall not be subject in any manner to anticipation, alienation, sale, transfer, assignment, pledge, encumbrance, charge, garnishment, execution, or levy of any kind, either voluntary or involuntary, prior to actually being received by the person entitled to the benefit under the terms of the plan; and any attempt to anticipate, alienate, sell, transfer, assign, pledge, encumber, charge or otherwise dispose of any right to benefits payable hereunder, shall be void. The trust shall not in any manner be liable for, or subject to, the debts, contracts, liabilities, engagements or torts of any person entitled to benefits hereunder. 

(4) Qualified Domestic Relations Order. Notwithstanding subsection (J)(3) of this section, amounts may be paid with respect to a participant pursuant to a domestic relations order, but if and only if the order is determined to be enforceable under state law.

(5) Nonforfeitability of Benefits. Subject only to the specific provisions of this plan, nothing shall be deemed to deprive a participant of his/her right to the nonforfeitable interest to which he/she becomes entitled in accordance with the provisions of the plan.

(6) Incompetency of Payee. In the event any benefit is payable to a minor or incompetent, to a person otherwise under legal disability, or to a person who, in the sole judgment of the employer, is by reason of advanced age, illness, or other physical or mental incapacity incapable of handling the disposition of his/her property, the employer may apply the whole or any part of such benefit directly to the care, comfort, maintenance, support, education, or use of such person or pay or distribute the whole or any part of such benefit to:

(a) The parent of such person;

(b) The guardian, committee, or other legal representative, wherever appointed, of such person;

(c) The person with whom such person resides;

(d) Any person having the care and control of such person; or

(e) Such person personally.

The receipt of the person to whom any such payment or distribution is so made shall be full and complete discharge therefor.

(7) Inability to Locate Payee. Anything to the contrary herein notwithstanding, if the employer is unable, after reasonable effort, to locate any participant or beneficiary to whom an amount is payable hereunder, such amount shall be forfeited and held in the trust for application against the next succeeding employer contribution or contributions required to be made hereunder. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, such amount shall be reinstated, by means of an additional employer contribution, if and when a claim for the forfeited amount is subsequently made by the participant or beneficiary or if the employer receives proof of death of such person, satisfactory to the employer. To the extent not inconsistent with applicable law, any benefits lost by reason of escheat under applicable state law shall be considered forfeited and shall not be reinstated.

(8) Mergers, Consolidations, and Transfer of Assets. The plan shall not be merged into or consolidated with any other plan, nor shall any of its assets or liabilities be transferred into any such other plan, unless each participant in the plan would (if the plan then terminated) receive a benefit immediately after the merger, consolidation, or transfer that is equal to or greater than the benefit he/she would have been entitled to receive immediately before the merger, consolidation, or transfer (if the plan had then terminated). 

(9) Employer Records. Records of the employer as to an employee’s or participant’s period of service, termination of service and the reason therefor, leaves of absence, reemployment, earnings, and salary will be conclusive on all persons, unless determined to be incorrect.

(10) Gender and Number. The masculine pronoun, whenever used herein, shall include the feminine pronoun, and singular shall include the plural, except where the context requires otherwise.

(11) Applicable Law. The plan shall be construed under the laws of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, except to the extent superseded by federal law. The plan is established with the intent that it meets the requirements under the code. The provisions of this plan shall be interpreted in conformity with these requirements.

In the event of any conflict between the plan and a policy or contract issued hereunder, the plan provisions shall control; provided, however, no plan amendment shall supersede an existing policy or contract unless such amendment is required to maintain qualification under Section 401(a) and 414(d) of the Code.

(K) Trust. A trust is hereby created to hold all the assets under this section for the exclusive benefit of participants and beneficiaries, except that expenses and taxes may be paid from the trust including investment expenses and reasonable compensation of plan administrator and reimbursement of reasonable expenses of plan administrator. 

The trustee or the plan administrator acting as agent for the trustee shall have all such powers of a trustee as are permitted under the laws of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

(L) Document Coordination. The defined contribution provisions of this section shall be construed in conformance with the provisions of City Ordinance 3700 of 2012 (additional code provisions, MMC 160.14 and 160.15); City Ordinance 3693 of 2011 (Heart Act, MMC 160.13); and City Ordinance 3655 of 2008 (code provisions, Article 160 MMC) including the rollover provisions of these ordinances associated with rollover out of the plan. No rollovers are permitted into the defined contribution fund or participant accounts.

MAINTENANCE AND ADMINISTRATION

(M) The provisions of the plan shall be maintained for the exclusive benefit of eligible employees and their beneficiaries.

(N) The employer hereby executes the declaration of trust of VantageTrust, intending this execution to be operative with respect to the provisions of plan codified in subsections (A) through (L) of this section established by the employer associated with the assets of the plan that are to be invested in the VantageTrust.

(O) The employer hereby agrees to serve as trustee under the provisions of the plan and to invest funds held thereunder in the VantageTrust.

(P) The city manager shall be the coordinator for the plan administration; shall receive reports, notices, etc. from the ICMA Retirement Corporation or the VantageTrust; shall cast, on behalf of the employer, any required votes under the VantageTrust; may delegate any administrative duties relating to the plan administration to appropriate departments.

(Q) The employer hereby authorizes the city manager to execute all necessary agreements with the ICMA Retirement Corporation incidental to the administration of the plan. References to any entity hereunder shall include successors of such entity. (Ord. 3730 §§ 1 – 6, 2014)

*Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 3730 adds the provisions of this section as Section 165.18. The section has been editorially renumbered to prevent duplication of numbering.


Article 171       AUTHORITIES*

Sections:

171.01  Authorities.

*Editor’s note: This article has been established to provide a synopsis of legislation relating to the creation of authorities by council. 


171.01       Authorities.

(A) Parking Authority. Under the provisions of the Parking Authority Law, Act of June 5, 1947 (P.L. 458), as amended, the parking authority was created by Ordinance No. 2249, passed October 10, 1950. Lease and management agreements were authorized as follows: 

(1) Agreement dated November 15, 1965, authorized by Ordinance No. 2623, passed November 19, 1965.

(2) Agreement dated May 15, 1967, authorized by Ordinance No. 2662, passed May 23, 1967.

(3) Agreement dated August 25, 1969, authorized by Ordinance No. 2716, passed October 14, 1969. 

(B) Housing Authority. Under the provisions of the Housing Authorities Law, Act of May 28, 1937 (P.L. 955), as amended, the housing authority was created by Resolution No. 1957-25, passed October 8, 1957. 

(C) Redevelopment Authority. Under the provisions of the Urban Redevelopment Law, Act of May 24, 1945 (P.L. 991), as amended, the redevelopment authority was created by resolution passed May 8, 1956. 

(D) Market Authority. Under the provisions of the Municipal Authorities Law, Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382), as amended, the market authority was created by Ordinance No. 2763, passed January 26, 1971. 

(E) Meadville Area Recreation Authority. Under the provisions of the Municipal Authorities Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382), as amended, the Meadville area recreation authority was created by Ordinance No. 2780, passed July 6, 1971, and amended by Ordinance No. 2973 of 1979, passed March 13, 1979. 

(F) Meadville Area Water Authority. Under the provisions of the Municipal Authorities Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382), as amended, the Meadville area water authority was created by Ordinance No. 3272, passed February 12, 1991.

(G) Meadville Area Sanitary Sewer Authority. Under the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Law, Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382), as amended, the Meadville Area Sanitary Sewer Authority was created by Ordinance No. 3400, passed April 26, 1995.


Article 173       BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY*

Sections:

173.01  Boards, commissions and committees continued and created.

173.02  Personnel board – Composition, term, vacancy and duties.

173.03  Planning commission – Appointment.

*Editor’s note: This article has been established to provide a synopsis of legislation relating to the creation of boards and commissions by council or the Third Class City Code. 


173.01       Boards, commissions and committees continued and created.

(A) The following boards, commissions and committees to advise and assist council are hereby continued and created: 

(1) Planning commission;

(2) Zoning hearing board;

(3) Police pension board;

(4) Firemen’s pension board;

(5) City employees’ pension board;

(6) Sewer assessment board of view;

(7) Shade tree commission;

(8) Codes review committee;

(9) Personnel board.

(B) Until further changed by council, the duties and powers of the above boards, commissions and committees shall be governed by the existing laws, ordinances and directives of council presently applicable to each. 

(C) The manner of appointment of personnel to serve on such boards, commissions and committees shall be as provided and directed by law. (Ord. 2683 § 15, 1968) 


173.02       Personnel board – Composition, term, vacancy and duties.

(A) The personnel board shall be composed of five members appointed by council. Council may appoint one councilman to be a member of the personnel board. Members shall serve for a five-year term, except, that of the first five members appointed, one shall serve for a term ending the first Monday of January, 1977, two for a term ending the first Monday of January, 1978, and two for a term ending the first Monday of January, 1979. Any vacancy in the office of any member shall be filled by council within 30 days of the vacancy. The term of any councilman serving as a member of the personnel board shall expire at the expiration of that person’s term of office as a member of council. 

(B) The personnel board shall: 

(1) Make recommendations to and otherwise assist council in the formulation of personnel policy. 

(2) Periodically review the procedures and practices established by the city manager and the application thereof, as well as the application of personnel policies established by council, and report the results of such review to council.

(3) Be available for consultation and assistance to the city manager on any matters concerning city personnel under his jurisdiction. 

(4) At council’s request, investigate any complaint concerning any personnel policy, practice or procedure or the application of the same. 

(5) Perform such other duties concerning city personnel as council may lawfully direct. 

(C) The personnel board shall be charged with the investigation of complaints from city employees or other persons alleging the existence of discriminatory policies or practices affecting municipal employment. Subject to the following limitations, the personnel board may issue such regulations as it deems proper to assure the fair and impartial hearing of any and all such complaints:

(1) Complaints shall be filed in the office of the city clerk who shall forthwith notify the chairman of the personnel board and the city manager.

(2) Complaints shall be in writing on forms prescribed by the personnel board.

(3) The city clerk shall forward a certified copy of such complaints to the head of the department, authority or commission against which such complaints have been filed. City departments, authorities or commissions shall make answer to any such complaint in writing within 10 days of the receipt of a certified copy of the complaint. Answers shall be filed with the city clerk who shall forthwith forward copies of said answers to the personnel board and the city manager.

(4) Upon receipt of a formal complaint and answer, the personnel board shall meet and review same. If, in the unanimous opinion of the personnel board, a review of the complaint and answer indicates no basis for the complaint or that the complaint has been adjudicated in another form or that the complaint could more properly be adjudicated in another form, the same shall be dismissed. The complainant shall be given written notice of the dismissal of the complaint and the grounds therefor.

(5) Should any member of the personnel board believe a complaint to merit investigation, the board shall conduct a public hearing upon the complaint no later than 20 days after the date upon which the answer to the complaint was filed with the city clerk.

(6) The personnel board is hereby empowered to compel the attendance and testimony of any city officer or employee at hearings conducted pursuant to this article.

(7) Persons shall be entitled to appear before the board and shall have a right to be represented by counsel of their choice. The city manager shall attended all hearings conducted pursuant to this article and shall be entitled to give such testimony as he deems relevant to the controversy before the board.

(8) The personnel board shall issue written findings of fact no later than 10 days after the final hearing held upon any complaint.

(9) All decisions of the personnel board shall be by simple majority vote of all members of the board except as provided in subsection (C)(4) of this section.

(10) Upon receipt of the personnel board’s findings of fact, the city clerk shall forward a copy thereof to the complainant at his last known address and a copy thereof to the city manager.

(11) Upon receipt of findings of fact of the personnel board, the city manager shall review same and shall submit to the personnel board a written proposal for immediate and positive action designed to remedy any discriminatory practice or policy and the effects thereof which have been determined by the personnel board’s finding of fact. 

(12) The personnel board shall review the city manager’s proposed action and, if satisfied that the same is sufficient to remedy any discriminatory practice or policy and the effects thereof, shall communicate its agreement with the proposed action to the city manager in writing.

(13) If the personnel board and the city manager are unable to agree upon a course of conduct designed to remedy any discriminatory practice or policy and the effects thereof, the dispute shall be placed on the agenda of the next public city council meeting for decision.

(14) The personnel board shall delegate one of its members to present the board’s position to council should council action be required by subsection (13) of this section. (Ord. 2876 § 1, 1975; Ord. 2875 § 1, 1975; Ord. 2683 § 15, 1968)


173.03       Planning commission – Appointment.

(A) The planning commission, consisting of seven members, shall be appointed by the city council in the manner prescribed by law. All members of the planning commission shall be residents of the City of Meadville. At least five members of the commission shall not be officers or employees of the city. All members of the commission shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for necessary and reasonable expenses. Elected or appointed officers or employees of the city shall not, by reason of membership therein, forfeit the right to exercise the powers, perform the duties or receive the compensations of the municipal offices held by them during such membership. 

(B) The two additional members of the planning commission authorized by this section shall be appointed to such terms which require that appointments after the initial appointment shall be for a term of four years but shall be fixed so that not more than two members shall be re-appointed or replaced during any future calendar year. (Ord. 3068 §§ 1, 2, 1984) 


Article 175       CITY PLANNING COMMISSION*

(Reserved)

*Editor’s note: The Meadville city planning commission exists under authority of the Third Class City Code, Article XL, Section 4001. s    


Article 177       CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION*

(Reserved)

*Editor’s note: There are no sections in Article 177 MMC. This article has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 


Article 178 CITIZEN ADVISORY COMMITTEES*

Sections:

178.01    Citizens advisory committee.

178.02    Beautification committee.

178.03    Special study committees.

178.04    Memorial tree fund.

178.05    Repealer.

178.06    Shippen Fountain fund.

*The city council of the City of Meadville shall be served and assisted in its policy-making role by the citizen committees of this article.


178.01 Citizens advisory committee.

(A) Composition. The citizens advisory committee shall be a standing committee consisting of nine members appointed by city council. Members shall serve terms of three years. Terms shall be staggered so that three members are appointed February 15th each year. All members shall be residents of the City of Meadville. The committee shall elect a chairman and a recording secretary and may divide itself into such subcommittees as it deems necessary for the proper conduct of its affairs.

(B) Purpose. The purpose of the citizens advisory committee is to provide citizen participation in general or specific matters concerning city government including those specifically herein stated and others which may be from time to time specially assigned for committee study and report by action of the city council.

(C) Areas of Continuing Responsibility. The citizens advisory committee shall be specifically charged with the continuing duty to study and report upon:

(1) Grants. Any and all applications or proposals for the use of state or federal funds for community development purposes; and

(2) Human Relations. The status and development of human relations matters within the city including but not limited to fair and adequate housing practices, impartial enforcement of city ordinances and regulations, and equal employment opportunities for all citizens.

(D) Council Assignments. In addition to the areas of continuing responsibility set forth above, the city council may by motion from time to time assign specific projects to the citizens advisory committee.

(E) Committee Initiative. If the committee at any time desires to study and to report upon any matter not specifically charged to as by the terms of this section, it may specifically request the assignment of such project by the city council. Council’s decision upon such requests shall be determinative of the committee’s authority to pursue the subject matter.

(F) Reports. The committee shall make the following written reports of its activities to the city council. Reports shall be presented at public council meetings by a member of the committee.

(1) An annual report outlining all work of the committee during the previous year.

(2) Special reports detailing the results of the committee’s study of each project undertaken.

(G) Staff. The citizens advisory committee shall be assisted in its work by the city administration to the extent that the city manager determines such assistance to be available under staffing conditions from time to time existing.


178.02 Beautification committee.

(A) Composition. The beautification committee shall be a standing committee consisting of up to 15 members appointed by the city council in March of each year. Members serving on the committee on the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section shall serve until the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. Appointments shall be made after consideration of a slate of proposed candidates submitted during February of each year by those members of the beautification committee in office on February 1st of each year beginning in 2006. Appointments shall not be limited by any slate proposed by the committee. The city council may also add members to the committee up to the maximum compliment established in this section from time to time throughout the year. All members shall serve until new members are appointed in March of the year following the year in which they are appointed. All members shall be residents of the City of Meadville. The committee shall elect a chairman and a recording secretary and may divide itself into such subcommittees as it deems necessary for the conduct of its affairs.

(B) Purpose. The beautification committee shall assist the council in the advancement of aesthetic concerns within the city.

(C) Council Assignments. The city council may by motion from time to time assign specific projects to the beautification committee.

(D) Committee Initiative. If the committee at any time desires to study and to report upon any matter not specifically charged by the terms of this section, it may specifically request the assignment of such project by the city council. Council’s decision upon such requests shall be determinative of the committee’s authority to pursue the subject matter. 

(E) Auxiliary Members. The committee may be assisted in its work by any interested resident of the City of Meadville. Such persons shall be nonvoting auxiliary members of the committee. A listing of all persons serving in such capacity shall be given to the city council as part of the beautification committee’s annual report.

(F) Reports. The committee shall make written special reports detailing the results of the committee’s study of each project undertaken. Reports shall be presented at public council meetings by a member of the committee.

(G) Staff. The beautification committee shall be assisted in its work by the city administration to the extent that the city manager determines such assistance to be available under staffing conditions from time to time existing. (Ord. 3634 § 1, 2006; Ord. 3402 §§ 1, 2, 1995)


178.03 Special study committees.

(A) Authority. The city council may from time to time appoint special citizen study committees to consider and report upon specific matters requiring specialized expertise and analysis.

(B) Procedure. Such committees shall be created by resolution of city council. All such resolutions shall specify:

(1) The project to be studied;

(2) The membership of the committee;

(3) The nature of the report desired. 

(C) Termination. Each special study committee shall terminate and be discharged upon the filing of the committee’s final report under the terms of the resolution which created the committee. (Ord. 2975, 1979)


178.04 Memorial tree fund.

(A) There is hereby created among the accounts of the City of Meadville, a special trust fund account to be known and denominated as the City of Meadville memorial tree fund. 

(B) It shall be the purpose of the City of Meadville memorial tree fund to accept contributions from the public at large and to employ the sums so accumulated therein, together with any income earned thereupon, for the placement and maintenance of flowering trees in and along the public ways of the City of Meadville. 

(C) The City of Meadville memorial tree fund shall be administered by a board of four trustees, one of whom shall be the finance director of the City of Meadville, one of whom shall be the superintendent of the parks department of the City of Meadville, one of whom shall be the chairman of the shade tree commission, and one of whom shall be the chairman of the beautification subcommittee of the citizens advisory council. All actions of the trustees shall be by unanimous vote. No tree shall be placed by the trustees without the prior approval, by simple majority vote, of the shade tree commission of the City of Meadville. It is the intent of the city council of the City of Meadville that the trustees give preference to the use of flowering trees wherever such use is, in the opinion of the trustees, feasible. 

(D) A memorial book shall be purchased from the fund in which the names of persons in whose memory contributions to the fund are made shall be inscribed. The memorial book shall be held for public display at the Meadville Municipal Building at a place to be designated by the city manager of the City of Meadville. 

(E) If, at any time, continued maintenance of the fund hereby created becomes, in the opinion of the city council of the City of Meadville, impractical, the city council by resolution may dissolve the fund and direct that the proceeds therefrom be paid directly to the shade tree commission of the City of Meadville for the general purposes of said commission. (Ord. 2919, 1977)


178.05 Repealer.

All resolutions or motions of the city council of the City of Meadville creating citizen advisory committees or organizations of any nature are hereby repealed. Nothing in this section or in this article shall affect the continuation of any operating commission, committee, board or authority created by ordinance of the city council pursuant to specific authority granted by the Pennsylvania Third Class City Code. (Ord. 2975, 1979) 


178.06 Shippen Fountain fund.

(A) In accordance with the authority of Sections 2403 (1.1) and (61) of the Third Class City Code and the general powers provisions of the Optional Third Class City Charter Law, there is hereby created a special fund to be known and denominated as the City of Meadville Shippen Fountain fund.

(B) It is the purpose of the City of Meadville Shippen Fountain fund to accept contributions from the public at large and to employ the sums so accumulated therein, together with any income earned thereupon, for the restoration, repair and maintenance of the Shippen Fountain, and its surrounding fence, located within Diamond Park in the City of Meadville.

(C) The City of Meadville Shippen Fountain fund shall be used for the restoration and repair of the Shippen Fountain and surrounding fence upon the advice and recommendation of the Shippen Fountain board consisting of three members. Members of the board shall consist of Lori A. Soff, or her designee, by reason of her special interest and leadership in establishing the fund; the mayor of the City of Meadville; and the finance director of the City of Meadville. All actions of the board shall be by simple majority vote.

(D) If, at any time, continued maintenance of the fund hereby created becomes, in the opinion of the city council of the City of Meadville, impractical, the city council may dissolve the fund by repeal of this section, at which time all remaining funds shall be paid directly to the Crawford County Historical Society, for the express purpose of restoration, repair, and/or maintenance of the remaining statues and memorials located within Diamond Park in the City of Meadville. (Ord. 3669 § 1, 2009)


Article 179       CITY EMPLOYEE PRESCRIPTION DRUG REIMBURSEMENT FUND

Sections:

179.01  Creation of employees benefit fund.

179.02  Declaration of purpose.

179.03  Creation of accounts within the fund.

179.04  Contributions.

179.05  Definition of benefits.

179.06  Annual account adjustment.

179.07  Fund administration.

179.08  Termination of accounts and fund.


179.01       Creation of employees benefit fund.

(A) Creation of Account. There is hereby created among the accounts of the City of Meadville a special account for the purpose of providing city employee prescription drug reimbursement in accord with the terms of this article.

(B) Name of Fund. The fund hereby created shall be known and denominated as the Meadville city employees prescription drug reimbursement fund. (Ord. 2972, 1979)


179.02       Declaration of purpose.

(A) Purpose. It shall be the purpose of the Meadville city employees prescription drug reimbursement fund to provide prescription drug reimbursement benefits to persons on the active full-time city payroll in accord with the hereinafter- stated terms and conditions.

(B) Limitations. The employee benefits arising from the establishment of this fund shall be paid and administered only in accord with the terms of this article. (Ord. 2972, 1979)


179.03       Creation of accounts within the fund.

(A) Unit Funds. The Meadville city employees prescription drug reimbursement fund shall consist of a separate master unit account for each employee group participating in said fund whether by the terms of a labor relations agreement or by action of city council. 

(B) Employee Accounts. Each unit account shall consist of individual employee accounts. One such employee account shall be assigned to each full-time employee on the active payroll within participating employee unit. (Ord. 2972, 1979)


179.04       Contributions.

(A) Employer Contributions. The Meadville city employees prescription drug reimbursement fund shall be funded by contributions of the City of Meadville. Contributions shall be allocated to appropriate unit and employee accounts upon receipt of the fund.

(B) Basis of Contribution. City contributions to the fund shall be based upon rates from time to time approved by motion of the city council of the City of Meadville whether through approval of labor relations agreements or otherwise. 

(C) Time for Making Contribution. Contributions shall be paid from the general fund to the Meadville city employees prescription drug reimbursement fund in equal quarterly installments and shall be paid on or before the last day of each quarter. 

(D) Allocations of Contributions to Unit and Employees Accounts. Upon receipt of contributions by the fund, such contributions shall be immediately assigned to the appropriate unit and employee accounts in accord with the terms of this article, then existing labor relations agreements or separate council action.

(E) Charging of Claims. Individual employee claims for reimbursement of prescription drug expense made pursuant to the terms of this article shall be charged to the applicable employee and unit accounts within the fund when paid.

(F) Accounting. An annual accounting of all transactions of the Meadville city employees prescription drug reimbursement fund shall be made and filed among the record of the City of Meadville. Such accounting shall be in writing and as a public record shall be available for review by any employee of any participating employee group.

(G) Abatement of Contributions. Whenever the fund balance allocable to any unit account is sufficient in amount that the net interest thereupon, after administration expenses, equals the contribution to such unit account then required under the terms of labor relations agreements or city council directives, direct city contributions shall cease and abate. Direct city contributions will resume when necessary to meet agreed funding levels. (Ord. 3009 §§ 1, 2, 1981; Ord. 2972, 1979)


179.05       Definition of benefits.

(A) Reimbursable Expense. Full-time employees on the active payroll within any participating employee unit shall be entitled to cash reimbursement for any prescription drug expense actually incurred while such employee is a full-time employee within a participating unit and on the active payroll of the City of Meadville.

(B) Family Coverage. Reimbursement shall only be allowed for prescription drug expense incurred by employees as aforesaid or on behalf of the spouse or dependent children of any employee qualified under the terms of this article who are single and under the age of 19 years.

(C) Limitation of Benefits. The total amount payable to any employee individually or to any employee as the result of any prescription drug expense of a spouse of child shall not exceed the balance assigned to the claiming individual employee’s account at the time a claim or claims are made. Eligible claims properly filed which exceed the balance in any employee’s account at the time of filing will be reimbursed in installments in accord with the balances from time to time existing in said employee’s individual account within the fund.

(D) Time for Making Claims. Claims must be filed within 30 days after an eligible employee incurs a reimbursable prescription drug expense.

(E) Manner of Making Claim. Claims shall be made upon claim forms available in the office of the city clerk. A pharmacy receipt for the claimed expense must be attached to the claim form and must indicate that the prescription drug charge for which reimbursement is sought has been paid by the employee and that such charge is reimbursable under the terms of this article.

(F) Liability of Fund. The Meadville city employees prescription drug reimbursement fund shall only be liable to participating employees for valid claims. No employee or city officer may obligate the fund to any pharmacy or third person or entity for the payment of any prescription drug charges. Payment shall only be made to qualified employees as reimbursement for reimbursable charges actually paid by such employees.

(G) Fraudulent Claims. Any employee who submits a claim for prescription drug charges not actually incurred or not actually incurred by or on behalf of the employee, the employee’s spouse or child shall be considered to have submitted a fraudulent claim. Any person determined to have submitted a fraudulent claim shall be disqualified from all future participation in the plan and shall forfeit to the fund any and all sums credited to such employee’s individual employee account prior to the filing of the fraudulent claim.

(H) Time for Paying Claims. All reimbursable claims shall be paid to the claiming employee quarterly, beginning July 10, 1979. (Ord. 2972, 1979)


179.06       Annual account adjustment.

(A) Plan Year. The Meadville city employees prescription drug reimbursement fund shall operate on a calendar year.

(B) Unexpended Balances. Any and all unexpended balances in unit and individual employee accounts at the close of business on the thirty-first day of December of each year during the fund’s existence shall be adjusted as follows:

(1) Employee Account Adjustment. All unexpended sums credited to any individual employee account shall be canceled and transferred to the proper employee unit account for allocation in accord with subsection (B)(2) of this section.

(2) Unit Account Adjustment. All sums transferred to participating employee unit accounts in accord with the term of subsection (B)(1) of this section shall be equally allocated and credited to the individual employee accounts of each full-time employee within the unit on the active city payroll on January 1st of each year during the existence of the fund. (Ord. 2972, 1979)


179.07       Fund administration.

(A) Fund Administrator. The finance director of the City of Meadville shall administer the Meadville city employees prescription drug reimbursement fund. It shall be the duty of the fund administrator to comply to terms of this article and to properly manage the affairs of the fund.

(B) Investments. The fund administrator is hereby authorized to make such investments of sums to the fund as the fund administrator in his discretion deems proper and consistent with the proper operation of the fund. Interest earned in any calendar year shall be credited pro rata to the unit accounts and any interest balance in any unit account after payment of administration costs on the thirty-first day of each December shall be allocated to the employee accounts within such unit accounts in the same manner as herein above provided for reallocation of unexpended contributions.

(C) Administration Cost. The fund administrator shall keep records of all personnel and service costs incurred in the administration of the fund. Such expenses may be quarterly charged against the fund to the extent that there is interest or other income available for paying such expenses arising from the investment and management of the contributions of the city to the fund. In no event shall the base contributions of the city to the fund be chargeable for administration expenses. (Ord. 2972, 1979)


179.08       Termination of accounts and fund.

(A) Termination of Employee Participation. Any employee who ceases to be a full-time employee on the active city payroll shall become ineligible for continued participation in the fund. Any and all sums credited to such individual employee account shall be canceled and assigned to the appropriate unit fund for reallocation to the individual accounts of employees within such unit in the next calendar year.

(B) Unit Termination. Any employee unit which terminates its participation in the fund shall have no claim upon any individual employee accounts within such unit at the time of termination. Such sums shall be transferred to the general fund of the city upon termination of unit participation.

(C) Fund Termination. The Meadville city employees prescription drug reimbursement fund may be terminated by agreement with participating labor unions or by action of the city council for employees not subject to collective bargaining agreements. Should termination of the fund not provide for other distribution of moneys held at time of termination, such money shall revert to the general fund of the city.

(D) Dispute Resolution. Any disputes arising under the terms of this article or as a result of the administration of the fund created hereby shall be resolved by the majority vote of an arbitration panel which shall consist of (1) a representative of the employee unit from which the dispute arises; (2) the city manager; and (3) the chairman of the personnel board of the City of Meadville. (Ord. 2972, 1979)


Article 180       

ACCIDENT AND SICKNESS DISABILITY PLAN

Sections:

180.01  Purpose of the plan.

180.02  Definitions.

180.03  Administrative responsibility.

180.04  Eligibility.

180.05  Financing the plan.

180.06  Benefits.

180.07  Miscellaneous.


180.01       Purpose of the plan.

The City of Meadville hereby establishes an accident and sickness and disability plan for the purpose of protecting its employees against the loss of wages resulting from a temporary disability due to non-occupational sickness or accident. This plan shall become effective upon the date of the enactment of the ordinance codified in this section. (Ord. 2994, 1979)


180.02       Definitions.

In this plan, whenever the context so indicates, the singular or plural number, and the masculine, feminine or neuter gender shall each be deemed to include the other, the terms "he", "his" and "him" shall refer to an employee of either gender and the following words shall have the following meanings:

(A) "Total disability" means the inability, due to injury or sickness, to perform substantially all the material duties of the employee’s occupation.

(B) "Complications of pregnancy" shall mean:

(1) Conditions requiring medical treatment prior to or subsequent to the termination of pregnancy whose diagnoses are distinct from pregnancy but which are adversely affected by pregnancy or caused by pregnancy, such as acute nephritis, nephrosis, cardiac decompensation, missed abortion, disease of the vascular, hemopoietic, nervous, or endocrine systems, and similar medical and surgical conditions of comparable severity.

(2) Hyperemesis gravidarum and pre-eclampsia requiring hospital confinement, ectopic pregnancy which is terminated, and spontaneous termination of pregnancy which occurs during a period of gestation in which a viable birth is not possible. 

The following conditions are not complications of pregnancy: false labor, occasional spotting, physician prescribed rest during the period of pregnancy, morning sickness and similar conditions associated with the management of a difficult pregnancy not constituting a classifiably distinct complication of pregnancy. (Ord. 2994, 1979)


180.03       Administrative responsibility.

(A) Assignment of Administrative Authority. The city manager is hereby assigned the authority to administer this plan. He shall administer the plan in accordance with its terms and shall have all the powers necessary to carry out the provisions of the plan. The city manager shall interpret the plan and shall determine all questions arising in the administration, interpretation and application of the plan. Any such determination by the city manager shall be conclusive and binding on all employees.

(B) Payment of Expenses. The expense of administration of the plan shall be paid from the special fund created by this article to finance the plan. (Ord. 2994, 1979)


180.04       Eligibility.

(A) Conditions of Eligibility. All full-time employees of the City of Meadville will be eligible to participate in this plan on and after their first day of employment. (Ord. 2994, 1979)


180.05       Financing the plan.

(A) Creation of Special Fund. A special fund is hereby created to finance this plan. The city shall pay into said special fund hereby created an amount actuarially computed according to the experience of the city as to benefits paid during prior years and the costs of administration of the plan. This amount shall be determined at least annually by the city manager. An additional amount will be paid to the plan by the city at any time the city manager determines that there may be insufficient funds to pay benefits due under the plan or pay the costs of administration of the plan. (Ord. 2994, 1979)


180.06       Benefits.

(A) The city will pay from the special fund a weekly benefit to all classes of employees, except Class 6-A, a weekly benefit of $60.00 per week when the employee incurs total disability. The weekly benefit for employees in Class 6-A shall be $35.00 per week.

(B) Except for employees in Class 5, benefits shall begin on the first day after the disabled employee has used up his accumulated sick leave. For employees in Class 5, benefits shall begin on the first day an employee is disabled due to injury or on the eighth day an employee is disabled due to sickness. 

(C) Benefits shall continue so long as the employee is totally disabled but no longer than 13 consecutive weeks.

(D) No benefit shall be paid if: 

(1) The employee engages in any other work for remuneration or profit; or

(2) The employee is not under the direct care of a licensed physician; or

(3) The disability is covered under the Workman’s Compensation Act or similar legislation; or

(4) The disability is intentionally self-inflicted; or

(5) The disability is due to normal pregnancy and not a complication of pregnancy.

(E) Successive periods of disability shall be considered as one continuous period of disability unless said separate periods are:

(1) Due to unrelated causes commencing after the employee has returned to full-time active work; or

(2) Separated by two or more weeks of full-time continuous work. (Ord. 2994, 1979)


180.07       Miscellaneous.

(A) Neither the establishment of this plan or special fund hereby created, nor any modification thereof, nor the payment of any benefits, shall be construed as giving to any employee or any other person a legal or equitable right against the city, or any officer or employee thereof or the city manager, except as herein provided.

(B) This agreement shall be construed according to the laws of the state of Pennsylvania, and all provisions hereof shall be administered according to the laws of Pennsylvania. (Ord. 2994, 1979)


PART 3 BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION CODE

Articles:

Title 1. Business Regulation and Licensing

305    Circuses and Menageries

309    Dances and Dance Halls

313    Peddlers, Hucksters and Solicitors

317    Transient Retail Merchants

321    Vehicles for Transportation

325    Sexually Oriented Business Regulations

Title 3. Taxation

341    Earned Income and Net Profits Tax

345    Repealed

349    Local Services Tax

353    Juke Box and Mechanical Amusement Device Tax

357    Per Capita Tax

358    Repealed

360    Realty Transfer Tax

361    Improvement and Economic Revitalization of the Meadville Junior High School Area Tax Assistance Plan

362    Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Code

363    Improvement of Deteriorating Real Property or Areas Tax Exemption


Article 305       CIRCUSES AND MENAGERIES

Sections:

305.01  License required.

305.02  License fees.

305.99  Penalty.


305.01       License required.

No person shall conduct any circus or menagerie within the city without first obtaining a license therefor from the city clerk, which license shall express for what it is granted and the time it is to continue. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1874) 


305.02       License fees.

Applicants for a circus or menagerie license shall pay the following fees: those carrying less than 20 cars shall pay a license fee of $50.00 per day and those carrying 20 cars or more shall pay a license fee of $75.00 per day. (Ord. 1757 § 1, 1927)


305.99       Penalty.

Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $100.00. (Ord. 80 § 5, 1874) 


Article 309       DANCES AND DANCE HALLS*

Sections:

309.01  Permit fees.

*Editor’s note: The city clerk issues permits for dances and licenses dance halls pursuant to Section 2630 et seq. of the Third Class City Code. Licensed places are to be kept in a clean, healthful and sanitary condition. Inspection by police officers and orders to vacate are authorized by Section 2637 of the Third Class City Code. The presence of minors under 16 years of age and closing hours are regulated by Sections 2638 and 2639 of the Third Class City Code. 


309.01       Permit fees.

The following fees shall be charged for the following permits: 

(A) Public dance or ball permit: $2.00;

(B) Dance instruction – hall license: $18.00 per annum (or part thereof);

(C) All other dance hall licenses: $27.00 per annum (or part thereof). (Ord. 3176 § 10, 1988)


Article 313       

PEDDLERS, HUCKSTERS AND SOLICITORS

Sections:

313.01  Definitions.

313.02  License required – Compliance.

313.03  License personal and not transferable.

313.04  Valid days and hours.

313.05  License application form and information.

313.06  License evidenced by license cards.

313.07  Licensee to exhibit license.

313.08  Qualifications of licensee – License refusal.

313.09  License suspension or revocation.

313.10  License granted three days after application.

313.11  Peddler’s license fees.

313.12  Huckster’s license fee.

313.13  Manufacturer’s agent license fee.

313.14  Soliciting agent’s license fee.

313.15  No licensee fee for solicitor.

313.16  Hawker’s license fee.

313.17  License term.

313.18  License fee exceptions.

313.19  License required though fee not collected.

313.20  Illegal use of licenses.

313.21  Article intent as police power exercise.

313.99  Penalty.


313.01       Definitions.

For the purpose of this article, certain terms are defined as follows: 

(A) "Peddler" means any person who goes about from door to door with goods, wares, and/or merchandise, other than as described in subsection (B) of this section, the ownership of which is vested in him, and offering the same for immediate sale and/or delivery. 

(B) "Huckster" means any person who goes about from door to door selling or offering for sale farm, truck and/or garden produce, fruit, bakery, fish and/or poultry products, whether the same be of his own raising or production or not, or who sells the same from a railroad car. 

(C) "Hawker" means any person who establishes a stand or place of business on the traveled portion of any business street or sidewalk or any public place adjacent thereto for the purpose of selling or offering for sale, or advertising, goods, wares and/or merchandise, or offering or distributing samples thereof.

(D) "Manufacturer’s agent" means any person who goes about from door to door as the agent or representative of some other person, firm or corporation, exhibiting samples of goods, wares and/or merchandise, or describing the same, for the purpose of taking or receiving orders for present or future delivery thereof or on account of his principal. 

(E) "Soliciting agent" means any person who goes about from door to door for the purpose of securing or obtaining subscriptions or contracts for the purchase or otherwise acquiring by the person or persons solicited on his own behalf or that of another, of any magazine, book, periodical, study- course or other publications, or any of them. 

(F) "Solicitor" means any person who goes about from door to door, or from person to person, and solicits or attempts to solicit money and/or other contributions for any public or private charity wheresoever situate. 

(G) The use of the masculine pronoun in this article shall be taken to mean male or female, and when relating to a principal or manufacturer shall include an individual, corporation or partnership. (Ord. 2066 §§ 1, 22, 1940)


313.02       License required – Compliance.

No person within the city shall be or engage in the business of peddler, huckster, hawker, manufacturer’s agent, soliciting agent and/or solicitor, or any of them as defined in MMC 313.01, without having first obtained a license for each and every such person from the city clerk and otherwise complying with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 2066 § 2, 1940)   


313.03       License personal and not transferable.

Licenses provided for under this article shall be personal and will not be issued to a firm or corporation, nor to an employer, nor in bulk applications, but only on the application of the proposed licensee in the manner provided in MMC 313.05. Each license shall be surrendered to the city clerk by the licensee upon its expiration and shall not be transferable. (Ord. 2066 § 3, 1940) 


313.04       Valid days and hours.

No license granted under the provisions of this article shall be valid except on weekdays only, and on such days between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. (Ord. 2066 § 4, 1940) 


313.05       License application form and information.

Application for a license shall be made on a written or printed form furnished by the city and directed to the city clerk, signed by the applicant who shall affirm to the truth of the facts thereon stated. Each applicant shall be required to give his age, place of legal residence, name of employer or principal, if any, the names and addresses of two reputable citizens, resident business or professional men in the United States who may be referred to as to his reputation for honesty and fair dealing, and such facts as may be necessary to establish his classification. In addition, any application for a license as a manufacturer’s agent, soliciting agent or solicitor must be accompanied by a proper certificate from the principal of such applicant on a form prescribed by the city clerk, certifying such manufacturer’s agent, soliciting agent or solicitor to be employed by him and defining the scope of his employment, and, if a solicitor, the purpose of the contribution desired. (Ord. 2066 § 5, 1940)


313.06       License evidenced by license cards.

Licenses shall be evidenced by cards bearing the date of issue, the seal of the city, the name of the licensee, his classification and the period of limitation. They shall be signed by the city clerk and countersigned by the licensee. (Ord. 2066 § 6, 1940)


313.07       Licensee to exhibit license.

Any licensee shall be required to exhibit his license upon demand by any police officer or by any person whom he may approach for the purpose of his business, and failure on his part to show such license when so demanded shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this article. (Ord. 2066 § 7, 1940) 


313.08       Qualifications of licensee – License refusal.

It is the intent of this article that each licensee hereunder shall be a reputable and law-abiding person engaged only in the pursuit of lawful business, and a license shall, therefore, be refused any applicant who fails to sign the required application or to otherwise comply with the provisions of this article, or one who upon investigation shall have been found to have been convicted of a crime or misdemeanor, or one whose references do not show him to be a reputable and law-abiding person or refuse to furnish required information as to the applicant. (Ord. 2066 § 8, 1940)


313.09       License suspension or revocation.

Any license issued under the provisions of this article may be suspended by the city clerk at any time upon well-founded complaint of any resident or police officer of the city and shall be forthwith surrendered upon demand to the city clerk or to any police officer. Following a hearing of such complaint within 24 hours after the suspension of the license the city clerk may, for proper cause shown, revoke the license. The licensee shall present himself before the city clerk for such hearing upon notice to do so given by any police officer and his failure to appear shall be sufficient cause for revocation of the license. (Ord. 2066 § 9, 1940)


313.10       License granted three days after application.

No license shall under any circumstances be granted until three days after the filing of the application for such license, and not then unless the applicant has fully complied with the requirements of this article. (Ord. 2066 § 10, 1940)   


313.11       Peddler’s license fees.

Any person, except as provided in MMC 313.18, obtaining a license to engage in the business of peddling shall be required to pay a license fee for the use of the city of $9.00 per day, $27.00 per week, $72.00 per month and $180.00 per year. (Ord. 3176 § 1, 1988) 


313.12       Huckster’s license fee.

Any person, except as provided in MMC 313.18, obtaining a license to engage in the business of huckstering shall be required to pay a license fee for the use of the city of $2.00 per day, $5.50 per week, $18.00 per month and $90.00 per year, if the licensee goes about from house to house, and $9.00 per car or part thereof if the licensee sells from a railroad car. (Ord. 3176 § 1, 1988) 


313.13       Manufacturer’s agent license fee.

Any person obtaining a license to engage in the business of manufacturer’s agent shall be required to pay a license fee for the use of the city of $9.00 per day, $27.00 per week, $72.00 per month or $180.00 per year. (Ord. 3176 § 1, 1988) 


313.14       Soliciting agent’s license fee.

Any person obtaining a license to engage in the business of soliciting agent shall be required to pay a license fee for the use of the city of $2.00 per day, $9.00 per week, $18.00 per month or $55.00 per year. (Ord. 3176 § 1, 1988)   


313.15       No licensee fee for solicitor.

Any person obtaining a license to engage in the business of solicitor shall not be required to pay a license fee. (Ord. 2066 § 15, 1940) 


313.16       Hawker’s license fee.

Any person obtaining a license to engage in the business of hawker shall be required to pay a license fee for the use of the city of $3.50 per day. (Ord. 3176 § 1, 1988) 


313.17       License term.

A yearly license as provided in this article shall be for the fiscal year from the first Monday of January of one year to the first Monday of January of the following year, and no apportionment of the yearly license fee shall be made. A monthly license shall run from the date of issue to the corresponding date of the next succeeding month. No license shall be granted to a hawker or solicitor for more than one day at a time. (Ord. 2066 § 17, 1940) 


313.18       License fee exceptions.

(A) No license fee shall be charged a huckster disposing of farm, truck, garden produce, fruit, poultry or eggs of his own raising or production, but any such person shall be required to file with the city clerk an affidavit giving the location and size of the property farmed by him and that the products which he is offering for sale and which he will continue to offer for sale under this license is and will be exclusively composed of products raised by him, or produced by him on the property in such affidavit described, and the sale of any other products shall constitute a violation of this article. 

(B) No license fee shall be charged for a peddler or huckster’s license to any honorably discharged soldier, sailor or marine of the military or naval service of the United States who holds a license to peddle under an Act of Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (Ord. 2066 § 18, 1940) 


313.19       License required though fee not collected.

In any instance, if a fee for license is not legally collectible from a registrant under this article, the requirement of securing a license shall be still effective as to such registrant. (Ord. 2066 § 19, 1940) 


313.20       Illegal use of licenses.

No person shall have or exhibit a license under this article which has not been issued to him, and no person to whom a license has been issued shall give, loan, sell or otherwise dispose of it to another. (Ord. 2066 § 20, 1940) 


313.21       Article intent as police power exercise.

It is the intent of council that the police of the city shall be diligent in the enforcement of the provisions of this article and shall keep a careful and constant supervision over all persons engaging in any of the businesses herein set forth, for which reason it is hereby expressly declared that the license fees herein set forth are not imposed as a tax but are imposed under the police power of the city as necessary and required to compensate the city for the proportionate expenses of the police department incurred in the investigation of applicants and supervision of respective businesses hereby authorized to be licensed. (Ord. 2066 § 23, 1940)


313.99       Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not less than $15.00 nor more than $25.00, together with costs for the first offense, not less than $25.00 nor more than $50.00 with costs for the second offense, and $100.00 with costs for the third and any subsequent offense, and in default of payment of any such fine or costs shall be imprisoned for not less than three days nor more than five days for the first offense, not less than five days nor more than 15 days for the second offense, and 30 days for the third or any subsequent offense. In addition thereto, if the person so offending has a license granted under this article by the city, such license may be revoked by the city clerk. (Ord. 2066 § 21, 1940) 


Article 317       TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANTS

Sections:

317.01  License required – Exceptions.

317.02  License fee – Monthly renewal and posting.

317.99  Penalty.


317.01       License required – Exceptions.

Hereafter every person, whether principal or agent, entering into, beginning or desiring to begin a transient retail business in the city for the sale of any goods, wares or merchandise whatsoever, and who hires, leases, occupies or uses any room, apartment, store, shop, building, railway car or other place or structure for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares or merchandise, shall take out a license for the same from the city clerk. However, nothing herein contained shall apply to farmers selling their own produce, or to any sale of goods, wares or merchandise donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic enterprise, or to any merchant previously established in business in the city, and who, by reason of fire, or other valid cause, is compelled to lease a place of business until he can be re-established in a permanent location. (Ord. 1798 § 1, 1928)


317.02       License fee – Monthly renewal and posting.

The amount of such license fee shall be $360.00 per month, or fractional part thereof, to be paid to the city treasurer. Such license shall be renewed monthly during the continuance of the sale, and shall be posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such licensed business is located. (Ord. 3176 § 3, 1988)


317.99       Penalty.

Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $200.00 together with costs of prosecution, to be collected as other fines are by law collectible, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be imprisoned not more than 30 days. (Ord. 1798 § 3, 1928) 


Article 321       VEHICLES FOR TRANSPORTATION

Sections:

321.01  License required.

321.02  Annual license term – Fee proration.

321.03  Annual license fees.

321.04  Card receipt and tag.

321.05  Transfer license and fee – Lost tag and fee – Emergency permit.

321.99  Penalty.


321.01       License required.

No person, firm or corporation shall operate within the city any vehicle for the transportation of passengers, goods or luggage for hire without first obtaining a license from the city clerk to do so. The city clerk is hereby authorized to issue licenses for the purposes aforesaid. (Ord. 2154 § 1, 1945)


321.02       Annual license term – Fee proration.

All licenses as prescribed in MMC 321.01 shall be issued on or before the first Monday of January of each year and shall be for a term of one year from such first Monday of January. However, if a license is issued at any time after the first Monday of January in any year, for a vehicle not operated until after the first Monday of January in such year, it shall expire on the first Monday of January following, and the fee therefor shall be the proportionate part of the annual fee fixed by this article for the time remaining in such year, without, however, making any reduction for a fractional part of a month. (Ord. 2154 § 2, 1945)


321.03       Annual license fees.

The annual license fees for the purposes set forth in MMC 321.01 are hereby established as follows: 

(A) On each vehicle for carrying passengers, with a capacity of eight or more passengers, the sum of $90.00 per year for each of the first three such vehicles licensed by one person, firm or corporation and the sum of $30.00 per year for the fourth and each successive such vehicle. 

(B) On each vehicle for carrying passengers, with a capacity of less than eight passengers, the sum of $45.00 per annum for each of the first five such vehicles licensed by any one person, firm or corporation and the sum of $18.00 for the sixth and each successive such vehicle. (Ord. 3176 § 2, 1988)


321.04       Card receipt and tag.

Upon the filing of the application for license and payment of the license fee, the city clerk shall issue to the licensee a card receipt which shall show the name of the licensee, the make, type, seating capacity, manufacturer’s and motor numbers of the vehicle for which the license fee was paid and gross weight capacity in case of trucks, and a tag which shall bear the same number as the card receipt. The tag shall sufficiently indicate the purpose and the year for which the same was issued and shall be firmly attached at the rear of the vehicle for which it was issued, on or near the vehicle’s state license plate, at all times that the vehicle is being operated within the city. (Ord. 2154 § 4, 1945)


321.05       Transfer license and fee – Lost tag and fee – Emergency permit.

The license issued under the provisions of this article shall not be transferable by the licensee to any other person. The license tag shall not be attached to any other vehicle than that for which the same was issued, except as hereinafter provided. In the event of the discontinuance of the operation of any vehicle for which a license was issued, and the substitution of another vehicle therefor, the city clerk shall, upon application made and payment of a fee of $1.00, issue to the licensee a transfer license, bearing like identification data and information concerning the substituted vehicle as in the case of the vehicle originally licensed, and thereupon the tag issued for the original vehicle shall be attached by the licensee to the substituted vehicle, without the payment of any further fee. In case a tag is lost or destroyed, the licensee may obtain a duplicate tag from the city clerk, for a fee of $1.00. In the event of the temporary discontinuance of the operation of any licensed vehicle due to the making of necessary repairs, and the substitution of another vehicle therefor while the licensed vehicle is undergoing repairs, a card or tag bearing the words, "emergency permit" furnished by the city shall be exhibited in a conspicuous place on the rear of the substituted vehicle while the same is in operation. (Ord. 2154 § 5, 1945) 


321.99       Penalty.

Whoever violates any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $50.00, and, in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned not less than two days nor more than 10 days. Each day that any vehicle is operated in violation hereof shall be deemed a single and separate offense. (Ord. 2154 § 6, 1945) 


Article 325       SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATIONS

Sections:

325.01  Findings.

325.02  Purposes.

325.03  Authority.

325.04  Definitions.

325.05  Prohibited conduct.

325.06  Administration.

325.07  Application for license for sexually oriented business.

325.08  Issuance of license.

325.09  Fees.

325.10  Additional licensing regulations.

325.11  Regulations on operation and conduct of adult/sexually oriented establishments.

325.12  License suspensions and revocations.

325.13  Notice of violation.

325.14  Appeals.

325.15  Penalty.

325.16  Other remedies.


325.01       Findings.

City council makes the following findings:

(A) Sexually oriented businesses have adverse secondary effects which are detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. Such adverse secondary effects include, but are not limited to, increased incidence of sexual harassment, obscenity, prostitution and other illegal sexual activities, spread of communicable diseases, public exposure to sexual acts in public places, crime, and decreased property values and neighborhood deterioration. These findings are supported by numerous studies performed by many cities throughout the United States, some of which are referenced in:

(1) Report to American Center for Law and Justice on the Secondary Impacts of Sex Oriented Businesses – 1996.

(2) Adult Business Study for Town of Ellicottville, New York – 1998.

(3) Adult Entertainment Study prepared by the Department of City Planning for the City of New York – 1994.

(4) An Analysis of the Effects of Sexually Oriented Businesses on the Surrounding Neighborhoods in Dallas, Texas – 1997.

(B) Based on similar findings, the Pennsylvania legislature enacted legislation at 68 PA C.S. Section 5501, et seq., that regulates certain activities of sexually oriented and adult entertainment establishments.

(C) The Pennsylvania Commonwealth Court in the case of Piatek v. Pulaski Twp., 828 A.2d 1164 (2003), appeal denied by the Pennsylvania Supreme Court, 857 A.2d 681 (2005), determined that regulations similar to the ones hereby adopted are lawful.

(D) The city council recognizes and respects the fundamental constitutional guarantees of free speech and free expression and recognizes that restrictions on sexually oriented businesses cannot be imposed without due regard for the protection of these rights. (Ord. 3629 § 1, 2005)


325.02       Purposes.

The city council of the City of Meadville enacts this article to place certain controls and restrictions on the conduct of sexually oriented business activities solely for purposes of minimizing the adverse secondary effects created by such conduct and thereby to protect and preserve the neighborhood character of the city and deter deterioration of the city neighborhoods, and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Meadville, in a manner consistent with the laws and constitutions of this commonwealth and the United States.

It is the express intent of the city council that the restrictions and regulations included within this code conform with restrictions and regulations which are and have been found lawful and not contrary to the protections afforded under the Pennsylvania and United States Constitutions and laws. (Ord. 3629 § 1, 2005)


325.03       Authority.

This article is enacted pursuant to the general powers and authority set forth in the Home Rule Charter for the City of Meadville; general powers provided under the applicable provisions of the Optional Third Class City Charter Law, Act of July 15, 1957, P.L. 901, as amended, 53 P.S. Section 41201, et seq.; and general powers found in Section 2403 of the Third Class City Code, Act of June 23, 1931, P.L. 932, as amended, 53 P.S. Section 37403. (Ord. 3629 § 1, 2005)


325.04       Definitions.

(A) Terms used in this article shall be given their general and customary meaning and, where such terms are defined in statutes of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania or ordinances of the City of Meadville, such definitions shall control. 

To the extent applicable, the definitions set forth in 68 PA C.S. Section 5502 (Pennsylvania laws governing adult-oriented establishments) and 18 PA C.S. Section 5903 (Pennsylvania laws relating to crimes involving obscenity) as these laws may be amended, are hereby incorporated by reference.

Specifically, the following definitions set forth in 68 PA C.S. Section 5502, as same may be amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated by reference – definitions of:

adult bookstore;

adult motion picture theater;

adult mini-motion picture theater;

entertainer;

employee;

operator.

(B) When used in this article, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

"City" means the City of Meadville, its governing council referred to as city council, and its duly appointed and authorized representatives.

"Code enforcement officer" means the person or persons appointed by the city manager of the City of Meadville to administer and enforce the provisions of this article.

"Licensee" means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.

"Motion pictures" shall include films and videotapes, DVDs, streaming video, whether available on site or through cable, satellite, closed-circuit television, or on computers or through chat rooms or any Internet connection.

"Nude" or "nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.

"Person" means any individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. In any provision prescribing a penalty or fine, the term "person" shall include the officers, directors and any persons in charge of the entity or organization as well as partners and persons with a 20 percent ownership interest in the entity or organization.

"Sexually oriented or adult entertainment" means:

(1) An exhibition of any sexually oriented books, motion pictures or other media, meaning those distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as these terms are defined.

(2) A live performance, display or dance of any type which has as a significant or substantial portion of the performance any actual or simulated performance of specified sexual activities, or exhibition and viewing of specified anatomical areas, or removal of articles of clothing or appearing nude, or which includes providing any sexually oriented personal services to customers.

"Sexually oriented bookstore, novelty store or video store" means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:

(1) Books, games, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, CD-ROM discs or other computer software, or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," or

(2) Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities."

"Sexually oriented business or establishment" means any business, activity, club, establishment or premises operated for profit, whether direct or indirect, where the exhibition, showing, rental, or sale of materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing, or exhibiting specified anatomical areas or relating to specified sexual activities is regularly permitted and is a principal part of the activity of the business or establishment. Sexually oriented businesses shall include, but are not limited to the following:

(1) Sexually oriented or adult bookstores, arcades, novelty stores or video stores.

(2) Sexually oriented or adult motion picture or mini-motion picture theaters.

(3) Any premises to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing sexually oriented motion pictures or where an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member.

The terms "booths," "cubicles," "rooms," "studios," "compartments" or "stalls," for purposes of defining sexually oriented establishments, do not mean enclosures which are private offices used by the owner, manager or persons employed on the premises for attending to the tasks of their employment, and which are not held out to the public for the purpose of viewing motion pictures or other entertainment for a fee, and which are not open to any persons other than employees.

(4) Any premises to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are used for sexually oriented entertainment, whether advertised or represented as such or not, which may include but is not limited to studios, exotic dance studios, rap studios, encounter studios, sensitivity studios, modeling studios, massage studios, or any other term of like import.

"Specified anatomical areas" means:

(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered:

(a) Human genitals or pubic region;

(b) Buttocks; or

(c) Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola.

(2) Human male genitalia in a discernible turgid state, even if completely opaquely covered.

"Specified criminal activity" means prostitution or promotion of prostitution, dissemination of obscene material, sexual performance by a child, possession or distribution of child pornography, public lewdness, indecent exposure, indecency with a child, engaging in organized criminal activity, sexual assault, molestation of a child, unlawful distribution of a controlled substance or any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

"Specified sexual activities" includes any of the following:

(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.

(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.

(3) Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts. (Ord. 3629 § 1, 2005)


325.05       Prohibited conduct.

It is unlawful:

(A) To operate or permit the operation of a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the city pursuant to this code;

(B) To operate or permit the operation of a sexually oriented business in a manner contrary to the requirements of this code;

(C) To allow a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business or where sexually oriented entertainment takes place;

(D) To refuse or interfere with the lawful inspection of the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 3629 § 1, 2005)


325.06       Administration.

This article shall be administered by the code enforcement officer, the city police, or other persons specially designated by the city. (Ord. 3629 § 1, 2005)


325.07       Application for license for sexually oriented business.

(A) An application, on a form provided by the city, shall be submitted to the code enforcement officer together with all required fees. The applicant shall provide such information as necessary to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this code.

(B) Premises where a sexually oriented business is proposed must meet all the requirements set forth in this code to qualify for a license.

(C) For purposes of a sexually oriented business license, the term "applicant" shall include the following:

(1) If a partnership – all partners;

(2) If a corporation – all persons with a 25 percent or greater ownership interest in the business and the officers and directors;

(3) If an entity other than a partnership or corporation, all persons with a 25 percent or greater ownership interest in the business and persons exercising control over the entity.

(D) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, the person must sign the application for a license as an applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 25 percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as an applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under the following section and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.

(E) The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:

(1) If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he/she is at least 18 years of age;

(2) If the applicant is a partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name and the name of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any;

(3) If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation and qualified and authorized to conduct business in Pennsylvania, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the names of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process;

(4) If the applicant is any entity other than a partnership or corporation, information about the entity including the type of entity or organization; any documents which establish its organization including such things as charter, constitution, bylaws, et seq.; the persons who exercise control over the entity’s affairs and documents establishing their control shall be provided;

(5) If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, he, she or it must:

(a) State the sexually oriented business’s fictitious name; and

(b) Submit the required registration documents;

(6) Whether the applicant(s) has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this code and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, and the date, place and jurisdiction of each conviction;

(7) Whether the applicant(s) holds any other licenses under this code or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another municipality, state or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed business;

(8) Whether the applicant(s) has had a previous license under this code or any similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another municipality, state or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, and the date and circumstances of the denial, suspension or revocation;

(9) The specific classification of sexually oriented use for which the applicant is filing along with a detailed description of each and every activity encompassed by the proposed sexually oriented business, which description shall thoroughly demonstrate compliance and/or intended compliance with all provisions of this code;

(10) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address and telephone number(s), if any, and the location of the building on the premises with reference to the property lines;

(11) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale;

(12) The mailing address and an address where applicant(s) may be served with notice;

(13) A recent photograph of the applicant(s);

(14) The applicant’s date of birth and social security number;

(15) Any other information required to demonstrate compliance with all other applicable laws including, but not limited to, zoning, subdivision and land development regulations, and building code regulations. (Ord. 3629 § 1, 2005)


325.08       Issuance of license.

(A) Upon the filing of said application in a fully completed form for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall then be referred to the code enforcement officer for review and investigation. The code enforcement officer shall utilize any available resources including the city police and other law enforcement agencies as may be necessary to complete the review and investigation required by this code. Within 30 days from the date the completed application is filed, the code enforcement officer shall issue a license, unless it is determined by the code enforcement officer that one or more of the following findings is true:

(1) An applicant has failed to provide all information required for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form;

(2) An applicant is under the age of 18 years;

(3) An applicant has been convicted of "specified criminal activity" as defined in this code;

(4) The required application, investigation and license fees have not been paid;

(5) An applicant’s license to operate a sexually oriented business, issued by any jurisdiction, has been revoked within the preceding 12 months;

(6) The proposed sexually oriented business is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this code.

(B) The sexually oriented business license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the business and the specific classification of use for which the license is issued.

(C) A sexually oriented business license shall be issued only for the specific classification of sexually oriented use indicated.

(D) If denied, the decision to deny shall be in writing and state the reasons for denial with references to the provisions of the code. (Ord. 3629 § 1, 2005)


325.09       Fees.

(A) Every application for sexually oriented business license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application and investigation fee of $150.00.

(B) In addition to the application and investigation fee required above, every sexually oriented business that is granted a license (new or renewal) shall pay to the city an annual nonrefundable license fee of $300.00 within 30 days of license issuance or renewal. (Ord. 3629 § 1, 2005)


325.10       Additional licensing regulations.

(A) An activity which meets the definition of a sexually oriented business, on the date the ordinance codified in this article becomes effective, must make application for, must meet the requirements for a license and must obtain a license in accordance with the provisions of this code within one year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article.

(B) Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance. A license shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal activity as defined in this code or committed any act during the existence of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the fees required by this code. Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date. To the extent the information on the previous application remains the same, that information can be incorporated into the renewal application.

(C) When the city denies renewal of a license for noncompliance of this code, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial unless subsequent to denial the city finds that the basis for the nonrenewal has been corrected or abated, in which case the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the renewal application was denied.

(D) No sexually oriented establishment shall be situated or located nearer than 500 feet from the nearest property line of any other sexually oriented establishment, bottle club, church, school or other institution of learning or education, park or playground, or licensed day care center.

(E) No sexually oriented establishment shall be situated or located nearer than 500 feet from any land zoned residential, and no sexually oriented establishment shall be situated or located nearer than 500 feet from any property line of any single-family or multifamily dwelling.

(F) If, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article, a sexually oriented business is operating from a location which does not meet the location requirements set forth in subsections (D) and (E) of this section, it shall be exempt from these requirements under the following conditions:

(1) It is registered as an adult/sexually oriented business with the code enforcement officer within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article;

(2) An application for a license is submitted and obtained within one year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article; and

(3) If the sexually oriented business ceases operation for any reason for more than one year, the exemption from the location requirements shall end. (Ord. 3629 § 1, 2005)


325.11       Regulations on operation and conduct of adult/sexually oriented establishments.

From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article, a sexually oriented business shall comply with the following regulations:

(A) Each adult or sexually oriented business shall be required to prominently post a sign or signs conforming to the city’s sign regulations, which shall be visible from each entrance and inform the public that adult and/or sexually oriented activities occur within and that minors are prohibited from entering. 

(B) No sexually oriented business shall be open for business earlier than 3:00 p.m. and no such business shall be open for business later that 3:00 a.m. on any day of the week.

(C) No activities of a sexually oriented establishment shall be visible from any public street.

(D) No sexually oriented business shall be operated in any facility or building unless all necessary zoning, subdivision and land development, building/construction code, and all other required governmental permits and approvals have been obtained and evidence of same have been provided to the code enforcement officer; and unless the facility and building meet all current governmental regulations and requirements.

(E) No sexually oriented business shall permit any sexually oriented activity except as specifically indicated on the license.

(F) At least one employee must be on duty on the premises at all times the business is open. There must be an employee’s station with full view of the interior premises.

(G) At all times, the business operation must comply with all applicable laws including but not limited to all regulations set forth in the laws of Pennsylvania pertaining to adult-oriented establishments, and all criminal laws relating to obscenity.

(H) An applicant or licensee shall permit the code enforcement officer and other designated representatives to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 3629 § 1, 2005)


325.12       License suspensions and revocations.

(A) Suspension. The code enforcement officer shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee of a licensed sexually oriented business has:

(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this code;

(2) Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this code;

(3) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises.

(B) Revocation. The code enforcement officer shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension occurs and the license had been suspended within the preceding 12 months.

(C) Revocation. The code enforcement officer shall revoke a license if it is determined that:

(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the application process;

(2) A licensee has knowingly allowed unlawful possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises;

(3) A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;

(4) A licensee has knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;

(5) A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other sex acts to occur in or on the licensed premises.

(D) When a license is revoked, the license revocation will be for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date the revocation became effective with the following exception. If, subsequent to revocation, the code enforcement officer finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license. (Ord. 3629 § 1, 2005)


325.13       Notice of violation.

Whenever a condition constituting a violation of this article is found to exist, the code enforcement officer shall cause written notice to be served upon the licensees of the subject premises and any other responsible party in the following manner:

(A) Notice. The written notice of violation shall include the following information:

(1) Identity and description of the premises in violation, including location and identity of licensees or other persons responsible for premises.

(2) A statement of the specific conditions which cause the premises to be in violation with references to the sections of the code being violated.

(3) A statement of the action required to correct the violation.

(4) A notice of license suspension or revocation and any other penalties that may be imposed due to the violation or failure to correct the violation.

(5) Person(s) to contact concerning remedial action or other concerns.

(B) Service of Notice. Notices shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is (1) delivered to the licensees personally; or (2) sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the licensees and persons responsible at the last known address with return receipt requested. If the certified or registered notice is returned showing that the notice was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the property affected by such notice, and mailed by regular mail. A record of the means of serving the notice should be maintained by the code enforcement officer. (Ord. 3629 § 1, 2005)


325.14       Appeals.

(A) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the code enforcement officer may appeal pursuant to procedures of the Local Agency Law (2 PA C.S. Section 101, et seq.) to the city council. Any such appeal must be in writing and filed with the code enforcement officer within 20 days from the date of the mailing or delivery of the decision appealed from and shall specify, in detail, the basis for the appeal. If an appeal is timely filed, the city council will hold a hearing pursuant to the provisions of the Local Agency Law within 30 days from the date the appeal is filed and will render a written decision within 10 days from the date such hearing concludes. In the case of a denial of license renewal, or in the case of a permit suspension or revocation, the permittee may continue to operate to the same extent as immediately prior to the suspension or revocation until the earlier of the expiration of the 20-day appeal period without filing an appeal; or the date of the final decision dismissing an appeal.

(B) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city council may appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Local Agency Law. In the case of a denial of a license renewal, a suspension, or a revocation, the licensee may continue to operate to the same extent as immediately prior to the denial, suspension or revocation until the earlier of the expiration of the 30-day appeal period without filing an appeal; or the date of a decision dismissing an appeal by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 3629 § 1, 2005)


325.15       Penalty.

Any person or entity committing any act(s) prohibited by this code shall violate this code. Any person who violates this code, either by commission of a prohibited act, or as a property owner, proprietor, manager of a business or similar establishment who permits, promotes or allows the violation of this code, shall be guilty of a summary offense, and upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, and in default of payment of such fine, to be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days. In any enforcement action, a person or entity found to have violated this code shall also be obligated within the judgment to pay all costs and attorney’s fees incurred by the city in the enforcement action. Each day a violation of this code continues shall constitute a separate offense. Each violation of this code shall constitute a separate offense, subject to the prescribed penalty for each violation. (Ord. 3629 § 1, 2005)


325.16       Other remedies.

In addition to the penalty provided above, the city shall have and may pursue the following enforcement remedies, all of which may be pursued simultaneously or in the alternative, as deemed appropriate:

(A) An action in a court of appropriate jurisdiction for an order to restrain, correct or remove the violation, or to refrain from further violations;

(B) An action in a court of appropriate jurisdiction to abate a nuisance or other health or safety hazard to the public created by a violation of this code;

(C) An action in a court of appropriate jurisdiction to secure compliance with an order or orders of the code enforcement officer;

(D) An action in a court of appropriate jurisdiction to obtain any other remedy permitted by law. (Ord. 3629 § 1, 2005)


Article 341 EARNED INCOME AND NET PROFITS TAX

Sections:

341.01    Title.

341.02    Purpose.

341.03    Authority.

341.04    Definitions.

341.05    Levy of earned income and net profits tax.

341.06    Local Tax Enabling Act applicable.

341.07    Tax levied for 2012 and each year thereafter.

341.08    Applicable laws, regulations, policies and procedures.

341.09    Employers’ obligations.

341.10    Taxpayers’ obligations.

341.11    Tax officer responsibilities.

341.12    Actions of tax officer to collect unpaid tax.

341.13    Interest and penalties against the taxpayer.

341.14    Fines and penalties for taxpayer violations.

Prior legislation: Ords. 2459, 2673 and 2974.


341.01 Title.

The title of this article is the City of Meadville earned income and net profits tax ordinance of 2012. (Ord. 3692 § 1, 2011)


341.02 Purpose.

The purpose of this article is to continue, reaffirm and update the ordinance for the levy of the earned income and net profits tax to meet the existing requirements of the Local Tax Enabling Act as same has been and may be further amended. (Ord. 3692 § 2, 2011)


341.03 Authority.

The ordinance codified in this article is adopted pursuant to the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act 511 of 1965, as amended by Act 32 of 2008 and as otherwise amended, found at 53 P.S. Section 6924.101, et seq. (Ord. 3692 § 3, 2011)


341.04 Definitions.

“City of Meadville” shall mean the City of Meadville, a third class city located in Crawford County, PA, its governing body and duly appointed representatives. It shall also mean political subdivision or municipality as those terms are used in this article.

“Earned income” means the compensation as required to be reported to or as determined by the Department of Revenue under Section 303 of the Act known as the Tax Reform Code of 1971, and rules and regulations promulgated under that section. Employee business expenses as reported to or determined by the Department of Revenue under Article III of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 shall constitute allowable deductions in determining earned income. The term does not include offsets for business losses. The amount of any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy shall not be taxable as earned income.

“Earned income and net profits tax” or “tax” means the tax levied on earned income and net profits under authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act.

“Employer” means a person, business entity or other entity, employing one or more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation. The term includes the Commonwealth, a political subdivision and an instrumentality or public authority of either. For purposes of penalties, the term includes a corporate officer.

“Local Tax Enabling Act” (or “LTEA”) means Act 511 of 1965, enacted December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, as thereafter amended, and including Act 32 adopted July 2, 2008, as thereafter amended, which Act is found at 53 P.S. Section 6913 (until repealed effective June 30, 2012) and 53 P.S. Section 6924.101, et seq., as same may be hereafter amended.

“Net profits” means the net income from the operation of a business, other than a corporation, as required to be reported to or as determined by the Department of Revenue under Section 303 of the Act known as the Tax Reform Code of 1971, and rules and regulations promulgated under that section. The term does not include any:

(1) Income which:

(i) Is not paid for services provided; and

(ii) Is in the nature of earnings from an investment.

(2) Income which represents:

(i) Any gain in the sale of farm machinery;

(ii) Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft, breeding or dairy purposes; and

(iii) Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of a farm.

“Nonresident” means a person or business domiciled outside the political subdivision levying the tax.

“Person” means a natural person.

“Resident” means a person or business domiciled in the political subdivision levying the tax.

“Succeeding year” means the calendar year following the tax year.

“Tax collection committee” or “TCC” means the committee established to govern the Crawford County tax district for purpose of collection of the earned income and net profits tax.

“Tax collection district” means the tax collection district established under Section 504 of the LTEA, encompassing political subdivisions in Crawford County and surrounding counties.

“Tax officer” means the person(s) or entity(s) appointed by the tax collection committee to collect the earned income and net profits tax for political subdivisions within the Crawford County tax collection district.

“Taxpayer” means a person or business required under this article to file a return or to pay a tax.

“Tax year” or “current year” means the calendar year for which the tax is levied.

The definitions as found in the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated herein by reference and shall be applied in the administration and enforcement of this article. (Ord. 3692 § 4, 2011)


341.05 Levy of earned income and net profits tax.

In accordance with the provisions of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the City of Meadville hereby levies and assesses a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of one percent on the earned income and net profits, as defined, of residents of the City of Meadville, and on the earned income, as defined, received by nonresidents for work done or services performed or rendered in the City of Meadville, and on the net profits of businesses, professions and other activities conducted in the City of Meadville by nonresidents. (Ord. 3692 § 5, 2011)


341.06 Local Tax Enabling Act applicable.

This tax is imposed under authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act. All provisions of the Local Tax Enabling Act that govern the levy, administration and collection of the tax on earned income and net profits are incorporated into the ordinance codified in this article by reference as though set forth herein. Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that are required to be applied to the levy and collection of a tax on earned income or net profits shall automatically become part of the ordinance codified in this article upon the effective date of such amendment, without the need for formal amendment of the ordinance codified in this article, to the maximum extent allowed by law. (Ord. 3692 § 6, 2011)


341.07 Tax levied for 2012 and each year thereafter.

The tax hereby levied and assessed shall be levied and assessed for the calendar year 2012 and each year thereafter, without annual reenactment or levy. (Ord. 3692 § 7, 2011)


341.08 Applicable laws, regulations, policies and procedures.

This tax shall be collected and administered in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Local Tax Enabling Act, other applicable laws and regulations; and regulations, policies and procedures adopted by this political subdivision, the tax collection committee, or by the tax officer. This includes any regulations, policies, and procedures adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by law. (Ord. 3692 § 8, 2011)


341.09 Employers’ obligations.

Employers shall withhold, remit and report taxes imposed by this article as follows:

(A) Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse or other place of business within a tax collection district who employs one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation, who has not previously registered, shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer, register with the tax officer the name and address of the employer and such other information as the Department of Community and Economic Development (DCED) may require.

(B) An employer shall require each new employee to complete a certificate of residency form, which shall be an addendum to the federal Employee’s Withholding Allowance Certificate (Form W-4). An employer shall also require any employee who changes their address or domicile to complete a certificate of residency form. The certificate of residency form shall provide information to help identify the political subdivisions where an employee lives and works.

(C) Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse or other place of business within a tax collection district that employs one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation, shall, at the time of payment, deduct from the compensation due each employee employed at such place of business the greater of the employee’s resident tax or the employee’s nonresident tax as released in the official register maintained by the DCED.

(D) Except as set forth in subsection (E) of this section, within 30 days following the end of each calendar quarter, every employer shall file a quarterly return and pay the amount of taxes deducted during the preceding calendar quarter to the tax officer for the place of employment of each employee. The form shall show the name, address and Social Security number of each employee, the compensation of the employee during the preceding three-month period, the tax deducted from the employee, the political subdivisions imposing the tax upon the employee, the total compensation of all employees during the preceding calendar quarter, the total tax deducted from the employees and paid with the return and any other information prescribed by the DCED.

(E) Notwithstanding subsection (D) of this section, the provisions of this subsection shall apply if an employer has more than one place of employment in more than one tax collection district. Within 30 days following the last day of each month, the employer may file the return required by subsection (D) of this section and pay the total amount of taxes deducted from employees in all work locations during the preceding month to the tax officer for either the tax collection district in which the employer’s payroll operations are located or as determined by the DCED. The return and taxes deducted shall be filed and paid electronically. The employer must file a notice of intention to file combined returns and make combined payments with the tax officer for each place of employment at least one month before filing its first combined return or making its first combined payment. This subsection shall not be construed to change the location of an employee’s place of employment for purposes of nonresident tax liability.

(F) Any employer who, for two of the preceding four quarterly periods, has failed to deduct the proper tax, or any part of the tax, or has failed to pay over the proper amount of tax as required by subsection (C) of this section to the tax collection district, may be required by the tax officer to file returns and pay the tax monthly. In such cases, payments of tax shall be made to the tax officer on or before the last day of the month succeeding the month for which the tax was withheld.

(G) On or before February 28th of the succeeding year, every employer shall file with the tax officer where taxes have been deducted and remitted pursuant to subsection (C) of this section:

(1) An annual return showing, for the period beginning January 1st of the current year and ending December 31st of the current year, the total amount of compensation paid, the total amount of tax deducted, the total amount of tax paid to the tax officer and any other information prescribed by the DCED.

(2) An individual withholding statement, which may be integrated with the federal Wage and Tax Statement (Form W-2), for each employee employed during all or any part of the period beginning January 1st of the current year and ending December 31st of the current year, setting forth the address and Social Security number, the amount of compensation paid to the employee during the period, the amount of tax deducted, the amount of tax paid to the tax officer, the numerical code prescribed by the DCED representing the tax collection district where the payments required by subsections (D) and (E) of this section were remitted and any other information required by the DCED. Every employer shall furnish one copy of the individual withholding statement to the employee for whom it is filed.

(H) Any employer who discontinues business prior to December 31st of the current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business, file returns and withholding statements required under this section and pay the tax due.

(I) Except as otherwise provided in Section 511 of the Local Tax Enabling Act (53 P.S. Section 6924.511), an employer who willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the deductions required by this section shall be liable for payment of taxes which the employer was required to withhold to the extent that the taxes have not been recovered from the employee. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements for filing of declarations and returns. (Ord. 3692 § 9, 2011)


341.10 Taxpayers’ obligations.

Taxpayers shall declare and pay taxes as follows:

(A) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15th of the succeeding year, make and file with the tax officer for the place of taxpayer’s residence a final return showing the amount of taxable income received during the period beginning January 1st of the current year and ending December 31st of the current year, the total amount of tax due on the taxable income, the amount of tax paid, the amount of tax that has been withheld and the balance of tax due. All amounts reported shall be rounded to the nearest whole dollar. At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the tax officer the balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.

(B) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, by April 15th of the current year, make and file with the tax officer for the place of taxpayer’s residence a declaration of the taxpayer’s estimated net profits during the period beginning January 1st and ending December 31st of the current year, and shall pay to the tax officer in four equal quarterly installments the tax due on the estimated net profits. The first installment shall be paid at the time of filing the declaration, and the other installments shall be paid on or before June 15th of the current year, September 15th of the current year and January 15th of the succeeding year, respectively.

(C) Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15th of the current year shall make and file the declaration required on or before June 15th of the current year, September 15th of the current year or December 31st of the current year, whichever date next follows the date on which the taxpayer first anticipates such net profit, and shall pay to the tax officer in equal installments the tax due on or before the quarterly payment dates that remain after the filing of the declaration.

(D) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15th of the succeeding year, make and file with the tax officer for the place of taxpayer’s residence a final return showing the amount of net profits earned or received based on the method of accounting used by the taxpayer during the period beginning January 1st of the current year, and ending December 31st of the current year, the total amount of tax due on the net profits and the total amount of tax paid. At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the tax officer the balance of tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment. Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth quarterly installment of the estimated tax, elect to make and file with the resident tax officer on or before January 31st of the succeeding year the final return.

(E) The DCED, in consultation with the Department of Revenue, shall provide by regulation for the filing of adjusted declarations of estimated net profits and for the payments of the estimated tax in cases where a taxpayer who has filed the declaration required under this section anticipates additional net profits not previously declared or has overestimated anticipated net profits.

(F) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31st of the current year, shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business, file a final return as required under this section and pay the tax due.

(G) Every taxpayer who receives any other taxable income not subject to withholding under the Local Tax Enabling Act shall make and file with the tax officer for the place of taxpayer’s residence a quarterly return on or before April 15th of the current year, June 15th of the current year, September 15th of the current year, and January 15th of the succeeding year, setting forth the aggregate amount of taxable income not subject to withholding by the taxpayer during the three-month periods ending March 31st of the current year, June 30th of the current year, September 30th of the current year, and December 31st of the current year, respectively, and subject to tax, together with such other information as the Department may require. Every taxpayer filing a return shall, at the time of filing the return, pay to the tax officer the amount of tax due. The Department shall establish criteria under which the tax officer may waive the quarterly return and payment of the tax and permit a taxpayer to file the receipt of taxable income on the taxpayer’s annual return and pay the income tax due on or before April 15th of the succeeding year.

(H) For a taxpayer whose fiscal year is not a calendar year, the tax officer shall establish deadlines for filing, reporting and payment of taxes which provide time periods equivalent to those provided for a calendar year taxpayer. (Ord. 3692 § 10, 2011)


341.11 Tax officer responsibilities.

The tax officer appointed by the tax collection committee is hereby authorized and directed to take such actions to collect and remit the earned income and net profits tax hereby levied as are authorized by the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended from time to time, and shall carry out those responsibilities in accordance with the requirements of the Local Tax Enabling Act. (Ord. 3692 § 11, 2011)


341.12 Actions of tax officer to collect unpaid tax.

The tax officer is hereby authorized to take any and all actions authorized by the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended from time to time, and as otherwise permitted by law to determine and to collect taxes owed. (Ord. 3692 § 12, 2011)


341.13 Interest and penalties against the taxpayer.

(A) Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, if the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate the taxpayer is required to pay to the Commonwealth under Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176), known as the Fiscal Code, on the amount of the tax, and an additional penalty of one percent of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction of a month during which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected but the amount shall not exceed 15 percent in the aggregate. Where an action is brought for the recovery of the tax, the taxpayer liable for the tax shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection, interest and penalties.

(B) The tax officer, with the concurrence of the tax collection committee, may abate interest or penalties that would otherwise be imposed for the nonreporting and underreporting of income tax liabilities or for the nonpayment of taxes previously imposed and due if the taxpayer voluntarily files delinquent returns and pays the taxes in full. The provisions of this subsection shall not affect or terminate any petitions, investigations, prosecutions or other proceedings pending under this article, or prevent the commencement or further prosecution of any proceedings by the proper authorities for violations of this article. (Ord. 3692 § 13, 2011)


341.14 Fines and penalties for taxpayer violations.

(A) Any taxpayer who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or refuses to register, keep or supply records or returns required by the LTEA or to pay the tax deducted from employees, or fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from employees, any taxpayer or employer who refuses to permit the tax officer appointed by a tax collection committee or an employee or agent of the tax officer to examine books, records and papers, and any taxpayer or employer who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return, or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the amount of income in order to avoid the payment of income taxes shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $2,500 for each offense and reasonable costs, and in default of the payment of said fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than six months.

(B) Any employer required under this article to collect, account for and distribute taxes who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for and distribute taxes, commits a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $25,000 or to imprisonment not exceeding two years, or both.

(C) The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any other costs and penalties imposed by this article.

(D) The failure of any person to obtain forms required for making the declaration or returns require by this article shall not excuse the person from making the declaration or return. (Ord. 3692 § 14, 2011)


Article 345       MERCANTILE LICENSE TAX

(Repealed by Ord. 3452)


Article 349 LOCAL SERVICES TAX

Sections:

349.01    Levy of tax.

349.02    Authority for tax.

349.03    Use of tax revenues.

349.04    Definitions.

349.05    Duty of employer.

349.06    When tax is due.

349.07    More than one occupation.

349.08    Self-employed individuals.

349.09    Nonresident employers and self-employed persons.

349.10    Exemptions.

349.11    Administration of tax.

349.12    Penalty on delinquent accounts.

349.13    Collection of delinquent accounts.

349.14    Fine and penalty.

349.15    Period for which tax is in effect.

349.16    Tax references.

349.17    Incorporation of subsequent legislation.

349.18    Savings clause.


349.01 Levy of tax.

A tax known and referred under Pennsylvania’s Local Tax Enabling Act as the local services tax, or by such other name as shall be designated by Pennsylvania Legislature, is hereby levied upon the privilege of engaging in an occupation within the City of Meadville beginning January 1, 2008, for the year 2008 and each year thereafter. Each person who exercises such privilege during 2008 and during any calendar year thereafter for any length of time during said year shall pay a tax in the amount of $52.00 in accordance with the provisions of this article and the applicable provisions of the Local Tax Enabling Act. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the City of Meadville. This tax is hereby levied for every calendar year hereafter without annual reenactment of an article. (Ord. 3648 § 2, 2007)


349.02 Authority for tax.

This tax is levied under the authority of Act 511 of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, known as the Local Tax Enabling Law, as amended generally and by Act 7 of June 21, 2007, and as same may be further amended. (Ord. 3648 § 2, 2007)


349.03 Use of tax revenues.

Funds derived from the local services tax will be used for the following purposes or such other purposes as may be permitted by law, all in accordance with the requirements of the Local Tax Enabling Act:

(A) Emergency services, including police and fire services and emergency medical services.

(B) Road construction or maintenance.

(C) Property tax relief. (Ord. 3648 § 2, 2007)


349.04 Definitions. 

The following words and phrases when used in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except when the context or language indicates or requires a different meaning:

(A) “City,” when used to describe the local government, shall mean and refer to the city council of the City of Meadville. When used to describe the territory, it shall mean the area within the corporate limits of City of Meadville.

(B) “Employer” means a person, partnership, association, corporation, institution, governmental body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.

(C) “Earned income” and “net profits” shall have the meanings ascribed by Section 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended from time to time.

(D) “Local Tax Enabling Act” means Act 511 of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, as amended generally and by Act 7 of June 21, 2007, and as further amended, found generally at 53 P.S. Section 6901 et seq.

(E) “Occupation” means any livelihood, job, trade, profession, business or undertaking of any type, kind or character, including services, domestic or otherwise, carried on or performed for which compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages, commission or other form of compensation for services rendered.

(F) “Person” means a natural person.

(G) “Receiver of taxes” means the person or persons designated by the city council of the City of Meadville to administer and collect the tax hereby levied and to enforce the provisions of this article.

(H) “Tax/taxes” or “local services tax” means the tax imposed on the privilege of engaging in an occupation as authorized by the Local Tax Enabling Act, known and referred to as the local services tax. This term shall also include any other names designated by the Pennsylvania Legislature for this tax.

(I) “Taxpayer” means a person, partnership, association, corporation or other entity responsible for paying the tax imposed or levied by this article.

Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the plural, the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender. (Ord. 3648 § 2, 2007)


349.05 Duty of employer.

Each employer located in the city and each employer who engages in business in the city is required and has the duty, in accordance with the requirements and provisions of this article, the Local Tax Enabling Act, and applicable rules and regulations:

(A) To collect the local services tax from each person employed by employer and engaged in an occupation for employer in the city. For this purpose, employer is authorized to deduct/withhold this tax from the employee’s compensation.

(B) To prepare and file a return showing the tax collected and being paid to the city for each employee subject to the tax. The return form shall be the form provided by the city or as otherwise found acceptable by the city.

(C) To remit and pay the tax to the city’s receiver of taxes 30 days after the end of each quarter of the calendar year. (Ord. 3648 § 2, 2007)


349.06 When tax is due. 

The local services tax levied under this article shall be collected on the basis of each payroll period in which the person is engaged in an occupation in the city, as set forth in the Local Tax Enabling Act and below:

(A) A person subject to the local services tax shall be assessed a pro rata share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation in the city. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the combined rate of the local services tax levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods established by the employer for the calendar year in accord with the provisions of the Local Tax Enabling Act.

(B) The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. (Ord. 3648 § 2, 2007)


349.07 More than one occupation.

(A) In the event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is, concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period, the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the following order:

(1) The political subdivision in which a person maintains the person’s principal office or is principally employed;

(2) The political subdivision in which the person resides and works, if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;

(3) The political subdivision in which a person is employed and which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person’s home.

(B) In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from withholding the local services tax, if the employee provides a recent pay statement from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the length of the payroll period and the amount of the local services tax withheld and a statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the employee’s principal employer and the employee will notify other employers of a change in principal place of employment within two weeks of its occurrence.

(C) The local services tax shall be no more than $52.00 on each person for each calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a person may be employed. (Ord. 3648 § 2, 2007)


349.08 Self-employed individuals.

All self-employed persons who perform services of any type or kind or who engage in any occupation or profession within the city shall be subject to the tax and required to file a return and pay the tax to the receiver of taxes. (Ord. 3648 § 2, 2007)


349.09 Nonresident employers and self-employed persons. 

All employers and self-employed persons residing or having their place of business outside the city but who perform services of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the city are subject to the provisions and requirements of this article. Further, any person engaged in an occupation within the city and an employee of a nonresident employer may, for the purposes of this article, be considered a self-employed person, and in the event this tax is not paid, the city shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 3648 § 2, 2007)


349.10 Exemptions.

The tax hereby levied shall not be imposed upon or collected from any of the following persons:

(A) Any person who served in any war or armed conflict in which the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability declared by the United States Veterans’ Administration or its successor to be a total 100 percent permanent disability.

(B) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the taxable year. “Reserve component of the armed forces” shall mean the United States Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard, or the Pennsylvania Air National Guard.

(C) Any person whose total earned income and net profits from all sources within the city is less than $12,000 for the calendar year in which the local services tax is levied. In the case of an exemption based on annual income below $12,000, a person must affirm that the person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits from all sources within the city of less than $12,000 in the calendar year, and provide evidence of income in the form of W-2 or pay stubs from employment within the city. In the event the person does thereafter receive income and net profits in excess of $12,000 within the calendar year, the exemption shall no longer apply and collection in accordance with the provisions of the Local Tax Enabling Act will be instituted.

To be exempt, a person must file an exemption certificate on an approved form, with the information required to grant the exemption and the verification of the person filing for exemption as to the accuracy of the information. The exemption certificate must be filed with the city and the person’s employer. (Ord. 3648 § 2, 2007)


349.11 Administration of tax. 

(A) Payments of the local services tax shall be made to the receiver of taxes who shall keep a proper account of the taxes collected.

(B) The receiver of taxes is hereby charged with the administration of this article and is hereby charged and empowered to prescribe, adopt, and promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article, as permitted by law.

(C) The receiver of taxes is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made by an employer, or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the tax collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination. (Ord. 3648 § 2, 2007)


349.12 Penalty on delinquent accounts.

(A) In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30 days after the due dates above set forth, the receiver of taxes may institute suit for the recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with interest and penalty.

(B) If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of six percent on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due date of such tax and a penalty of five percent shall be added to the flat rate of such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where a suit is brought for the recovery of this tax, the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed. (Ord. 3648 § 2, 2007)


349.13 Collection of delinquent accounts.

Receiver of taxes, with the approval of the city, is authorized to pursue collection of any delinquent account in accordance with the provisions of the Local Tax Enabling Act and other laws as applicable. The city shall have authority to collect unpaid taxes from persons owing same by instituting proceedings in a court of law. In any proceeding to collect a delinquent account, the city or person designated to collect the account may recover such costs and expenses, including attorney’s fees, as permitted by law. (Ord. 3648 § 2, 2007)


349.14 Fine and penalty.

Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any exemption certificate or statement required by the Local Tax Enabling Act or this article; or who refuses inspection of his books, records or accounts in his custody and control documenting employees subject to this tax who are in his employment; or whoever fails or refuses to file any return required by this article; or who shall fail to pay the tax due, shall upon conviction before any district magistrate or court of jurisdiction be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300.00 for each offense and in default of payment of said fines and costs be imprisoned in a correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days for each offense. (Ord. 3648 § 2, 2007)


349.15 Period for which tax is in effect. 

This article shall be effective in accordance with the provisions of the Local Tax Enabling Act and shall be in effect for the year 2008 and remain in effect for each and every calendar year thereafter, without annual reenactment. (Ord. 3648 § 2, 2007)


349.16 Tax references.

All references in the Meadville Municipal Code of the City of Meadville to a tax on the privilege of engaging in an occupation, the occupational privilege tax, or the emergency and municipal services tax shall be deemed a reference to the local services tax for the purposes of this article. (Ord. 3648 § 2, 2007)


349.17 Incorporation of subsequent legislation.

In the event the Pennsylvania Legislature shall finally enact a law that mandates exemptions, tax collection procedures and obligations, tax refund procedures and obligations, tax reporting and return procedures and obligations, and requirements different from those set forth in this article, these requirements mandated by law shall be incorporated by reference as a part of this article and the terms of this article shall be deemed modified by such statutory requirements, as permitted by law. (Ord. 3648 § 2, 2007)


349.18 Savings clause.

(A) Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the city to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed upon the privilege of engaging in an occupation, not within the taxing power of the city under the Constitution and laws of the United States and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

(B) If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not affect or impair the right to impose or collect such tax or the validity of the tax so imposed on other persons as herein provided.

(C) The provisions of this article are severable and if any of its provisions shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of the court shall not affect or invalidate any of the remaining provisions. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that this article would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional provision had not been included herein. (Ord. 3648 § 2, 2007)


Article 353       JUKE BOX AND MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE TAX

Sections:

353.01  Authority for tax.

353.02  Definitions.

353.03  Tax levied and rate.

353.04  Payment dates – No deduction or refund.

353.05  Certificate and seal issuance.

353.06  Information confidential – Disclosure a violation.

353.07  Penalty for delinquent payment.

353.08  Recovery of taxes.

353.09  Repeal of conflicting legislation.

353.10  Validity.

353.99  Penalty.


353.01       Authority for tax.

This juke box and mechanical amusement device tax is levied under the authority granted to the city by Act 511 approved December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, known as the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended. (Ord. 2672 § 1, 1967) 


353.02       Definitions.

Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have for the purpose of this article the meaning herein indicated: 

(A) "Device" means any juke box and/or any mechanical amusement device taxable under this article. 

(B) "Juke box" means any music vending machine contrivance or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice or other opening, or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated, for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.

(C) "Mechanical amusement device" means any device, other than a juke box, which, upon insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score and whether or not a prize is offered. The term does not include any gambling device or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device. 

(D) "Person" includes natural person, firm, association, copartnership or corporation, except such corporations as are exempt from taxation under any act of assembly. (Ord. 2460 § 1, 1958)   


353.03       Tax levied and rate.

(A) The following taxes are imposed for general city purposes: 

(1) On each mechanical amusement device installed for use or available for rental within the city, $50.00 per calendar year or portion thereof;

(2) On each juke box installed for use or available for rental within the city, $25.00 per calendar year or portion thereof. 

(B) The foregoing rates shall apply to all new installations, rentals and renewals after the final passage hereof and to all new and renewal installations and certificates for the year 1989 and subsequent years. 

(C) No tax shall be imposed more than once each year on an individual juke box or mechanical amusement device. (Ord. 3326 § A, 1992; Ord. 3176 § 5, 1988) 


353.04       Payment dates – No deduction or refund.

The taxes imposed under this article shall be payable to the city clerk by the person operating or managing any device subject to such tax, unless such tax shall first be paid by the person owning or leasing such device. In the case of any juke box and mechanical amusement device tax device installed for use or available for rental on or before January 31st, such tax shall be payable on or before January 31st, and annually thereafter so long as the device remains installed or available for rental. In the case of any such device installed for use after January 31st, such tax shall be payable at the time of installation or first rental and thereafter on or before January 31st of each year as long as the device remains installed or available for rental. No deduction or refund of any tax under this article shall be granted in the case of any tax payable for less than a full calendar year, nor in the case of any device destroyed, stolen, sold or otherwise disposed of or transferred after payment of the tax. (Ord. 2460 § 3, 1958) 


353.05       Certificate and seal issuance.

(A) The city clerk shall procure, at the expense of the city, a sufficient number of certificates, on each of which the following information shall be recorded:

(1) The name of the city. 

(2) The number of the certificate. 

(3) The name and address of the person paying the tax. 

(4) The year for which the tax shall have been paid. 

(5) The date on which the tax shall have been paid. 

(6) The type of device for which the tax shall have been paid, giving the trade name, manufacturer’s name and/or identification number when available. 

(7) The date when the device was installed or made available for rental or the fact that the device was installed or made available for rental on or before January 31st. 

(8) The amount of tax paid. 

Whenever any tax shall have been paid under this article, the city clerk shall prepare in duplicate a certificate. The original of such certificate, to which the city seal shall be affixed, shall be given to the person paying the tax, and the duplicate shall be kept on file by the city clerk. The city clerk shall also procure and give to each person paying such tax a gummed seal to be affixed to each device upon which a tax is paid. Such seal shall indicate the year for which the tax is paid, the type of device and the certificate number. In case of the loss, defacement or destruction of any original certificate or seal, the person to whom such certificate or seal was issued shall apply to the city clerk, who may issue a new certificate or seal upon payment of a fee of $1.00 and who shall amend the duplicate of the certificate first issued in case that a new certificate has been issued. In case of removal of any device taxed under this article to another location within the city or in case of a change in the identity of the person operating or managing any such device, such fact shall be reported within five days to the city clerk who shall immediately amend the certificate and the duplicate certificate. 

However, no such report or amendment or certificate shall be required in case of temporary removal of a device for any period of 10 days or less, where the tax on the device has been previously paid for that year. 

(B) Alternate Certification of Place of Installation. In the discretion of the city clerk, and with the written consent of the persons responsible for the payment of tax hereunder, the city clerk may issue certificates of license to premises upon which mechanical amusement devices or juke boxes are operated in lieu of the certificate and seal required by subsection (A) of this section. Such premises certificate and license shall specify the number of mechanical amusement devices and the number of juke boxes permitted to be operated upon each licensed premises and for which the appropriate tax has been paid. Any premises so licensed may maintain mechanical amusement devices or juke boxes up to the maximum number or which the tax has been paid in each year regardless of the identity of any particular machine. In any such licensed premises, machines in place at the time of the issuance of the original certificate or license for any year may be replaced by other machines in the discretion of the owner or operator thereof at no additional cost or licensing. The alternative premises certificate and license shall only be issued to owners or operator within the City of Meadville. Any owner or operator who, after electing the alternative certificate and license hereby provided, is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article by the operation of any mechanical amusement device or juke box upon any premises in excess of the number licensed for such premises shall thereafter for a period of two calendar years be denied the opportunity to elect the alternative premises certification and license provided by this subsection and shall only be entitled to continued operation or ownership of such mechanical amusement devices or juke boxes within the City of Meadville upon the payment of all taxes due for machines actually in operation and pursuant to the provisions of subsection (A) of this section. The licensing of any premises for the operation of any stated number of machines shall be for the greatest number of machines operated upon said premises in any year, and there shall be no proration or adjustment of such license in the event of any addition to or reduction from the number of machines upon such premises in any calendar year. (Ord. 3064 § 1, 1983; Ord. 2460 § 4, 1958) 


353.06       Information confidential – Disclosure a violation.

Any information gained by the city clerk or any other official agent of the city as a result of any returns, investigations or verifications required or authorized by this article shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law. Any disclosure of any such information contrary to the provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this article. (Ord. 2460 § 5, 1958) 


353.07       Penalty for delinquent payment.

If any tax imposed in pursuance of this article shall not be paid when due, a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of tax due and unpaid shall be added thereto. (Ord. 2460 § 6, 1958) 


353.08       Recovery of taxes.

All taxes levied by this article, together with all penalties, shall be recoverable by the city as other debts of like amount are recovered. (Ord. 2460 §  7, 1958)   


353.09       Repeal of conflicting legislation.

Any ordinance or part of any ordinance conflicting with this article is hereby repealed insofar as the same affects this article. (Ord. 2460 § 9, 1958) 


353.10       Validity.

If any sentence, clause or section or part of this article is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses or sections or parts of this article. It is hereby declared as the intent of council that this article would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included therein. (Ord. 2460 § 10, 1958) 


353.99       Penalty.

Whoever violates or fails to carry out any of the provisions or requirements of this article, or neglects, fails or refuses to furnish correct and complete reports or returns or to pay over any tax levied by this article at the time required, or knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent returns, or attempts to do anything whatever to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this article shall be fined not more than $100.00 for each and every offense, and the costs of prosecution thereof, and, in default thereof, shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days. Such fine or penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other section of this article. (Ord. 2460 § 8, 1958) 


Article 357       PER CAPITA TAX

Sections:

357.01  Authority for tax.

357.02  Tax levied and rate.

357.03  Names of inhabitants from assessment books.

357.04  Collection by city treasurer.

357.05  Discount and penalty authorized.

357.06  Recovery of taxes.

357.07  Repeal of conflicting legislation.

357.08  Validity.


357.01       Authority for tax.

This per capita tax is levied under the authority granted to the city by Act 511 approved December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, known as the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended. (Ord. 2675 § 1, 1967) 


357.02       Tax levied and rate.

An annual per capita tax for general revenue purposes in the amount of $5.00, in addition to the residence tax authorized by the Third Class City Code, is hereby imposed upon each inhabitant of the City of Meadville above the age of 18 years. (Ord. 2817 § 1, 1973)   


357.03       Names of inhabitants from assessment books.

The names of the inhabitants taxable under the provisions of this article shall be taken from the assessment books prepared by the city assessor. (Ord. 2461 § 2, 1958) 


357.04       Collection by city treasurer.

The per capita tax shall be paid to and collected by the city treasurer in the same manner as the residence tax authorized by the Third Class City Code. (Ord. 2461 § 3, 1958)   


357.05       Discount and penalty authorized.

If any tax levied in pursuance of this article shall be paid on or before April 30th of the year for which it is assessed, a discount of two percent shall be deducted therefrom, and if any such tax is not paid on or before June 30th of the year for which it was assessed, a penalty of five percent shall be added thereto. (Ord. 2461 § 4, 1958)   


357.06       Recovery of taxes.

The tax imposed by this article, together with any penalty thereon, shall be recoverable by the city as other debts are recoverable at law. (Ord. 2461 § 5, 1958)   


357.07       Repeal of conflicting legislation.

Any ordinance or part of any ordinance conflicting with this article is hereby repealed insofar as the same affects this article. (Ord. 2461 § 6, 1958) 


357.08       Validity.

If any sentence, clause or section or part of this article is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses or sections or parts of this article. It is hereby declared as the intent of council that this article would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof been included therein. (Ord. 2461 § 7, 1958) 


Article 358       

MEADVILLE ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION TAX ASSISTANCE PLAN

(Repealed by Ord. 3568)


Article 360       REALTY TRANSFER TAX

Sections:

360.01  Short title.

360.02  Definitions.

360.03  Rate of tax – When payable.

360.04  To whom tax is payable.

360.05  Exempt parties.

360.06  Excluded transactions.

360.07  Documents relating to associations or corporations and members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.

360.08  Special rules affecting acquired real estate companies.

360.09  Credits against tax.

360.10  Extension of lease.

360.11  Payment from proceeds of judicial sale.

360.12  Stamps.

360.13  Recorder of deeds, duties, compensation and bond.

360.14  Recorder of deeds – Discretion.

360.15  Value to be stated in document or affidavit.

360.16  Collection and penalty.

360.99  Criminal penalties.


360.01       Short title.

This article may be known and denominated as the "realty transfer tax ordinance" of the Meadville Municipal Code. (Ord. 3156, 1987)


360.02       Definitions.

The following words when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

(A) "Association" means a partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of unincorporated enterprise, owned or conducted by two or more persons other than a private trust or decedent’s estate.

(B) "Corporation" means a corporation, joint-stock association, business trust or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this commonwealth, the United States, or any other state, territory, or foreign country or dependency.

(C) "Document" means any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers, demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable over a period of time exceeding 30 years or instruments which solely grant, vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include a declaration of acquisition required to be present for recording under MMC 360.08. 

(D) "Family farm corporation" means a corporation of which at least 75 percent of its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75 percent of each class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:

(1) Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing, camping, skiing, show competition or racing;

(2) The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish, cats, dogs or pets, or animals intended for use in sporting or recreational activities;

(3) Fur farming;

(4) Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or

(5) Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.

(E) "Member of the same family" means any individual, such individual’s brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual’s parents and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be treated as if they were related by the whole blood.

(F) "Person" means every natural person, association, or corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or both, the term "person", as applied to associations, shall include the responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 

(G) "Real estate" means:

(1) Any land, tenements or hereditament within this commonwealth, including, without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.

(2) A condominium unit.

(3) A tenant-stockholder’s interest in a cooperative housing corporation, trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.

(H) "Real estate company" means a corporation or association which is primarily engaged in the business of holding, selling, or leasing real estate 90 percent or more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and which:

(1) Derives 60 percent or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or disposition of real estate; or

(2) Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90 percent or more of the value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established market.

(I) "Title to real estate" means:

(1) Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate or perpetual leasehold; or

(2) Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real estate in which the lessee has equity.

(J) "Transaction" means the making, executing, delivering, accepting, or presenting for recording of a document.

(K) "Value" means:

(1) In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm’s length for actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor, paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real estate; provided, that where such documents shall set forth a nominal consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;

(2) In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio of assessed values to market values of the taxing district as established by the State Tax Equalization Board, or a commensurate part of the assessment where the assessment includes other real estate;

(3) In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value of which is not determinable under subsection (K)(1) or (2) of this section, the actual monetary worth of such interest; or

(4) The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executor agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or between grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor or a related corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before or effective with the transfer. (Ord. 3156, 1987)


360.03       Rate of tax – When payable.

Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts, or presents for recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made, executed, delivered, accepted, or presented for recording shall be subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, or for or in respect of the vellum parchment or paper on which such document is written or printed, a realty transfer tax at the rate of one percent of the value of the real estate represented by such document, which realty transfer tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the document is presented for recording or within 30 days of making, execution, delivery or acceptance of such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company. (Ord. 3156, 1987)


360.04       To whom tax is payable.

(A) General Payment Requirement. The tax levied and imposed in this article shall be payable to the persons hereinafter indicated.

(B) Recorded Documents. In the case of a document presented for recording, the tax shall be paid, at the time of the presenting for recording of such document, to the recorder of deeds of Crawford County, Pennsylvania, or his/her duly authorized agent. 

(C) Documents Not Recorded. In the case of a document made, executed, delivered, or accepted, but not presented for recording, the tax herein imposed shall be payable to the city treasurer, or his/her duly authorized agent.

(D) Future Adjustments. The city may, from time to time, provide additional methods for the collection of the tax herein imposed and may adopt instructions, additional regulations, and policies for administering and enforcing this article, and in order to facilitate and expedite the collection of said tax, said city may appoint one or more additional responsible persons as their agent, or agents, for the collection thereof. (Ord. 3156, 1987)


360.05       Exempt parties.

The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the tax. (Ord. 3156, 1987)


360.06       Excluded transactions.

(A) List of Excluded Transactions. The tax imposed by this article shall not be imposed upon: 

(1) To Government. A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property line adjustments provided said reconveyance is made within one year from the date of condemnation.

(2) Legal Limitations. A document which the commonwealth is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.

(3) Certain Tax Sale Transfers. A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax claim bureau sale.

(4) Corrective Deeds. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend or limit existing record legal title or interest.

(5) Certain Transfers by Certain Co-Tenants. A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by co-tenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.

(6) Certain Family Transfers. A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were previously husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or spouse of a brother or sister and between a grandparent and grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.

(7) Certain Transfers as Personal Representative. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal representative of a decedent to the decedent’s devisee or heir.

(8) Certain Transfers to Trust. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be granted unless the recorder of deeds is presented with a copy of the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all possible beneficiaries. 

(9) Certain Transfers by Trustees to Beneficiaries. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a beneficiary of an ordinary trust.

(10) Certain Transfers Among Trustees. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to successor trustee. 

(11) Certain Agent/Straw Party Transfer. A transfer:

(a) For no or nominal actual consideration between principal and agent or straw party; or

(b) From or to an agent or straw party where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would be imposed under this article.

Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this subsection.

(12) Certain Corporate Transfers. A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation, except where it is reasonably determined that the primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.

(13) Certain Transfers to Shareholders. A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of record in the name of the corporation or association where the grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the grantee for more than two years.

(14) Certain Debt-Related Transfers by Certain Nonprofit Entities. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.

(15) Certain Industrial Development Transfers. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:

(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing, publishing, research and development, transportation, energy conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and

(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the real estate transferred. 

(16) Certain Transfers in Lieu of Foreclosure. A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.

(17) Certain Transfers Between Religious Organizations. Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial purposes.

(18) Certain Transfers to Certain Conservancies. A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. Section 501(c)(3)) and which has as its primary purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or open space opportunities.

(19) Certain Farm Corporation Transfers. A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a family farm corporation by a member of the same family which directly owns at least 75 percent of each class of stock thereof.

(20) Certain Family Farm Transfers. A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.

(21) Certain Diminimus Transfers. A transaction wherein the tax due is $1.00 or less.

(22) Oil, Gas and Mineral Leases. Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals and assignments thereof.

(B) In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of value. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article. (Ord. 3156, 1987)


360.07       Documents relating to associations or corporations and members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.

Except as otherwise provided in MMC 360.06, documents which make, confirm, or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article, corporations and associations are entities separate from their members, partners, stockholders or shareholders. (Ord. 3156, 1987)


360.08       Special rules affecting acquired real estate companies.

(A) Definition. A "real estate company" is an acquired company upon a change in the ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change:

(1) Does not affect the continuity of the company; and

(2) Of itself of together with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly, 90 percent or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.

(B) Special Rules for Certain Family Farm Corporations. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation under this article.

(C) Filing of Declaration of Acquisition Required. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate holdings of the acquired company in such county. (Ord. 3156, 1987)


360.09       Credits against tax.

(A) Certain Broker Transactions. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real estate broker which property was transferred to him within the preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.

(B) Certain Builder Transfers. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.

(C) Certain Post Demise Transfers. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is demised by the grantor, a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the demise shall be given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.

(D) Certain Post Contract Transfers. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor toward the tax due upon the deed.

(E) Carryover Credit. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be allowed. (Ord. 3156, 1987)


360.10       Extension of lease.

In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is established. (Ord. 3156, 1987)


360.11       Payment from proceeds of judicial sale.

To the extent authorized and permitted by the laws of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate. If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for the remaining tax. (Ord. 3156, 1987)


360.12       Stamps.

The payment of the tax imposed by this article shall be evidenced by the affixing of a stamp to every document by the recorder of deeds of Crawford County, Pennsylvania, or by the city treasurer, or by their duly authorized agent. Said stamp shall indicate the date of payment, the amount of tax paid and to whom the tax was paid. Said stamp shall be furnished by the city and shall only be given to the recorder of deeds of Crawford County and to the city treasurer and shall be kept in the sole possession, custody and control of said persons, or their duly authorized agents and shall only be affixed to a document upon payment of the tax imposed by this article. (Ord. 3156, 1987)


360.13       Recorder of deeds, duties, compensation and bond.

(A) Primary Collection Agents. The recorder of deeds of Crawford County, Pennsylvania, along with the city treasurer, shall be the collection agents for the tax imposed by this article. On or before the tenth of each month, the recorder of deeds of Crawford County, Pennsylvania, shall pay over to the city treasurer all taxes collected pursuant to this article, less two percent for the use of Crawford County together with a report containing the information as is required by the commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax. 

(B)  Bonds. The city may, from time to time, by separate ordinance or resolution, require any collection agent collecting the tax imposed by this article to post a bond before entering upon his official duties conditioned upon the faithful discharge by such collection agent, including his appointees and agents of all duties imposed upon such agent by this article and applicable provisions of the law of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The amount of such bond or bonds shall be determined by the city from time to time by separate ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 3156, 1987)


360.14       Recorder of deeds – Discretion.

The recorder of deeds of Crawford County, Pennsylvania, in his or her sole discretion and to the extent permitted by the applicable laws of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall have authority on behalf of the city to refuse to record any document which in his or her opinion a tax hereby imposed applies and upon which document such tax has not been paid or upon which document the stamp provided for hereinabove has not been imprinted or stamped. (Ord. 3156, 1987)


360.15       Value to be stated in document or affidavit.

Every document, lodged with or presented to the recorder of deeds of Crawford County, Pennsylvania, for recording and every document which is not presented for recording but which is presented to the city treasurer for the payment of the tax herein imposed shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true, full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under this article. (Ord. 3156, 1987)


360.16       Collection and penalty.

Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be obligated to pay interest on the amount of the unpaid tax at the rate of one-half of one percent per month from the time said tax was due until paid, and a penalty on the amount of the unpaid tax at the rate of one percent per month from the time said tax was due until paid. The city treasurer or his/her duly authorized agent is hereby authorized to collect said tax from the person or persons obligated to pay the same, pursuant to this article, by suit in assumpsit in the name of the city or by such other means as may now or hereafter be authorized by law for the collection of taxes. When suit is brought for the recovery of the taxes imposed by this article, the person or persons liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed. (Ord. 3156, 1987)


360.99       Criminal penalties.

Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall, in addition to any other penalties or remedies herein provided, upon summary conviction before an alderman, justice of the peace or district justice within the county, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $100.00 for each offense and costs of prosecution, and upon default of the payment of said fine and costs, be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 10 days. (Ord. 3156, 1987)


Article 361       IMPROVEMENT AND ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION OF THE MEADVILLE JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL AREA TAX ASSISTANCE PLAN

Sections:

361.01  Short title.

361.02  Definitions.

361.03  Grant of exemption.

361.04  Limitations.

361.05  Nonrecognition.

361.06  Notice to taxpayers.

361.07  Procedure for obtaining exemption.

361.08  Sunset provision.


361.01       Short title.

This article shall be known and denominated as the "Improvement and Economic Revitalization of the Meadville Junior High School Area Tax Assistance Plan." (Ord. 3606 § 1, 2004)


361.02       Definitions.

For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(A) "Base year" means the year in which an application is filed. Applications for exemption shall be processed and, if appropriate, granted in accord with the terms of this article as they existed on the day of the filing of said application. Subsequent amendments to this article, if any, shall not apply to applications filed prior to the effective date of any such amendments.

(B) "Commercial improvement" means repair, construction or reconstruction, including alterations and additions, having the effect of rehabilitating a deteriorated commercial property so that it becomes habitable or attains higher standards of safety, health, economic use or amenity, or is brought into compliance with laws, ordinances or regulations governing such standards. New construction of commercial or other business properties by individuals, associations or corporations within the designated deteriorated or deteriorating area shall be deemed to be a commercial improvement. Ordinary upkeep and maintenance shall not be deemed to be a commercial improvement.

(C) "Deteriorated area," "deteriorating area," and "deteriorated neighborhood" all mean the geographic area bounded by Walnut, North Main, North, and Liberty Streets in the Second Ward of the City of Meadville. The designations of the deteriorated area, deteriorating area, and deteriorated neighborhood for the purpose of administering of the terms of this article were made by the city council of the City of Meadville after public hearings and with the recommendations of the planning commission and the redevelopment authority of the City of Meadville, and upon a determination by the city council of the City of Meadville that the designated deteriorated neighborhood is physically blighted based upon the existence of a disproportionate number of tax exempt or delinquent properties in the area.

(D) "Deteriorated commercial property" means any commercial or other business property owned by an individual, association or corporation and located in the designated deteriorated or deteriorating area.

(E) "Deteriorated residential property" means any dwelling unit located in the designated deteriorated neighborhood.

(F) "Dwelling unit" means any building or portion of a building (including but not limited to any house, double house or duplex, townhouse, rowhouse or apartment) intended for occupancy as living quarters by an individual, a family or families or other groups of persons, which living quarters contain a kitchen or cooking equipment for the exclusive use of the occupant or occupants.

(G) "Exemption" means the exemption from taxation provided pursuant to the terms of this article. The exemption provided pursuant to the terms of this article shall be the exemption for tax purposes from the total assessed value of any subject property of that portion of the assessed value attributable to improvements for which an exemption has been granted by the appropriate assessment authorities under the terms hereof. The actual cost of any improvement shall be relevant to the exemption only to the extent that appropriate assessment officials consider the actual cost of such improvements in determining the assessed value of the subject property. In no event shall any exemption of assessed value exceed the actual cost incurred in the making of any improvement regardless of whether the subject improvement increases the assessed value of the property by a sum in excess of the actual cost of the improvement.

(H) "Improvement" means residential or commercial improvement as defined herein.

(I) "New residential construction" means the building or erection of a dwelling unit or units, as defined above, upon vacant land or land specifically prepared to receive such structures.

(J) "Residential improvement" means the repair, construction or reconstruction, including alterations and additions, having the effect of rehabilitating a deteriorated residential property, as defined above, so that it becomes habitable as a dwelling unit or units or attains higher standards of housing safety, health or amenity, or is brought into compliance with laws, ordinances or regulations governing housing standards applicable within the City of Meadville. The renovation or rehabilitation of deteriorated commercial property, as defined above, for occupancy as a dwelling unit or units shall be deemed to be a residential improvement as to the portion or portions of the deteriorated commercial property so renovated or rehabilitated. New residential construction by individuals, associations or corporations within the designated deteriorated neighborhood shall also be deemed to be a residential improvement. Ordinary upkeep and maintenance shall not be deemed to be a residential improvement. (Ord. 3606 § 1, 2004)


361.03       Grant of exemption.

From and after the effective date hereof, and subject to the limitations hereinafter stated, there is hereby exempted from real estate taxation the assessed value of all improvements (as herein defined). (Ord. 3606 § 1, 2004)


361.04       Limitations.

The exemption granted pursuant to the terms of this article shall be limited as follows:

(A) Assessed Value. The exemption hereby granted shall apply only to the assessed valuation of an improvement and in no case shall exceed the actual cost of the improvement.

(B) Damaged Properties. In the event of improvements to properties damaged by fire or another casualty after the effective date hereof, only so much of the assessed value of improvements actually incurred which would cause the assessed value of the improved structure to exceed the assessed value of the structure in the tax year immediately preceding the casualty shall be subject to exemption.

(C) Commercial Improvements. The exemption shall be equal to 100 percent of the assessed value of the improvements in each of the three tax years following the year in which construction is complete. Thereafter, the exemption shall end and any benefited property shall be fully taxable upon its full assessed valuation including the assessed value of improvements defined in accord with the terms of this article. 

(D) Residential Improvements. The exemption shall be equal to 100 percent of the assessed value of the improvement in each of the five tax years following the year in which construction is complete. Thereafter, the exemption shall end and any benefited property shall be fully taxable upon its full assessed valuation including the assessed value of improvements defined in accord with the terms of this article.

(E) New Residential Construction. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the exemption for new residential construction (as herein defined) shall be equal to 100 percent of the assessed value of the improvement in each of the five tax years following the year in which the building permit authorizing such improvement was issued, and shall not exceed the assessment attributable to $500,000 in cost per dwelling unit. (Ord. 3606 § 1, 2004)


361.05       Nonrecognition.

No improvements granted exemption pursuant to the terms of this article shall, during the period of exemption granted pursuant to the terms hereof, be considered as a factor in assessing other properties. (Ord. 3606 § 1, 2004)


361.06       Notice to taxpayers.

All building permit applications for improvements (as herein defined) issued by the City of Meadville shall, from and after the effective date hereof, be accompanied by a written notice to the applicant of the existence of the Improvement and Economic Revitalization of the Meadville Junior High School Area Tax Assistance Plan, and of the procedures necessary to obtain exemption in accord with the terms of this article. (Ord. 3606 § 1, 2004)


361.07       Procedure for obtaining exemption.

(A) Any taxpayer desiring tax exemption pursuant to the terms of this article shall apply in writing upon a form approved by the City of Meadville at the time such taxpayer secures a building permit for an intended improvement. A copy of the exemption application shall be forwarded by the City of Meadville to the appropriate assessment officials of Crawford County. The appropriate assessment officials of Crawford County shall, after completion of construction, assess separately the improvement and shall calculate the amounts of the assessment eligible for tax exemption pursuant to the terms of this article. In the event an improvement constitutes new residential construction, assessment officials shall separately assess the dwelling unit and the land upon which it stands. Notice of the determinations of the assessment officials shall be given to the taxpayer and to all interested local taxing authorities. Said notice shall state the amount of the assessment eligible for exemption. Appeals from the assessment for the determination of the amount eligible for exemption may be taken by the taxpayer as provided by law for general assessment appeals. The limitations upon exemption and the schedules of taxes exempted existing at the time of the grant of the building permit and the receipt of the application for exemption shall be applicable to that exemption request, and subsequent amendments to this article, if any, shall not apply to requests initiated prior to the effective date of such amendments.

(B) County assessment officials shall be advised of the completion of construction by the appropriate city building or housing inspection personnel. Notice of completion shall be in writing and shall contain a certification that the completed construction complies with all applicable building, plumbing, fire, land use and related laws, rules and regulations applicable to structures within the City of Meadville. No exemption shall be granted to any property which is not certified to be in compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations. Failure to complete new residential construction within one year after the date of the issuance of the building permit shall not operate to extend the applicable exemption period, and the exemption herein provided shall only be applied to improvements for a period of five years beginning with the year following the year in which the building permit authorizing such improvements was issued. (Ord. 3606 § 1, 2004)


361.08       Sunset provision.

This article shall be in effect for a period of seven years from the date of its enactment. All exemptions granted prior to the termination date hereof shall remain in full force and effect in accord with the terms and limitations herein stated notwithstanding the expiration of the effectiveness hereof. All applications for exemption filed prior to the termination date hereof shall be processed and, if appropriate, approved for exemption in accord with the terms and limitations hereof notwithstanding the termination of the effectiveness hereof prior to the expiration of any exemption granted pursuant to such applications. (Ord. 3606 § 1, 2004)


Article 362 LOCAL ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION TAX ASSISTANCE CODE

Sections:

362.01    Short title.

362.02    Definitions.

362.03    Grant of exemption.

362.04    Limitations of exemption.

362.05    Nonrecognition.

362.06    Notice to taxpayers.

362.07    Procedure for obtaining exemption.

362.08    Sunset provision.


362.01 Short title.

This article shall be known and denominated as the local economic revitalization tax assistance code. (Ord. 3654 § 1, 2008)


362.02 Definitions.

For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

A. “Improvement” means repair, construction or reconstruction, including alterations and additions, having the effect of rehabilitating and/or improving a commercial property so that it attains higher standards of safety, health, economic use or amenity, or is brought into compliance with laws, ordinances or regulations governing such standards, and which improvement increases the assessed value of the commercial property a minimum of 25 percent. New construction of commercial or other business properties by individuals, associations, or corporations within the designated deteriorated or deteriorating area shall be deemed to be a commercial improvement. Ordinary upkeep and maintenance shall not be deemed to be a commercial improvement. Properties which are used primarily for residential purposes shall not qualify as commercial properties for purposes of this article. The determination of the increase in assessed value shall be based on a final assessed valuation, conducted following any tax assessment appeal by the property owner of such assessment, if any such appeal is filed.

B. “Deteriorated area” or “deteriorating area” is defined as the geographic area bounded by the City of Meadville city limits.

C. “Deteriorated property” means any industrial, commercial or other business property owned by an individual, association or corporation and located in the designated deteriorated or deteriorating area.

D. “Exemption” means the exemption from taxation provided pursuant to the terms of this article in accordance with the authority of the Pennsylvania Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act found at 53 P.S. Section 4722 et seq. The exemption provided pursuant to the terms of this article shall be the exemption for tax purposes from the total assessed value of any subject property or that portion of the assessed value attributable to improvements for which an exemption has been granted by the appropriate assessment authorities. The actual cost of any improvement shall be relevant to the exemption only to the extent that appropriate assessment officials consider the actual cost of such improvements in determining the assessed value of the subject property. In no event shall any exemption of assessed value exceed the actual cost incurred in the making of any improvement regardless of whether the subject improvement increases the assessed value of the property by a sum in excess of the actual cost of the improvement. (Ord. 3701 § 1, 2012; Ord. 3654 § 1, 2008)


362.03 Grant of exemption.

From and after the effective date hereof, and subject to the limitations hereinafter stated, there is hereby exempted from real estate taxation the assessed value of all improvements, as herein defined. (Ord. 3654 § 1, 2008)


362.04 Limitations of exemption.

The exemption granted pursuant to the terms of this article shall be limited as follows:

A. Limited to Assessed Value of Improvement. The exemption hereby granted shall apply only to the assessed valuation of an improvement and in no case shall exceed the actual cost of the improvement.

B. Limited to Improvements to Damaged Property. In the event of improvements to properties damaged by fire or other casualty after the effective date hereof, only so much of the assessed value of improvements actually made which would cause the assessed value of the improved structure to exceed the assessed value of the structure in the tax year immediately preceding the casualty shall be subject to exemption.

C. Schedule of Exemptions. Exemptions shall be granted as follows:

	Year in Which Improvements Are Taxable	Proportion of Assessed Value Exempted

	First year	100%

	Second year	80%

	Third year	60%

	Fourth year	40%

	Fifth year	20%

	Sixth year	0%

D. Year Exemptions Are Made. Exemptions hereby granted shall apply either (1) in the first tax year following the year after completion of the new construction or improvement, or (2) in the event the property is already exempt under the authority of the Keystone Opportunity Zone, Keystone Opportunity Expansion Zone, and Keystone Opportunity Improvement Act found at 73 P.S. Section 820.101 et seq. (herein referred to as the Keystone Opportunity Zone Act), then in the first tax year following the termination of the exemption under the Keystone Opportunity Zone Act. In no event shall the exemption extend more than 10 years after the improvement has been completed and assessed. (Ord. 3654 § 1, 2008)


362.05 Nonrecognition.

No improvements granted exemption pursuant to the terms of this article shall, during the period of exemption granted pursuant to the terms hereof, be considered as a factor in assessing other properties. (Ord. 3654 § 1, 2008)


362.06 Notice to taxpayers.

All building permit applications for improvements (as herein defined) issued by the City of Meadville shall, from and after the effective date hereof, be accompanied by a written notice to the applicant of the existence of the local economic revitalization tax assistance program, and of the procedures necessary to obtain an exemption in accord with the terms of this article. (Ord. 3654 § 1, 2008)


362.07 Procedure for obtaining exemption.

A. Any taxpayer desiring tax exemption pursuant to the terms of this article shall apply in writing upon a form approved by the City of Meadville at the time such taxpayer secures a building permit for an intended improvement. A copy of the exemption application shall be forwarded by the City of Meadville to appropriate assessment officials of Crawford County. The appropriate assessment officials of Crawford County shall, after completion of construction, assess separately the improvement and shall calculate the amounts of the assessment eligible for tax exemption pursuant to the terms of this article. Notice of the determinations of the assessment officials shall be given to the taxpayer and to all interested local taxing authorities. Said notice shall state the amount of the assessment eligible for exemption. Appeals from the assessment for the determination of the amount eligible for exemption may be taken by the taxpayer as provided by law for general assessment appeals. The limitations upon exemption and the schedules of taxes exempted existing at the time of the grant of the building permit and the receipt of the application for exemption shall be applicable to that exemption request, and subsequent amendments to this article, if any, shall not apply to requests initiated prior to the effective date of such amendments. Provided, however, that the City of Meadville shall grant an exception for eligible improvements completed within the deteriorated area, as defined herein, in calendar years 2011 and 2012 through the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, which otherwise would not qualify for application for such exemption provided herein. Applications related to improvements completed in years 2011 and 2012 through the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section (to be evidenced by certificates of occupancy issued during 2011 and 2012) must be submitted to the city within 90 days of such effective date of the ordinance codified in this section in order to be eligible for the tax exemption provided herein.

B. County assessment officials shall be advised of the completion of construction by the appropriate city building inspection personnel. Notice of completion shall be in writing and shall contain a certification that the completed construction complies with all applicable building, plumbing, fire, land use and related laws, rules and regulations. Said notice shall also indicate whether the subject property is exempt under the Keystone Opportunity Zone Act and for how long. The exemption herein provided shall only be applied to improvements for a period of five years beginning with the year following the year in which the improvements were completed or following the year the Keystone opportunity zone exemption, if any, terminates, whichever is later. (Ord. 3701 § 1, 2012; Ord. 3654 § 1, 2008)


362.08 Sunset provision.

This article shall remain in effect for a period of 10 years from the date of this amendment. All exemptions granted prior to the termination date hereof shall remain in full force and effect in accordance with the terms and limitations herein stated, notwithstanding the expiration of the effectiveness hereof. All applications for exemption filed prior to the termination date hereof shall be processed and, if appropriate, approved for exemption in accordance with the terms and limitations hereof, notwithstanding the termination of the effectiveness hereof prior to the expiration of any exemption granted pursuant to such applications. (Ord. 3770 § 1, 2018; Ord. 3654 § 1, 2008)


Article 363 IMPROVEMENT OF DETERIORATING REAL PROPERTY OR AREAS TAX EXEMPTION

Sections:

363.01    Definitions.

363.02    Real property tax exemptions.

363.03    Exemption schedules.

363.04    Procedure for obtaining exemption.

363.05    Amendments.

363.06    Termination date.

363.07    Nonpermissible exemptions.


363.01 Definitions. 

As used in this article, the following words and phrases have the meanings set forth below:

“Deteriorated area” means, for purposes of “improvements” as defined herein, the area bounded and described as the “deteriorated area” by resolution passed by the city council of the City of Meadville on September 2, 2015, and as the same may thereafter be amended from time to time, and for purposes of residential construction as defined herein.

“Deteriorated property” means a dwelling unit located in the deteriorated area which has been or upon request is certified by a health, housing or building inspection agency as unfit for human habitation for rent withholding, or other health or welfare purposes, or has been the subject of an order by such agency requiring the dwelling unit to be vacated, condemned or demolished by reason of noncompliance with laws, ordinances or regulations.

“Dwelling unit” means a house, duplex, townhouse, apartment, condominium, or any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a separate living quarters by an individual, family or families or other groups of persons, which living quarters contain a kitchen or cooking equipment for the exclusive use of the occupant or occupants.

“Improvement” means repair, construction or reconstruction, including alterations and additions, having the effect of rehabilitating a deteriorated property so that it becomes habitable or attains higher standards of housing safety, health or amenity, or is brought into compliance with laws. 

“Residential construction” means the building or erection of dwelling units, as defined above, upon vacant land or land specifically prepared to receive such structures within the geographical limits of the deteriorated area. (Ord. 3742 § 1, 2015)


363.02 Real property tax exemptions.

A. The exemption from real property taxes shall be limited to:

(i) The exemption schedule as established by this article; and

(ii) That portion of the additional assessment attributable to the actual costs of improvements to deteriorated properties or the actual costs of residential construction built in the deteriorated area.

B. In all cases the exemption from taxes shall be limited to that portion of the additional assessment valuation attributable to the actual costs of the improvements or residential construction, as the case may be, and for which a separate assessment has been made by the Crawford County assessment office, and for which an exemption has been separately requested.

C. No tax exemption shall be granted by the City of Meadville if the property owner does not Secure all of the necessary and proper permits prior to commencing the residential construction or making the improvements.

D. In any case, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article, when residential construction or improvements are damaged, destroyed or demolished by any cause or for any reason, and the assessed value of the property affected has been reduced as a result of the said damage, destruction or demolition, the exemption from real property taxation authorized by this article shall be limited to that portion of the new assessment attributable to the actual costs of the residential construction or improvements that is in excess of the original assessments that existed prior to the damage, destruction or demolition of the improvements or residential construction.

E. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, each item of the residential construction and/or improvements shall be treated separately for exemptions under this article if they are being performed or constructed under separate building permits. By way of example only, if a property owner obtains a building permit to construct a house in year one, and then in year two obtains a separate building permit to install a garage or make additional improvements to the previously constructed house, that garage or new improvements shall be treated separately for purposes of exemption under this article. (Ord. 3742 § 2, 2015)


363.03 Exemption schedules.

A. The following exemption schedule shall apply for deteriorated properties to which improvements have been made, which schedule shall be in effect for five tax years commencing with the new tax year following the tax year within which a certificate of occupancy or other City of Meadville issued certification of completion for the improvements to the property is dated:

	Length	Portion Exempt

	1st year	100% 

	2nd year	80%

	3rd year	60%

	4th year	40%

	5th year	20%

After the fifth year, the exemption shall terminate.

B. The following exemption schedule shall apply for properties in a deteriorated area subject to new residential construction, which schedule shall be in effect for five years commencing with the new tax year following the tax year within which a certificate of occupancy or other City of Meadville issued certification of completion is dated:

	Length	Portion Exempt

	1st year	100% 

	2nd year	80%

	3rd year	60%

	4th year	40%

	5th year	20%

After the fifth year, the exemption shall terminate.

C. The exemptions set forth above are limited to the additional assessment valuation attributable to the actual costs of the improvements or residential construction.

D. If the use of the property at the time the exemption is granted is modified, terminated or changed during the five-year period which in any way would have affected the exemption if the property had been so used when the exemption was granted, then at the election of the City of Meadville, the exemption shall terminate as of the date the use was modified or terminated or the City of Meadville determines that the continuation of the exemption would be inconsistent with the purposes of this article.

E. The exemption from taxes authorized by this article shall be upon the property exempted and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of the property. (Ord. 3742 § 3, 2015)


363.04 Procedure for obtaining exemption.

A. Any person or entity desiring tax exemption pursuant to this article shall apply to the City of Meadville at the time a building permit is secured for new residential construction or for the improvement. The application shall be in writing upon forms specified by the City of Meadville setting forth the following information:

(i) The date the building permit was issued;

(ii) The location of the property to be improved;

(iii) The type of improvement/residential construction;

(iv) The summary of the plan of the improvement/residential construction;

(v) The cost of the improvement/residential construction;

(vi) Certification by the applicant that there are no unpaid real estate taxes, municipal sewer charges, or other municipal charges, bills or liens outstanding related to the property;

(vii) Such additional information as the City of Meadville may require.

B. A copy of the exemption requests shall be forwarded to the Crawford County assessment office by the City of Meadville city manager or his designated agent. The Crawford County assessment office shall, after completion of the new residential construction or improvement, assess separately the new residential construction or improvement and calculate the amounts of the assessment eligible for tax exemption in accordance with the limits set forth in this article and shall notify the taxpayer and the City of Meadville of the reassessment and amounts of the assessment eligible for exemption.

C. The cost of new residential construction or improvements to be exempted and the schedule of taxes exempted existing at the time of the initial request for tax exemption shall be applicable to that exemption request and subsequent amendment to this article, if any, shall not apply to requests initiated prior to their adoption.

D. Appeals from the reassessment and the amount eligible for the exemption may be taken by the City of Meadville or by the taxpayer as provided by law. (Ord. 3742 § 4, 2015)


363.05 Amendments.

No amendment to this article shall be binding upon any other taxing activity unless consented to by resolution or ordinance of each local taxing authority which has consented to be bound by the terms of this article. (Ord. 3742 § 5, 2015)


363.06 Termination date.

Unless prior to that date which is three years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article, the city council of the City of Meadville adopts an ordinance or takes other appropriate actions extending the ordinance codified in this article, this article shall automatically “sunset” and terminate exactly three years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any taxpayer who has received or applied for exemption granted by this article prior to the expiration or termination of this the ordinance codified in this article, if said exemption is granted, shall be entitled to the full exemption authorized herein; provided, that the improvements and/or residential construction is completed and a certificate of occupancy is issued by the City of Meadville within two years following the date of termination and/or expiration of the ordinance codified in this article. (Ord. 3742 § 6, 2015)


363.07 Nonpermissible exemptions.

Any exemption made permissible under this article shall not be applied to any properties not subject to exemption hereunder and under The Improvement of Deteriorating Real Property or Areas Tax Exemption Act, 72 P.S. Section 4711-101, et seq. (Ord. 3742 § 7, 2015)


PART 5 TRAFFIC CODE

Articles:

501    General Regulations

502    Reserved

503    Traffic Regulations 

504    Reserved

505    Unmetered Parking Regulations

506    Reserved

507    Snow and Ice Emergency

508    –

517    Reserved

518    School Bus Loading Zones

519    Handicapped Parking Regulations

521    On-Street Parking

525    Off-Street Parking

526    Prohibited Parking and Unattended Vehicles

530    Bridge and Street Weight Limits

531    Regulation of the Use of Skates, Skateboards and Similar Devices


Article 501 GENERAL REGULATIONS

Sections:

501.01    Definitions and interpretation.

501.02    Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking regulations.

501.03    Temporary and/or emergency regulations.

501.04    Experimental regulations.

501.05    Funeral procession.

501.06    Authority of peace officers.

501.99    Penalties.


501.01 Definitions and interpretation.

(A) Words and phrases, when used in the Traffic Code of the City of Meadville, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, as now in force, or as hereafter amended, enacted or re-enacted, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.

(B) The term “legal holidays” as used in the Traffic Code of the City of Meadville shall mean and include: New Year’s Day, Martin Luther King Day, Presidents’ Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day.

(C) The term “vehicle code” shall mean the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, 75 Pa. C.S. Section 101 et seq.

(D) The term “peace officer” shall mean and include any City of Meadville police officer and any other persons expressly authorized by the city manager or chief of police to enforce traffic or parking regulations of the City of Meadville.

(E) The term “highway” shall include street or way and vice versa.

(F) In this article, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


501.02 Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking regulations.

All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of the City of Meadville. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


501.03 Temporary and/or emergency regulations.

The city manager shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily, and in time of emergency:

(A) In the case of fire, flood, storm or similar emergency, to establish temporary traffic and/or parking regulations in such areas and for such periods of time as reasonably required for such emergencies.

(B) In the case of all other emergencies or to facilitate public works, or in the conduct of parades, processions, public events, community projects, commercial promotions, and area celebrations or events, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas or streets for a period of not more than 72 hours.

Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the city manager and the police department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any driver or other person who shall operate or park a vehicle in violation of any such regulation, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure, or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such regulations, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $30.00 or more than $300.00 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than five days. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


501.04 Experimental regulations.

For purposes of providing for the test and experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes in the ordinances of the City of Meadville relative to traffic and parking, the council of the City of Meadville may, from time to time, by resolution designate places upon and along the highways in the City of Meadville where, for a period of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate such locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective just as if they have been specified in this section. Council in the same manner specified herein shall have the authority to extend the experimental regulation for an additional 60 days in the event sufficient data or information has not been received from said experimental regulation; however, in no event shall said experimental regulation extend beyond one 60-day extension of the original 90-day experimental regulation. No driver or other person shall operate or park a vehicle in violation of any such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of this section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $30.00 or more than $300.00 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than five days. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


501.05 Funeral procession.

(A) No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this article. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or police officers.

(B) A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the police department of the City of Meadville.

(C) No funeral procession or parade containing 200 or more persons or 50 or more vehicles, except the Armed Forces of the United States, the military forces of this Commonwealth and the forces of the police and fire departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the city manager, and such other regulations as are set forth herein which may apply or except in accordance with such other regulations concerning parades and processions in the City of Meadville.

(D) Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more than $50.00 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 10 days. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


501.06 Authority of peace officers.

The peace officers or police of the City of Meadville are hereby given authority to direct traffic on the highways of the City of Meadville, and to regulate parking on the streets, highways and other public places of the City of Meadville, and at intersections thereof. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


501.99 Penalties.

Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of the articles comprising the Traffic Code of the City of Meadville, for which a specific penalty has not been established, shall be sentenced, upon conviction, to the extent permitted by law, to pay a fine of not less than $30.00 and not more than $300.00, together with court costs and costs of prosecution. Upon default of payment of fine and costs, such person shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 10 days. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


Article 502 RESERVED


Article 503 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS

Sections:

503.01    Vehicles not to be driven on sidewalks.

503.02    Speed limits.

503.03    Speed limits established on certain streets.

503.04    Traffic signals at certain intersections.

503.05    One-way streets established.

503.06    Traffic to move in counterclockwise direction around Diamond Square.

503.07    Left turns prohibited at certain intersections.

503.08    Stop intersections established.

503.09    Yield rights-of-way established.

503.10    Unlawful to operate vehicles on streets closed for construction or repairs.

503.11    Play streets established and authorized.

503.12    Operation within lanes in compliance to markings.

503.13    Accident reports required.


503.01 Vehicles not to be driven on sidewalks.

No driver or other person shall operate or leave unattended a vehicle upon any sidewalk in the City of Meadville; nor shall any driver or other person operate a vehicle upon or across any sidewalk except in order to gain access to or egress from a driveway or alley at such locations where the curb, if such sidewalk is curbed, shall have been properly cut down for that purpose. However, this section shall not apply to snow removal machinery or equipment which is utilized on the sidewalks in the City of Meadville for snow removal and which is not capable of being licensed under the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which does not exceed the total live and dead loads for sidewalks as specified in the building code of the City of Meadville. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50.00 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 10 days. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


503.02 Speed limits.

The provisions of the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all the streets and highways within the City of Meadville, except where the city council, upon the basis of traffic and engineering investigation, as required, determines that other speed limits shall be applicable on specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any driver to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so determined when signs are in place giving notice thereof. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


503.03 Speed limits established on certain streets.

No driver shall drive a vehicle on any part of a street identified in Schedule A below at a speed greater than the speed limit established for that street as set forth in Schedule A.

Schedule A  

	Street	Between	Speed Limit

	Allegheny Street	Beers Avenue and Park Avenue	25 miles per hour

	Belmont Drive	Seneca Road and Shawnee Road	25 miles per hour

	Carmont Drive 	Williamson Road and its terminus	25 miles per hour

	Lakemont Drive	Susquehanna Road and Williamson Road	25 miles per hour

	North Street	Water Street and Thurston Road	25 miles per hour

	Ridgemont Drive	Seneca Road and Seminole Road	25 miles per hour

	Seminole Road	Ridgemont Drive and Lamont Drive	25 miles per hour

	Seneca Road	Ridgemont Drive and Belmont Drive	25 miles per hour

	Shawnee Road	Lakemont Drive and Woodmont Drive	25 miles per hour

	Susquehanna Road	Ridgemont Drive and Woodmont Drive	25 miles per hour

	Woodmont Drive	Carmont Drive and Susquehanna Road	25 miles per hour

	Woodmont Drive	Seminole Road and Williamson Road	25 miles per hour

Fifteen mile-per-hour speed limits are established as designated in Schedule A-1:

Schedule A-1 

	School	Street	Between	Hours

	1st District	Randolph Street	N. Main and Garden Streets	7:30 a.m. – 8:30 a.m.

	3:15 p.m. – 4:00 p.m.

	N. Main Street	Randolph and Baldwin Streets	7:30 a.m. – 8:30 a.m.

	3:15 p.m. – 4:00 p.m.

	2nd District	Linden Street	Cottage and S. Main Streets	7:30 a.m. – 8:30 a.m.

	3:15 p.m. – 4:00 p.m.

	S. Main Street	Linden and Willow Streets	7:30 a.m. – 8:30 a.m.

	3:15 p.m. – 4:00 p.m.

	Seton	Pine Street	S. Main and Liberty Streets	7:30 a.m. – 8:30 a.m.

	3:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m. 

(Ord. 3716, 2013; Ord. 3684 § 1, 2011; Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


503.04 Traffic signals at certain intersections.

At the intersections designated in Schedule B of this section, the use of official traffic control signals to direct traffic is hereby ratified, and traffic at such intersections shall be directed by such signals. Unless otherwise directed by a uniformed police officer or other appropriately attired person authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic, the driver of any vehicle shall obey the directions of the official traffic control device.

Schedule B  

	Arch Street and Park Avenue

	Arch Street and Market Street

	Chestnut Street and Park Avenue

	French Creek Parkway and Linden Street

	French Creek Parkway and Willow Street

	French Creek Parkway and Arch Street

	French Creek Parkway and Bessemer Street

	Hickory Street and Washington Street

	Linden Street and S. Main Street

	Linden Street and Park Avenue

	Market Street and North Street

	North Street and N. Main Street

	North Street and Liberty Street

	North Street and Grove Street

	Park Avenue and Baldwin Street

	Park Avenue and North Street

	Pine Street and Park Avenue

	Poplar Street and Park Avenue

	Randolph Street and N. Main Street

	State Street and Washington Street and S. Grant Street and N. Grant Street

	Water Street and Arch Street

	Water Street and Chestnut Street

	Water Street and W. Center Street

	Water Street and North Street

	Willow Street and Park Avenue

(Ord. 3684 § 2, 2011; Ord. 3668 § 1, 2009; Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


503.05 One-way streets established.

The streets designated in Schedule C of this section are hereby established as one-way streets. Upon these designated streets, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction of travel designated.

Schedule C  

	Street	Between	Travel	Hours

	Chancery Lane	North Street and Walnut Street	South	 

	E. Center Street	Liberty Street and Diamond Park	East	 

	W. Center Street	Water Street and Park Avenue	West	 

	E. Cherry Street	Liberty Street and Diamond Park	West	 

	W. Cherry Street	Market Street and Mulberry Street	West	 

	W. Cherry Alley	Diamond Park and Park Avenue	East	 

	W. Cherry Alley	Water Street and Mulberry Alley	East	 

	Church Street	Park Avenue and N. Main Street	East	 

	N. Cottage Street	W. Center Street and Walnut Street	North	 

	Fairmont Avenue	Liberty Street to Poplar Street	East	 

	Federal Court	Chestnut Street and Arch Street	South	 

	Kennedy Street	State Street and a point 660 feet from the north ROW line of State St.	North	 

	Market Street	Poplar Street and Willow Street	South	 

	Mulberry	Shryock Apts. and Chestnut Street	North	 

	Mulberry Street	North Street and Steers Street	South	 

	Mulberry Street	Cherry Street and Chestnut Street	South	 

	North Street	N. Morgan and Thurston Road	West	7:30 – 8:00 a.m. and 2:30 – 3:30 p.m. on school days only

	Orchard Place	Chestnut Street and East Street	North then West 	 

	Park Avenue	French Creek Parkway and Linden Street	North	 

	Smith Street	Entire Length	North	 

	Walker Drive	Cul-de-Sac	Counterclock-wise	 

	Wallace Street	North Main Street and North Cottage Street	West	 

	Walnut Street	Water Street and N. Main Street	East	 

	Walnut Street	Grove Street and N. Main Street	West	 

(Ord. 3769 § 1, 2018; Ord. 3716, 2013; Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


503.06 Traffic to move in counterclockwise direction around Diamond Square.

Any vehicle passing around Diamond Square, also known as Diamond Park, or upon any portion of the street surrounding such square or park, shall only move in a counterclockwise direction, or to the right of Diamond Square or Park. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


503.07 Left turns prohibited at certain intersections.

No driver of a vehicle shall make a left hand turn from the street and direction identified in Schedule D of this section at the intersection identified in Schedule D.

Schedule D  

	Street	Travel Direction	Intersection

	North Street	West	Chancery Lane

	Baldwin Street	West	Mt. Hope Street

	S. Main Street	North	Chestnut Street

	Chestnut Street	West	S. Main Street

(Ord. 3684 § 3, 2011; Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


503.08 Stop intersections established.

The intersections identified in Schedule E of this section are established as stop intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are hereby confirmed if heretofore erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the intersecting street upon the first-named street, in the direction or directions hereby indicated. The driver of a vehicle on the first-named street approaching the named intersecting street in the direction indicated shall stop the vehicle at the intersecting street in the manner required by Section 3323(b) of the Vehicle Code and shall not proceed into or across the intersecting street until the driver has followed the requirements of Section 3323(b) and other applicable requirements of law.

Schedule E  

	Street	Intersecting Street	Direction

	Alden Street	Chestnut Street	West

	Alfred Street	Pine Street	South

	Alfred Street	Alden Street	North

	Allegheny Street	Park Avenue	East and West

	Allegheny Street	N. Main Street	East

	Arbutus Street	Park Avenue	West

	Arch Street	Alden Street	East

	Arch Street	Grove Street	East and West

	Arch Street	Liberty Street	East and West

	Arch Street	S. Main Street	East and West

	Arden Place	Miller Avenue	South

	Autumn Drive	S. Main Street	West

	Azalea Street	Park Avenue	West

	Azalea Street	N. Main Street	East

	Baldwin Street	N. Main Street	South

	Baldwin Street Park Drive	French Creek Parkway	West

	Baldwin Street Park Drive	Baldwin Street	East

	Beech Alley	Highland Avenue	East

	Beech Alley	N. Main Street	West

	Beechwood Drive	Leslie Road	North

	Ben Avon Street	Park Avenue	West

	Ben Avon Street	N. Main Street	East

	Bessemer Street	Mead Avenue	South

	Boynton Street	Water Street	East

	Brawley Avenue	N. Morgan Street	East and West

	Brawley Avenue	Hickory Street	West

	Byllesby Avenue	N. Main Street	West

	Carmont Drive	Williamson Road	East

	Carroll Avenue	Wood Street	West

	Carroll Avenue	N. Main Street	East

	Catherine Street	Pine Street	South

	Catherine Street	Arch Street	North

	Center Street	Market Street	West

	Center Street	West Diamond	East

	E. Center Street	Liberty Street	East and West

	E. Center Street	East Street	East and West

	E. Center Street	Grove Street	East

	W. Center Street	Park Avenue	West

	Chancery Lane	Poplar Street	North and South

	Chancery Lane	Pine Alley	North and South

	Chancery Lane	Pine Street	North and South

	Chancery Lane	South Street	North and South

	Chancery Lane	Arch Street	North and South

	Chancery Lane	Clinton Court	North and South

	Chancery Lane	Chestnut Street	North and South

	Chancery Lane	E. Cherry Street	North and South

	Chancery Lane	E. Center Street	North and South

	Chancery Lane	Walnut Street	North and South

	Charlton Street	Pine Street	South

	Charlton Street	Alden Street	North

	E. Cherry Street	Liberty Street	West

	W. Cherry Street	Mulberry Street	East

	W. Cherry Street	Park Avenue	East

	W. Cherry Street	E. Diamond	West

	W. Cherry Street	N. Cottage Street	East 

	Chestnut Street	Alden Street	West

	Chestnut Street	Grove Street	East and West

	Chestnut Street	Liberty Street	East and West

	Chestnut Street	N. Main St.	East

	Chestnut Street	Market Street	East and West

	Chestnut Street	S. Morgan Street	East and West

	Church Street	N. Main Street	East

	Clark Road	S. Main Street	East and West

	Clark Road	Liberty Street	East

	Clark Street	North Street	South

	Clinton Court	Federal Court	East and West

	Clinton Court	Chancery Lane	East and West

	Clinton Court	Liberty Street	East and West

	Cole Drive	Park Avenue	East

	E. College Street	N. Main Street	West

	E. College Street	Highland Avenue	East and West

	E. College Street	Cullum Street	West

	E. College Street	Gilmore Street	East

	W. College Street	Baldwin Street	West

	W. College Street	Park Avenue	East

	Columbia Avenue	Race Street	South

	Columbia Avenue	Rogers Ferry Road	North

	N. Cottage Street	Chestnut Street	South

	N. Cottage Street	W. Cherry Street	North and South

	N. Cottage Street	Walnut Street	North and South

	N. Cottage Street	W. Steers Street	North and South

	N. Cottage Street	North Street	North and South

	N. Cottage Street	Randolph Street	North and South

	S. Cottage Street	Poplar Street	North

	S. Cottage Street	Willow Street	North and South

	Cullum Street	E. College Street	North

	Davis Street	S. Main Street	West

	Davis Street	Liberty Street	East

	Deissler Court	Cullum Street	West

	Deissler Court	Jefferson Street	East

	W. Diamond	Chestnut Street	South

	Doughty Road	N. Main Street	South

	Doughty Road	Park Avenue	North

	East Alley	Poplar Street	North and South

	East Alley	Pine Alley	North and South

	East Alley	Pine Street	North and South

	East Alley	South Street	North and South

	East Alley	Arch Street	North and South

	East Alley	Clinton Court	North and South

	East Alley	Chestnut Street	North and South

	East Street	E. Center Street	North and South

	East Street	Walnut Street	North and South

	East Street	North Street	North

	Ernst Place	Chestnut Street	South

	Fairmont Avenue	Liberty Street	West

	Fairmont Avenue	Poplar Street	East

	Fairview Avenue	Chestnut Street	South

	Federal Court	Clinton Court	South

	Federal Court	Arch Street	South

	Fifth Ward A	Lincoln Avenue	East and West

	Fifth Ward B	Lincoln Avenue	East and West

	Fifth Ward C	Lincoln Avenue	East and West

	Fifth Ward D	Spring Street	South

	Fifth Ward E	Lincoln Avenue	West

	French Street	Mead Avenue	North

	Garden Street	North Street	South

	Garden Street	Randolph Street	North

	Gasteiger Road	Park Avenue	West

	Gilmore Street	Deissler Court	South

	Glenwood Avenue	Terrace Street	West

	Glenwood Avenue	Baldwin Street	East

	Graff Avenue	Washington Street	South

	Grandview Avenue	Limber Road	South

	Grandview Avenue	Sunset Drive	North

	N. Grant Street	Randolph Street	North

	Greendale Street	State Street	South

	Grove Street	Arch Street	North and South

	Grove Street	Chestnut Street	North and South

	Grove Street	Pine Street	North and South

	Grove Street	Williamson Road	South

	Grove Street	State Street	North

	Hailwood Drive	Wilson Avenue	West

	Hailwood Drive	Park Avenue	East

	Hamilton Avenue	N. Main Street	West

	Hartman Street	North Street	South

	Hartman Street	Washington Street	North

	Hartz Avenue	Forest Avenue	West

	Hecker Street	N. Main Street	East

	Hemlock Street	Poplar Street	South

	Hemlock Street	Pine Street	North

	Henry Street	N. Main Street	West

	Henry Street	Highland Avenue	East

	E. Henry Street	Cullum Street	East and West

	Highland Avenue	Randolph Street	South

	Highland Avenue	Limber Road	North and South

	Jackson Park Drive	N. Main Street	West

	Jefferson Street	Limber Road	North and South

	Jefferson Street	State Street	South

	Jefferson Street	Sunset Drive	North and South

	W. John Street	Park Avenue	East

	Kearney Street	Lincoln Avenue	East and West

	Laird Avenue	Park Avenue	West

	Lakemont Drive	Williamson Road	East

	Lamont Drive	Williamson Road	East

	Lamont Drive	Liberty Street	West

	Leslie Road	N. Main Street	West

	Liberty Street	Arch Street	North and South

	Liberty Street	Chestnut Street	North and South

	Liberty Street	Pine Street	North and South

	Liberty Street	Poplar Street	North and South

	Limber Road	N. Main Street	West

	Limber Road	Leslie Road	North and South

	Lincoln Avenue	Spring Street	South

	Linden Alley	Merrill Alley	South

	Linden Street	Liberty Street	East

	Locust Street	Terrace Street	West

	Locust Street	Baldwin Street	East

	Loomis Street	Park Avenue	West

	Loomis Street	N. Main Street	East

	Lord Street	Spring Street	North and South

	Lord Street	Reynolds Avenue	North and South

	Lyon Street	Columbia Avenue	West

	Lyon Street	Lincoln Avenue	East and West

	Mt. Hope Street	Baldwin Street	East

	N. Main Street	Baldwin Street	South

	S. Main Street	Arch Street	North and South

	S. Main Street	Chestnut Street	North

	S. Main Street	Pine Street	North and South

	S. Main Street	Poplar Street	North and South

	S. Main Street	Willow Street	North and South

	Maple Lane	Limber Road	East

	Market Street	Chestnut Street	North and South

	Market Street	Pine Street	North and South

	Market Street	Poplar Street	North and South

	Market Street	Randolph Street	North

	Market Street	Willow Street	North and South

	Martha Drive	Forest Avenue	West

	Meadow Street	Allegheny Street	South

	Meadow Street	Ben Avon Street	North and South

	Meadow Street	Carroll Avenue	North and South

	Mohican Place	State Street	South

	Mohican Place	Randolph Lane	North and South

	N. Morgan Street	North Street	South

	N. Morgan Street	Washington Street	North and South

	S. Morgan Street	Alden Street	North and South

	Mulberry Street	Poplar Street	South

	Mulberry Street	Pine Place	North and South

	Mulberry Street	Pine Street	North and South

	Mulberry Street	South Street	North and South

	Mulberry Street	Chestnut Street	North and South

	Mulberry Street	Center Street	North and South

	Mulberry Street	Walnut Street	North and South

	Mulberry Street	North Street	North

	North Street	State Street	West

	North Street	Thurston Road	East

	Northwood Drive	Baldwin Street	East

	Oak Drive	N. Main Street	West

	Orchard Place	East Street	West

	Park Avenue	Randolph Street	North and South

	Park Place	Park Avenue	West

	Park Place	N. Main Street	East

	Park Street	Water Street	East

	Penn Alley	Washington Street	North

	Penn Street	North Street	South

	Penn Street	Washington Street	North

	Pine Alley	Chancery Lane	East and West

	Pine Place	Park Avenue	East

	Pine Street	Grove Street	East and West

	Pine Street	Liberty Street	East and West

	Pine Street	S. Main Street	East and West

	Pine Street	Market Street	East and West

	Pine Street	S. Morgan Street	East

	Pine Street	Water Street	East and West

	Plateau Drive	Williamson Road	East

	Poplar Street	Liberty Street	East and West

	Poplar Street	S. Main Street	East and West

	Poplar Street	Water Street	East and West

	Porter Street	Chestnut Street	South

	Porter Street	Walnut Street	North

	Prospect Street	Baldwin Street	West

	Prospect Street	Park Avenue	East

	Race Street	Lincoln Avenue	East and West

	Race Street	Wadsworth Avenue	East and West

	Randolph Lane	Kennedy Street	West

	Randolph Lane	Mohican Place	East and West

	Randolph Lane	Stewart Street	East and West

	Randolph Lane	Sidler Street	East and West

	Randolph Street	Jefferson Street	East and West

	Randolph Street	Park Avenue	East and West

	Randolph Street	Terrace Street	West

	Ravine Street	Park Avenue	West

	Remler Alley	Penn Alley	East and West

	Reynolds Avenue	Terrace Street	East and West

	Reynolds Avenue	Baldwin Street	East

	Rogers Ferry Road	Lincoln Avenue	West

	Rose Lane	N. Main Street	West

	Rose Lane	Highland	East

	Russell Avenue	Park Avenue	West

	Seminole Road	Carmont Drive	North and South

	Shadow Oaks Drive	N. Main Street	West

	Sherman Street	N. Main Street	West

	Sherman Street	Highland Avenue	East

	Sidler Alley	State Street	North

	Sidler Street	State Street	South

	Sidler Street	State Place	South

	Sidler Street	Randolph Lane	North and South

	South Street	Chancery Lane	East and West

	South Street	Liberty Street	East and West

	South Street	S. Main Street	East and West

	South Street	Market Street	East

	South Street	Mulberry Street	East and West

	South Street	Park Avenue	East and West

	South Street	Spencer Alley	East and West

	Spencer Alley	Arch Street	North

	Spencer Alley	Poplar Street	South

	Spencer Alley	South Street	North and South

	Spring Street	Baldwin Street	East

	State Street	Hickory Street	East

	E. Steers Street	Liberty Street	East and West

	E. Steers Street	East Street	East and West

	W. Steers Street	Water Street	West

	W. Steers Street	Mulberry Street	East and West

	W. Steers Street	Park Avenue	East and West

	W. Steers Street	N. Cottage Street	East and West

	W. Steers Street	N. Main Street	East

	Stevens Alley	Hickory Street	West

	Stewart Street	State Street	South

	Stewart Street	Randolph Lane	North and South

	Sunnyside Avenue	Forest Avenue	West

	Sunset Drive	N. Main Street	West

	Terrace Street	Randolph Street	South

	Terrace Street	Spring Street	North and South

	Thurston Road	Washington Street	North

	Torrent Street	State Street	West

	Torrent Street	Sidler Alley	East and West

	Valleyview Drive	Baldwin Street	East

	Walker Drive	Baldwin Street	East

	Wallace Street	N. Main Street	East and West

	Walnut Street	Water Street	East

	Walnut Street	Market Street	East

	Walnut Street	Park Avenue	East

	Walnut Street	Diamond Park	West

	Walnut Street	Grove Street	West

	Warren Avenue	Park Avenue	West

	Water Street	Randolph Street	North

	Water Street	Willow Street	North and South

	Westview Drive	Baldwin Street	East

	Whittier Avenue	S. Morgan Street	West

	Willow Street	Liberty Street	East

	Willow Street	S. Main Street	East and West

	Wood Street	Park Avenue	West

	Woodmont Drive	Williamson Road	East

(Ord. 3716, 2013; Ord. 3684 § 4, 2011; Ord. 3668 § 2, 2009; Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


503.09 Yield rights-of-way established.

The intersections designated in Schedule F of this section are hereby established as yield right-of-way intersections. An official yield sign shall be erected (or is hereby ratified if heretofore erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the intersecting street from the first-named street in the direction or directions hereby indicated. The driver of a vehicle on the first-named street approaching the named intersecting street in a direction indicated shall yield the vehicle to traffic on the intersecting street in a manner required by Section 3323(c) of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code and shall not proceed into or across the intersecting street until the driver has followed the requirements of Section 3323(c) and other applicable requirements of law.

Schedule F  

	Street	Intersecting Street	Direction

	Belmont Drive	Shawnee Road	East

	Byllesby Avenue	Jefferson Street	East and West

	Chestnut Street	E. Diamond	North

	Jefferson Street	State Street	South

	Liberty Street	Randolph Street	North

	N. Main Street	Diamond Park	South

	Seminole Road	Lamont Drive	South

	Seminole Road	Belmont Drive	North and South

	Seminole Road	Lakemont Drive	North and South

	Seneca Road	Belmont Drive	South

	Shawnee Road	Woodmont Drive	South

	Shawnee Road	Carmont Drive	North and South

	Shawnee Road	Lakemont Drive	North and South

	Susquehanna Road	Carmont Drive	North and South

	Susquehanna Road	Belmont Drive	North and South

	Susquehanna Road	Lakemont Drive	North

	Walnut Street	Diamond Park	East

	Willow Street	French Creek Parkway	North

	Water Street	Arch Street	West

	Wilson Avenue	Hailwood Drive	North and South

	Woodmont Drive	Carmont Drive	North

	Woodmont Drive	Seminole Road	West

(Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


503.10 Unlawful to operate vehicles on streets closed for construction or repairs.

It shall be unlawful for any driver to operate any vehicle upon any street in the City of Meadville that is under construction, resurfacing or repair in disregard of any official sign, barricade or notice that the same is closed to vehicular traffic. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50.00 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 10 days. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


503.11 Play streets established and authorized.

(A) The following areas upon the streets in the City of Meadville are hereby established as play streets:

(1) Chancery Lane, between Pine Street and South Street, is hereby designated as a play street to be used exclusively for play purposes by children and such portion of Chancery Lane may be closed to general traffic between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., and between the hours of 11:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on each day of the week except Saturday and Sunday, when the schools of the city are in session during the school terms.

(2) Temporary barriers and appropriate signs, clearly designating such portion of Chancery Lane to be used for the purpose aforesaid and specifying the hours between which such street shall be closed, shall be erected at or near the intersection of Chancery Lane with Pine Street and with South Street.

(B) The city manager is hereby authorized to designate as play streets, whenever he shall deem such action advisable, and for whatever period of time directed by him, any portion of any street in the City of Meadville, whereon sledding and coasting shall be permitted. Such street shall be set apart for the purpose under the direction of the city manager.

(C) No driver shall operate any vehicle upon any play street at any time when such street shall be so designated, except in case of emergency, with special permission of the city manager or of the police officer in charge, who shall first clear such play street of all persons using such street for the purpose for which it was set aside. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $30.00 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than five days. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


503.12 Operation within lanes in compliance to markings.

(A) Where traffic is channellized for a separate lane to be used for “right” or “left” or “through traffic,” indicated on the pavement by visible lines or other visible markings or signs, or the words “right” or “left” or “thru” or “keep right” or “keep left” or appropriate directional arrows, no driver shall operate a vehicle on the roadway except within spacing included between such lines or other markings indicating the traffic lane in which such vehicle is to proceed, and in compliance to such visible markings.

(B) Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $30.00 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than five days. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


503.13 Accident reports required.

The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident in the City of Meadville and required by provisions of the Vehicle Code to report such accident to any department or agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any other person required to make such report, shall, at the time of making such report to the Commonwealth, make a written report to the chief of police of the City of Meadville containing the same information. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


Article 504 RESERVED


Article 505 UNMETERED PARKING REGULATIONS

Sections:

505.01    Parking within street right-of-way.

505.02    Reserved.

505.03    Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.

505.04    Parking prohibited at all times in the following street locations.

505.05    Parking prohibited on all bridges.

505.06    Reserved.

505.07    Parking time limited in specific locations during certain days and hours.

505.08    Parking prohibited in specific locations at certain times.

505.09    Special purpose parking zones established, parking otherwise prohibited.

505.10    Parking for certain purposes prohibited.

505.11    Market house parking.

505.12    Temporary loading zones.

505.13    Elimination of parking at certain intersections at the discretion of the city manager.

505.14    On-street residential permit parking.

505.15    Seasonal parking prohibited.

505.16    Overnight parking prohibited.

505.99    Penalty for violation.


505.01 Parking within street right-of-way.

Vehicle parking is and shall be prohibited at all times in the following places:

(A) Between the paved portion of the street or highway and the sidewalk;

(B) Between the paved portion of the street or highway and the property line;

(C) On a sidewalk or area designated for sidewalks;

(D) On any portion of the right-of-way of the street or highway except as permitted on the paved portion thereof. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


505.02 Reserved. 

(Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


505.03 Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.

Wherever a space shall be marked off on any street for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding such space. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


505.04 Parking prohibited at all times in the following street locations.

Vehicle parking is and shall be prohibited at all times, 24 hours each day, in the locations designated on Schedule G of this section.

Schedule G  

	Street	Side	Between

	Alden Street	South	Chestnut Street and S. Morgan Street

	Alfred Street	East	Pine Street and Arch Street

	Allegheny Street	South	Beers Avenue and N. Main Street

	Arch Street	North and South	French Creek Parkway and Water Street

	Arch Street	South	Water Street and Park Avenue

	Arch Street	South	Grove Street and Alden Street

	Arch Street	North	Water Street and Grove Street

	Arch Street	North	Talon Inc. and Burns Avenue

	Baldwin Street	West	N. Main Street and Glenwood Avenue

	Beech Alley	North and South	N. Main Street and Highland Avenue

	Beers Avenue	West	Prospect Street and Allegheny Street

	Ben Avon Street	North	Park Avenue and N. Main Street

	Boileau Place	North	Terrace Street and Dead End

	Boileau Place	South	Terrace Street and Dead End

	Boynton Street	North and South	Entire Length

	Brawly Avenue	South	Hickory Street and Dead End

	Burns Avenue	West	Pine Street and Arch Street

	Byllesby Avenue	North	N. Main Street and Dead End

	Carroll Avenue	South	Wood Street and N. Main Street

	Catherine Street	East	Pine Street and Arch Street

	Center Street	North and South	East Street to Grove Street

	Center Street	South	Ernst Place and Porter Street

	E. Center Street	North and South	Liberty Street and East Street

	W. Center Street	South	Water Street and Mulberry Street

	W. Center Street	North	Mulberry Street and Park Avenue

	W. Center Street	North	N. Cottage Street and Diamond Park

	W. Center Street	South	Diamond Park and a point 70 feet west of the south line of W. Center Street with the west line of Main Street at Diamond Park

	Chancery Lane	East and West	Poplar Street and Pine Street

	Chancery Lane	West	Pine Place and Pine Street

	Chancery Lane	East and West	Arch Street and E. Cherry Street

	Chancery Lane	East	A point 102.03 feet south of a monument at the intersection of the center lines of E. Center Street and Chancery Lane and a point 20 feet south of the first point

	Chancery Lane	East and West	E. Center Street and Walnut Street

	Chancery Lane	West	Walnut Street and W. Steers Street

	Charlton Street	East	Pine Street and Alden Street

	E. Cherry Street	North	Chancery Lane and Liberty Street

	E. Cherry Street	North and South	A point 75 feet west of Liberty Street to the west line of Liberty Street

	W. Cherry Street	North and South	Water Street and Mulberry Street

	W. Cherry Street	North and South	Market Street and Diamond Park

	Chestnut Street	North	Water Street and Diamond Park

	Chestnut Street	South	Diamond Park and Liberty Street

	Chestnut Street	North	Liberty Street and Grove Street

	Chestnut Street	North and South	Liberty Street and East Street

	Chestnut Street	North	Porter Street and S. Morgan Street

	Church Street	East	Baldwin Street and Hawkins Lane

	Church Street	East and West	Hawkins Lane and N. Main Street

	Clark Road	North	Crawford Street and Liberty Street

	Clark Street	East and West	North Street and Davenport Street

	Clark Street	East	Davenport Street and Washington Street

	Clinton Court	North and South	Mulberry Street and East Alley

	Clover Lane	East and West	E. College Street to a point 100 feet south of E. College Street

	E. College Street	South	N. Main Street and Clover Lane

	E. College Street	South	Cullum Street and Gilmore Street

	W. College Street	South	Baldwin Street and Park Avenue

	N. Cottage Street	East	Park Place and Addle Alley

	N. Cottage Street	East and West	Chestnut Street and a point 105 feet north of Cherry Street

	N. Cottage Street	East and West	W. Center Street and Park Place

	Cutler Street	East	Randolph Street and E. Henry Street

	Davenport Street	South	Clark Street and Hartman Street

	Deissler Court	North	Cullum Street and Gilmore Street

	Devore Drive	West	Limber Road and Dead End

	East Alley	East	Arch Street and Clinton Court

	East Street	East and West	Chestnut Street and Walnut Street

	Ellicott Court	West	Prospect Street and Cul-de-Sac

	Ellicott Court	 	All sides of Cul-de-Sac

	Elm Street	West	Linden Street and Willow Street

	Ernst Place	East and West	Chestnut Street and Center Street

	Euclid Avenue	South	Porter Street and Lafayette Street

	Fairmont Avenue	South	Liberty Street and Poplar Street

	Fairview Avenue	East	Chestnut Street and Walnut Street

	Federal Court	East and West	Arch Street and Clinton Court

	Federal Court	West	Clinton Court and Chestnut Street

	French Street	West	W. Poplar Street and Mead Avenue

	Garden Street	West	North Street and Randolph Street

	Gilmore Street	East	Deissler Court and Dead End

	Glenwood Avenue	South	Terrace Street and Baldwin Street

	Graff Avenue	East and West	Washington Street and H Street

	Graff Avenue	West	Washington Street and B Street

	Graham Alley	East and West	Arch Street and Clinton Court Ext.

	Grandview Avenue	West	Limber Road and Sunset Drive

	S. Grant Street	East	North Street and Washington Street

	Green Street	North	S. Grant Street and Penn Street

	Grove Street	East and West	Poplar Street and Pine Street

	Grove Street	West	South Street to Arch Street

	Grove Street	West	Clinton Court Ext. and State Street

	Hamilton Avenue	North	N. Main Street and Jefferson Street

	Hartman Street	West	Davenport Street and Washington Street

	E. Henry Street	North	Madison Avenue and Cullum Street

	E. Henry Street	North	Arden Place and Jefferson Street

	Hickory Street	West	Washington Street and city line

	Highland Avenue	East	Randolph Street and Byllesby Avenue

	Jefferson Street	East	North line of State Street and south line of Limber Road

	Jefferson Street	West	Limber Road and Byllesby Avenue

	Jefferson Street	West	Paramount Avenue and Limber Road

	W. John Street	South	Beers Avenue and Park Avenue

	Kennedy Street	West	State Street and Randolph Lane

	Kennedy Street	East and West	Randolph Lane and Randolph Street

	Lafayette Street	West	Chestnut Street and Walnut Street

	Laird Avenue	South	Park Avenue and Doughty Road

	Lakemont Drive	On the Boulevard	Susquehanna Drive and Williamson Road

	Liberty Street	East	Linden Street and Poplar Street

	Liberty Street	East	Pine Alley and North Street

	Liberty Street	West	North Street and 150 feet south of the south right-of-way line of North Street

	Liberty Street	West	E. Steers Street and North Street

	Liberty Street	East and West	North Street and Randolph Street

	Limber Road	North and South	N. Main Street and city line

	Lincoln Avenue	East	Race Street and Rogers Ferry Road

	Linden Street	North	Market Street and Park Avenue

	Linden Street	North and South	Park Avenue and S. Main Street

	Linden Street	North and South	S. Main Street and Chula Street

	Linden Street	South	Chula Street and Elm Street

	Locust Street	South	Terrace Street and Park Avenue

	Lord Street	West	Spring Street and Glenwood Avenue

	Madison Avenue	West	Randolph Street and E. Henry Street

	N. Main Street	East	Randolph Street and Jackson Park Drive

	N. Main Street	West	North Street and 100 feet south of the south right-of-way line of North Street

	N. Main Street	West	Allegheny Street and Loomis Street

	S. Main Street	East and West	Clark Road and Linden Street

	S. Main Street	West	Linden Street and Willow Street

	Maple Street	North	Lafayette Street and S. Morgan Street

	Market Alley	East and West	Market Street and Park Avenue

	Market Street	East	Poplar Street and Pine Street

	Market Street	West	Chestnut Street and Market Alley

	Market Street	West	Pine Street and Clinton Court

	Market Street	West	W. Steers Street and Randolph Street

	Mead Avenue	North	Bessemer Street and French Creek Parkway

	Meadow Street	East	Allegheny Street and Ben Avon Street

	Meadow Street	East	Carroll Street and Dead End

	Mohican Place	East and West	State Place and Randolph La.

	N. Morgan Street	West	Shady Brook Park and North Street

	N. Morgan Street	West	North Street and Washington Street

	N. Morgan Street	East	North Street and a point immediately north of the driveway for 787 North St.

	N. Morgan Street	East	Washington Street and a point immediately south of the driveway for 794 Washington St.

	N. Morgan Street	East	Washington Street and city line North

	S. Morgan Street	East and West	Whittier Avenue and Pine Street

	S. Morgan Street	East	Alden Street and Irvin Avenue

	S. Morgan Street	East	Chestnut Street and Walnut Street

	Morgan Village Road	East	City line and Whittier Avenue

	Mt. Hope Street	South	Lord Street and Baldwin Street

	Mulberry Street	East and West	Poplar Street and South Street

	Mulberry Street	East and West	Arch Street and North Street

	North Street	North	East Street and Hollister Alley

	North Street	North	State Street and S. Grant Street

	North Street	North	Sidler Alley and N. Morgan Street

	North Street	North	N. Morgan Street and Thurston Road

	North Street	North and South	Water Street and State Street 

	Park Avenue	East and West	Clark Road and Merrill Alley

	Park Avenue	East and West	Smock Bridge and Linden Street

	Park Avenue	East and West	Sides of Smock Bridge

	Park Avenue	West	Poplar Street and Pine Street

	Park Avenue	East	Pine Street and Arch Street

	Park Avenue	East	W. Center Street and North Street

	Park Avenue	West	W. Center Street and Walnut Street

	Park Avenue	East	Locust Street and Baldwin Street

	Park Avenue	West	Baldwin Street and Allegheny Street

	Park Avenue	West	Allegheny Street and Warren Avenue

	Park Avenue	East	Allegheny Street and Ben Avon Street

	Park Place	North and South	Park Avenue and N. Main Street

	Park Street	North and South	Water Street to its west terminus

	Peach Street	East	Brawley Avenue and Dead End

	Penn Street	West	North Street and Washington Street

	Penn Street	East	A point 30 feet north of the north line of Green Street and a point 30 feet south of the south line of Green Street

	Pine Street	South	Willow Place and Water Street

	Pine Street	North	Water Street and Chancery Lane

	Pine Street	North	Liberty Street and Grove Street

	Pine Street	South	Spencer Alley and Grove Street

	Pine Street	South	Grove Street and Burns Avenue

	Pine Street	North 	A point 300 feet east of the east ROW line of Alfred Street and Burns Ave.

	Plateau Drive	Extended Both Sides (Including Entire Cul-de-Sac)	A point 1,050 feet south of the intersection of the center line of Williamson Road with the center line of Plateau Drive, and a point 415 feet south of the first point

	Poplar Street	North	Water Street and Park Avenue

	Poplar Street	North	S. Cottage Street and Grove Street

	Poplar Street	South	From Grove Street to a point 50 feet west of the west line of Spencer Alley

	Porter Street	West	Chestnut Street and Center Street

	Prospect Street	South	Baldwin Street and Park Avenue

	Race Street	North	R.R. Tracks and Columbia Avenue

	Randolph Lane	South	Kennedy Street and Stewart Street

	Randolph Street	North	Terrace Street and Highland Avenue

	Randolph Street	North and South	Liberty Street and Fuller Alley

	Ravine Street	South	Park Avenue and Woodland Place

	Reynolds Avenue	South	Terrace Street and Baldwin Street

	Rogers Ferry Road	South	A point 775 feet west of the intersection of Columbia Avenue with Rogers Ferry Road and French Creek

	Russell Avenue	South	Park Avenue and Doughty Road

	Seminary Alley	East and West	W. Cherry Street and W. Center Street

	Seminole Drive	West	Ridgemont Drive and Lakemont Drive

	Sherman Street	North	N. Main Street and Highland Avenue

	Smith Street	East	Entire Length

	South Street	North and South	Water Street and Park Avenue

	South Street	South	S. Cottage Street and S. Main Street

	South Street	North	S. Main Street and Grove Street

	State Street	South	North Street and Grant Street

	State Street	North	North Street and Kennedy Street

	State Street	North	Sidler Alley and Grant Street

	State Street	North	Washington Street and Greendale Street

	E. Steers Street	North and South	Chancery Lane and Liberty Street

	W. Steers Street	North and South	Water Street and Mulberry Street

	W. Steers Street	North	Mulberry Street and Market Street

	W. Steers Street	South	Market Street and Park Avenue

	W. Steers Street	North and South	Park Avenue and N. Main Street

	Stewart Street	East	State Street and Randolph Street

	Sunset Drive	South	N. Main Street and Linda Lane

	Terrace Street	East and West	Randolph Street and Spring Street

	Valley View Drive	North	The western terminus of Valley View Drive and Baldwin Street

	Waelde Alley	West	Dead End and Randolph Street

	Wallace Street	North	N. Main Street and Garden Street

	Wallace Street	South	N. Main Street and N. Cottage Street

	Walnut Street	North and South	Boynton Street and Water Street

	Walnut Street	South	Water Street and Market Street

	Walnut Street	South	Seminary Alley and Diamond Park

	Walnut Street	North	N. Main Street and Chancery Lane

	Walnut Street	North	Liberty Street and S. Morgan Street

	Washington Street	South	State Street and Hartman Street

	Washington Street	North	Hickory Street and 130 feet east of the east right-of-way line of Hickory Street

	Washington Street	North	Hartman Street and N. Morgan Street

	Washington Street	North and South	N. Morgan Street to 90 feet east

	Water Street	West	Dead End and Willow Street

	Water Street	East	Poplar Street and Arch Street

	Water Street	West	Pine Street and W. Steers Street

	Water Street	East	W. Steers Street and Randolph Street

	Water Street	West	North Street and 150 feet north of the north right-of-way line of North Street Ext.

	West Alley	East and West	Entire Length

	William Street	West	Mt. Hope Street and Reynolds Avenue

	Willow Street	North	Water Street and Liberty Street

	Wood Street	East	Park Avenue and Carroll Avenue

	Woodland Place	West	Dead End and Ben Avon Street

	Woodmont Drive	On the Boulevard	Seminole Road and Shawnee Road

(Ord. 3769 § 2, 2018; Ord. 3716, 2013; Ord. 3684 § 5, 2011; Ord. 3674 § 1, 2010; Ord. 3668 § 3, 2009; Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


505.05 Parking prohibited on all bridges.

Vehicle parking is and shall be hereby prohibited on all bridges located in the City of Meadville at any and all times. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


505.06 Reserved.

(Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


505.07 Parking time limited in specific locations during certain days and hours.

Vehicle parking is and shall be limited in the locations identified in Schedule H-1 of this section, to the time limit established during days and hours as designated in Schedule H-1 of this section.

Schedule H-1 

Areas in Which Parking Is Restricted (Time-Limited) During Certain Times  

	Street	Side	Between	Days	Hours	Parking Time Limit

	Arch Street	South	S. Main Street and Liberty Street	All	24 hours	2 hours

	Baldwin Street	East	North curbline of E. College Street, north a distance of 80 feet	All	Midnight to 6:00 a.m.	2 hours

	E. Center Street	South	Chancery Ln. and Liberty Street	All	24 hours	2 hours

	Chestnut Street	South	A point located 152 feet east of the intersection of the east line of S. Main Street with south line of Chestnut Street and a point 100 feet east of the first defined point	All	24 hours	15 minutes

	Chestnut Street	South	A point located 50 feet east of the intersection of the east line of Chancery Lane with south line of Chestnut Street and a point 82 feet east of the first defined point	All	24 hours	15 minutes

	Chestnut Street	South	East Street and Grove Street	Monday – Friday	7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.	2 hours

	N. Cottage Street	West	 	Thursday	12:01 a.m. to 11:00 a.m.	No Parking

	N. Main Street	West	Randolph Street and Baldwin Street	All	When not otherwise regulated	2 hours

	N. Main Street	West	North line of Allegheny Street and Ben Avon Street	All	Midnight to 6:00 a.m.	No Parking

	Market Street	West	Linden Street and Pomona Alley	All	24 hours	2 hours

	Market Street	East	Pomona Alley and Willow Street	All	24 hours	2 hours

	Market Street	East and West	Willow Street and Poplar Street	All	24 hours	2 hours

	North Street	South	School Bus cut out area	Monday – Friday	7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.	Bus parking only

	Park Avenue	East	Pine Pl. and Pine Street	All	24 hours	15 minutes

	Park Avenue	East	North and Randolph Sts.	All	24 hours	2 hours 

	Pine Street	South	Water Street and Mulberry Street	All	24 hours	2 hours

	Pine Street	South	Market Street and S. Main Street	All	24 hours	2 hours

	Sherman Street	South	N. Main Street and Highland Avenue	All	Midnight to 6:00 a.m.	No Parking

	Walnut Street	South	Intersection of west line Water Street and south curb line of Walnut Street and a point 210 feet west of said intersection	All	24 hours	2 hours

	Walnut Street	South	Diamond Park and Liberty Street	All	8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.	2 hours

	Water Street	East	Dead End and Willow Street	All	24 hours	3 hours

	Water Street	East	Willow Street and Poplar Street	All	24 hours	2 hours

	Water Street	West	Norman Alley and Poplar Street	Monday – Friday	8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.	No Parking

(Ord. 3716, 2013; Ord. 3684 § 6, 2011; Ord. 3668 § 4, 2009; Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


505.08 Parking prohibited in specific locations at certain times.

Vehicle parking is and shall be prohibited in the locations identified in Schedule H-2 of this section, during the time period and on the days identified in Schedule H-2 of this section.

Schedule H-2 

Areas in Which Parking Is Prohibited During Certain Times 

	Street	Side	Between	Days	Hours	Parking Time Limit

	E. College Street	North	Cullum Street and Gilmore Street	Monday – Sunday	12:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.	No Parking

	Diamond Square	Both	Chestnut Street and Walnut Street	All	11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.	No Parking

	Highland Avenue	West	Limber Road and Byllseby Ave	All	12:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.	No Parking

	N. Main Street	West	Randolph Street and Baldwin Street	Monday – Friday	8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.	No Parking

	North Street	South	N. Morgan Street and Thurston Road	Monday – Friday	School Hours	No Parking

	Pine Place	North and South	Park Avenue and Market Street	All	8:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.	No parking or stopping

	Pine Street	North	Chancery Lane and Liberty Street	Monday – Friday	7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.	No parking except school buses

	Porter Street	East	Walnut Street and a point 195 feet south of Walnut Street	Monday – Friday	8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.	No Parking

	Randolph Street	North and South	Liberty Street and Madison Avenue	All	7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.	No Parking

	Randolph Street	North	Cullum Street and N. Grant Street	All	8:30 – 9:30 a.m. and 3:00 – 4:00 p.m.	No Parking

(Ord. 3684 § 7, 2011; Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


505.09 Special purpose parking zones established, parking otherwise prohibited.

The locations identified in Schedule I are hereby established as special purpose parking zones, and it is and shall be unlawful for any driver or other person to park any vehicle, or to allow the same to remain parked, in any such zone except as specifically authorized.

Schedule I  

	Street	Side	Location	Authorized Vehicles

	Park Avenue	East	Beginning 304 feet north of the north right-of-way line of Loomis Street, continuing for a distance of 50 feet in a northerly direction	Emergency vehicles only

	Park Avenue	West	Between W. Center Street and Market Alley	Taxi

	Pine Street	South	Between Water Street and Mulberry Street	Public bus zone/bus parking only

	Water Street	West	Beginning at a point 65 feet south from the south curb of Center Street and continuing south a distance of 220 feet to a point which is 135 feet north of the north curb of Chestnut Street	Public bus transfer zone/bus parking only

(Ord. 3684 § 8, 2011; Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


505.10 Parking for certain purposes prohibited.

No driver or other person shall park a vehicle on any roadway or street right-of-way for the principal purpose of:

(A) Displaying such vehicle for sale; or

(B) Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


505.11 Market house parking.

Notwithstanding other provisions in this article to the contrary, the Meadville market authority on approval of the city manager and the chief of police shall have the authority to permit the use of metered parking spaces adjacent to the market house, without meter charges, for the sale, display and the like of the market vendor’s goods or wares. Such use of metered parking space shall be governed by such rules, fees and other agreements as are executed and agreed to from time to time between the City of Meadville and the Meadville market authority. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


505.12 Temporary loading zones.

(A) Persons requiring the temporary restriction of parking on any portion of any public street for the purpose of providing a temporary loading zone for persons or property may apply for the grant of temporary loading zone permit.

(B) The application shall be filed in the office of the chief of police and shall be upon such form as the chief shall reasonably require. Within five days of the receipt of any such application, the chief of police shall recommend the approval, rejection or approval with modification of application to the city manager. The city manager may grant, deny or grant with modification any such application.

(C) Any grant of the designation of a temporary loading zone shall specifically define the location of the temporary parking restriction, and the day and hours during which such temporary parking restriction shall be in effect. The application shall mark the site of the temporary loading zone strictly in accord with the terms of the permit granted and such marking shall be with signs approved by the city manager which shall be provided at the applicant’s sole cost and expense.

(D) Any driver or other person parking any vehicle in any space properly signed as a temporary loading zone under the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be in violation of this section and shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $15.00 nor more than $500.00.

(E) Any driver or other person employing any sign or device indicating the presence of a temporary loading zone other than pursuant to a permit issued by the city manager in accord with the terms of this section shall be guilty of summary offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00.

(F) Any permit issued pursuant to the terms of this section may be revoked without cause or reason by the city manager upon the mailing of written notice of revocation to the applicant at the address given by said applicant upon the original application or to any other address provided for that purpose by the applicant in writing. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


505.13 Elimination of parking at certain intersections at the discretion of the city manager.

The city manager is hereby authorized to limit or eliminate parking on any street near an intersection when in the opinion of the city manager such action is appropriate and conducive to the safe and expeditious flow of traffic. The city manager shall effect the limitation or elimination of parking authorized pursuant to this section by the signing of affected areas. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


505.14 On-street residential permit parking.

(A) Vehicle Parking Prohibited Except for Vehicles with Residential Parking Permits Issued by the City. Vehicle parking is and shall be prohibited on the following identified streets in the City of Meadville except vehicles bearing a residential parking permit issued by the City of Meadville for the subject street in accordance with these regulations:

	Street	Side	Between	Maximum No. of Permits (one for each parking space)

	Smith Street	West	Park Ave. and W. College St.	4

(B) Qualifications for Residential Parking Permit. Residential parking permits shall only be issued for one vehicle owned by and registered in the name of a person whose residence of record is located on the street identified in subsection (A) of this section. Applications for a permit are available from the office of the city clerk. Permits will be restricted to one vehicle for each dwelling unit. New permits shall only be issued for the available parking spaces and shall be issued in the order in which applications are received by the city. Permits shall only be valid for one year. Applications for renewal must be submitted to the city at least 15 days before the expiration of the permit. Permit holders must notify the city if they no longer reside on the street or if they will no longer use the permit.

(C) A violation of this parking restriction will result in fines and penalties in accordance with MMC 505.99(A). (Ord. 3673 § 1, 2010; Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


505.15 Seasonal parking prohibited.

Vehicle parking is and shall be prohibited at all times, 24 hours each day, between November 1st and March 31st of each year, in the locations designated in Schedule J of this section.

Schedule J  

	Street	Side	Between

	Clinton Court	North	East line of Graham Alley and a point 100 feet west of the east line of Graham Alley

(Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


505.16 Overnight parking prohibited.

Vehicle parking is and shall be prohibited from 3:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. each day, between November 1st and March 31st, in all off-street parking lots owned by the City of Meadville. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


505.99 Penalty for violation.

(A) Penalties for Overtime Parking. Any driver or other person who parks a vehicle, or any person who permits any vehicle registered in his name, to be parked in violation of the provisions of this article except MMC 505.08, Schedule H-2 (Areas in Which Parking Is Prohibited During Certain Times), shall be subject to a penalty as follows:

(1) If penalty paid at courtesy box or city police headquarters within 48 hours of the issuance of the traffic ticket: $10.00.

(2) If penalty paid more than 48 hours, but within 10 days after the issuance of the traffic ticket: $15.00.

(3) If penalty paid more than 10 days after the issuance of a traffic ticket, but before the issuance of a citation pursuant to the terms of this article: $30.00.

(4) Time of payment for the purpose of this article shall be the time of the receipt of payment by the City of Meadville either in a courtesy box or at Police Headquarters, 984 Water Street, Meadville, Pennsylvania.

(5) Any person who fails to pay the parking penalties set forth in subsections (A)(1) through (A)(4) of this section shall, upon being convicted of the violation of any term or provision of this article (or of aiding, abetting or assisting in the violation of any term or provision of this article), be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $300.00 and may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 10 days.

(B) Penalties for Parking in Areas Where Parking Is Prohibited During Certain Times. Any driver or other person or any person who permits any vehicle registered in his name to be parked in violation of MMC 505.08, Schedule H-2, shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $30.00 and not more than $300.00 together with costs and, upon failure to pay said fines and costs, may be sentenced to imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 10 days. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


Article 506 RESERVED


Article 507 SNOW AND ICE EMERGENCY

Sections:

507.01    Declaration of snow and ice emergency.

507.02    Parking prohibited on specific streets during emergency – Restrictions on operation of vehicles on such streets.

507.03    Placement of signs along streets affected – Information on existence of emergency.

507.04    Streets affected.

507.05    Snow emergency tow-away zones.

507.99    Penalty.


507.01 Declaration of snow and ice emergency.

In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of excessive snow and ice on the streets or portions of streets identified in MMC 507.04, the city manager, at his discretion, may declare an emergency due to such hazards and take action to implement and enforce the snow and ice emergency provisions of this article. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


507.02 Parking prohibited on specific streets during emergency – Restrictions on operation of vehicles on such streets.

After any such emergency shall have been declared, it shall be unlawful during the period of such emergency for any driver or other person to park a vehicle or to allow the same to remain parked on any street or portion thereof named in MMC 507.04, or to operate any vehicle on any such street or portion thereof, unless such vehicle shall be equipped with adequate equipment to provide sufficient traction to keep such vehicle in motion so that other traffic on such streets will not be obstructed or impeded. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


507.03 Placement of signs along streets affected – Information on existence of emergency.

In order to assist the operators of vehicles and in determining the streets affected by this article, the city manager or the chief of police shall cause the placing around the utility poles and/or meter or sign poles on the streets or portions thereof designated in MMC 507.04 signs reading as follows:

Snow Emergency Route

Snow Tires or Chains Required

No Parking During Emergency

Vehicles Towed Away

The city manager or the chief of police shall also, through radio, newspaper or other available media, disseminate information as to the existence of such an emergency. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


507.04 Streets affected.

The streets or portions thereof to which the provisions of this article shall be applicable during all periods of the emergency declared as provided in MMC 507.01 are set forth in Schedule K:

Schedule K  

	Street	From	To:

	Alden Street	Entire Length

	Arch Street	Water Street	Alden Street

	Baldwin Street	Entire Length

	Brawley Street	Hickory Street	Morgan Street

	Cedarcrest Drive	Cole Drive	Sunnyside Avenue

	Chestnut Street	Water Street	Park Avenue

	Chestnut Street	Park Avenue	Alden Street

	Clark Street	Washington Street	North Street

	Cole Drive	Park Avenue	End of pavement

	E. College Street	Gilmore Street	Highland Avenue

	Cullum Street	Randolph Street	E. College Street

	Diamond Park	Entire Length

	Doughty Road	N. Main Street	Park Avenue

	East Street	E. Willow Street	Fairmont Avenue

	Fairmont Avenue	Poplar Street	Liberty Street

	Forest Avenue	Cole Drive	Martha Drive

	French Street	Mead Avenue	Poplar Street

	Gasteiger Road	Park Avenue	N. Main Street

	Graff Avenue	Washington Street	H. Street

	N. Grant Street	Washington Street	Randolph Street

	Grove Street	Poplar Street	State Street

	Hailwood Drive	Park Avenue	Wilson Drive

	Hickory Street	Entire Length

	Highland Avenue	Randolph Street	Byllesby Avenue

	Jackson Park Drive	Linda Lane	N. Main Street

	Jefferson Street	State Street	Jackson Park Drive

	Lakemont Drive	Williamson Road	Susquehanna Drive

	Leslie Road	N. Main Street	Limber Road

	Liberty Street	North Street	Randolph Street

	Liberty Street	Poplar Street	South city line

	Limber Road	N. Main Street	Wildley Drive

	Lincoln Avenue	Entire Length

	Linden Street	S. Main Street	Park Avenue

	Linden Street	Park Avenue	French Creek Parkway

	N. Main Street	Diamond Park	Gasteiger Road

	S. Main Street	Diamond Park	Linden Street

	Market Square	Entire Length

	Market Street	Linden Street	Randolph Street

	Martha Drive	Forest Avenue	Wilson Drive

	Mead Avenue	French Street	Water Street

	Meadow Street	Allegheny Street	Dead End

	Mercer Street	Water Street	Mercer Bridge

	Morgan Street	Alden Street	City line

	Morgan Street	Brawley Avenue	Washington Street

	North Street	Water Street	Park Avenue

	North Street	State Street	Thurston Road

	Park Avenue	Entire Length

	Pine Street	Water Street	Morgan Street

	Plateau Drive	Williamson Road	End of pavement

	Poplar Street	Liberty Street	Water Street

	Prospect Street	Baldwin Street	Park Avenue

	Race Street	Lincoln Avenue	City line

	Randolph Street	Greendale Cemetery	Water Street

	Rogers Ferry Road	Entire Length of City Portion

	Spring Street	Baldwin Street	Lincoln Avenue

	State Street	Washington Street	Jefferson Street

	Sunnyside Avenue	Cedarcrest Drive	Forest Avenue

	Susquehanna Road	Lakemont Drive	Carmont Drive

	Terrace Street	Glenwood Avenue	Randolph Street

	Walnut Street	Water Street	Morgan Street

	Washington Street	State Street	City line

	Water Street	Randolph Street	French Creek Parkway

	Williamson Road	Poplar Street	Lamont Drive

	Willow Street	Liberty Street	Water Street

	Wilson Avenue	Hailwood Drive	Martha Drive

(Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


507.05 Snow emergency tow-away zones.

(A) When in the opinion of the city manager restriction of parking upon any city street is required to facilitate snow removal, the city manager is authorized to declare such streets or parts of streets to be snow emergency tow-away zones. Upon such declaration, the affected streets or portions of the streets shall be posted with signs which read:

SNOW EMERGENCY TOW-AWAY ZONE

(DAY OF THE WEEK) – NO PARKING

No driver or other person shall park any vehicle or permit any vehicle to be parked or remain parked in violation of the temporary parking restrictions permitted by this section.

(B) (1) Vehicles parked in violation of the provisions of this section shall be towed at the owner’s expense.

(2) Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $30.00 nor more than $300.00 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than five days. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


507.99 Penalty.

(A) At any time during a period of emergency declared, as provided in MMC 507.01, any driver or other person who shall park a vehicle or permit a vehicle to be parked anywhere upon or along any of the streets or portions thereof listed in MMC 507.04 shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $30.00 or more than $300.00 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than five days.

(B) Any driver who shall operate a vehicle upon any street or portion thereof listed in MMC 507.04, if such vehicle shall become stalled upon any of such streets during a period of emergency declared as provided in MMC 507.01, if such stalling shall have been by reason of the failure to have such vehicle equipped with the equipment hereinabove prescribed, shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction thereof, such person shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $30.00 or more than $300.00 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than five days. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


Articles 508 – 517 RESERVED


Article 518 SCHOOL BUS LOADING ZONES

Sections:

518.01    School bus loading zones designated.

518.02    Traffic control signal system not required.

518.03    Caution on adjacent streets.


518.01 School bus loading zones designated.

The areas designated upon the Schedule L which is attached to and forms part of this traffic code are hereby designated as “school-supervised on-street school bus loading zones.”

Schedule L  

	First District School	N. Main Street from north curb of Randolph Street to south end of Baldwin Street; Randolph Street from east curb of N. Main Street to west curb of Highland Avenue

	Second District School	S. Main Street from north curb of Linden Street to south curb of Davis Street

	East End School	Porter Street from south curb of Walnut Street to north curb of Euclid Avenue

(Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


518.02 Traffic control signal system not required.

School buses operating within school-supervised on-street school bus loading zones within the City of Meadville shall not be required to employ the four-way traffic control signal system of said buses for the purpose of stopping traffic upon adjacent streets except with direction to do so by officials of the school district exercising control over the pick-up and discharge of students for the purpose of promoting the safety of said students. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


518.03 Caution on adjacent streets.

Drivers traveling upon streets adjacent to school-supervised on-street school bus loading zones are hereby authorized to proceed with caution past any school buses in said zones unless said buses display operating traffic control signals requiring traffic to stop. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


Article 519 HANDICAPPED PARKING REGULATIONS

Sections:

519.01    Special use parking spaces established.

519.02    Limitation upon use.

519.03    Display of special license or placard.

519.04    Other regulations continued.

519.99    Penalty.


519.01 Special use parking spaces established.

Those metered parking spaces identified in Schedule M and those nonmetered parking spaces identified and described upon Schedule M shall be designated as “handicapped parking spaces.”

Schedule M  

	Metered On-Street Parking Spaces Designated as Handicapped Parking Spaces

	Number	Street	Side	Between

	229	Market Alley	North	Market Street/Mulberry Street

	237	Market Street	East	Arch Street/Clinton Court

	308	Park Avenue	West	Clinton Court/Chestnut Street

	331 – 332	Park Avenue	West	W. Steers Street/North Street

	354	Park Avenue	East	Chestnut Street/Market Alley

	412	W. Center Street	North	Water Street/Mulberry Street

	529	Chestnut Street	North	S. Main Street/Chancery Lane

	912	Market Alley	West	Mulberry Street/Market Street

	926	W. Cherry Street	South	Mulberry Street/Market Street

	1044	S. Main Street	West	Clinton Court/Chestnut Street

	1400	E. Center Street	North	E. Diamond Park/Chancery Lane

	1412 – 1413	E. Center Street	South	E. Diamond Park/Chancery Lane

	Nonmetered Parking Spaces Designated as Handicapped Parking Spaces

	Street 	Side 	Location

	Walnut Street	South	First parking space west of Water Street

	N. Main Street	West	792 N. Main Street

	Pine Street	South	372 Pine Street

(Ord. 3684 § 9, 2011; Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


519.02 Limitation upon use.

No person other than a person to whom the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or any other duly authorized governmental entity has issued a disabled, disabled veteran, or handicapped registration plate, or disabled, disabled veteran, or handicapped parking placard shall park or permit the parking of any vehicle in any parking space designated for handicapped parking. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


519.03 Display of special license or placard.

No otherwise qualified user of any handicapped parking space shall park or permit the parking of any vehicle in any such place unless that vehicle is clearly marked with the special disabled, disabled veteran, or handicapped registration plate or disabled, disabled veteran, or handicapped parking placard issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or other duly authorized governmental entity. Absence of the clear and prominent display of a currently valid disabled, disabled veteran, or handicapped registration plate or placard upon any vehicle parked in any handicapped parking space shall be conclusive evidence of a violation of this article. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


519.04 Other regulations continued.

Except for the limitation upon the class of lawful users of handicapped parking spaces, subject to the applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, all time limitation, meter rate and other parking regulations of this traffic code shall continue to be in full force and effect as to all handicapped parking spaces. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


519.99 Penalty.

Any person who is convicted of or who pleads guilty to a violation of MMC 519.02 or 519.03 shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00 and costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such fines and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 10 days. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


Article 521 ON-STREET PARKING

Sections:

521.01    Vehicle defined.

521.02    On-street parking meter/machine zones and parking meter/machine rates for designated zones.

521.02B    Repealed.

521.03    Meter spaces to be marked.

521.04    Meter installation, operation and use.

521.05    Overtime parking violation.

521.06    Deposit to extend fixed time limit a violation.

521.07    Failure to deposit coin a violation.

521.08    Duty of peace officers – Effect of waiver payment.

521.09    Manner of parking within meter spaces.

521.10    Marking spaces – Parking vehicle within marked lines.

521.11    Deposit of slugs or substitute coins prohibited.

521.12    Defacing or injuring meter.

521.13    Days and hours of meter operation.

521.14    Parking in handicapped parking spaces.

521.15    Parking meter bags.

521.16    Special occasion parking permits.

521.99    Penalty.


521.01 Vehicle defined.

The word “vehicle” as used in this article shall mean any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a highway, except those operated upon rails or tracks. The word “vehicle” as used elsewhere in the traffic code shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania (Article 501, Section 501.01). (Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


521.02 On-street parking meter/machine zones and parking meter/machine rates for designated zones.

Parking meter/machine zones are established upon and along the streets and parts of streets within the parking meter/machine zones described below, and parking in these zones is permitted for the time limits established for each zone at the cost per unit of time designated.

Zone I – Central Business District 

The central business district zone consists of all streets within the area bordered by North Street on the north, Liberty Street on the east, Pine Street on the south, and Water Street on the west, and includes both sides of the above-referenced streets which form the boundary.

In the central business district zone, parking at parking meters/machines is permitted for up to two hours for $0.25 for each one hour.

Zone II – Diamond Park Zone 

The Diamond Park zone consists of all parking spaces abutting Diamond Park and along both sides of Cherry and Center Streets between Diamond Park and Liberty Street.

In the Diamond Park zone, parking at parking meters/machines is permitted for up to five hours for $0.25 for each one hour.

(Ord. 3716, 2013; Ord. 3670 § 1, 2009; Ord. 3668 § 5, 2009. Formerly 521.02A)


521.02B Effective date of parking limits and rates set forth in MMC 521.02A.

Repealed by Ord. 3716. (Ord. 3668 § 5, 2009)


521.03 Meter spaces to be marked.

In designated parking meter zones, the designated parking spaces shall be established and marked in accordance with applicable regulations. Spaces shall be marked at approximately 22 feet each in parallel parking areas and at approximately 10 feet each in diagonal parking areas, as measured lengthwise along the curb. The parking spaces shall be indicated on an official map, on file in the office of the city engineer. (Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


521.04 Meter installation, operation and use.

(A) The city manager or such officers or employees of the city as he may designate are hereby authorized to install or place parking meters in such parking meter zones hereby created or to be created by other ordinances. Such parking meters shall be placed immediately adjacent to the individual parking spaces designed as hereinbefore provided. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such a manner as to show whether the parking space adjacent to such meter is or is not legally occupied. The parking meters shall be numbered for reference and shall be indicated on an official map on file in the office of the city engineer.

(B) The city manager shall provide for the installation, regulation, control, operation and use of the parking meters provided for in this article and shall maintain such meters in good workable condition. Each parking meter shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal parking upon the deposit of a United States coin or coins designated and required for each zone and time limit in MMC 521.02 for a period of time conforming to the parking limit now or hereafter provided for the zone in which such meter is placed. Each meter shall by its device clearly set out and continue in operation from the time of depositing such coin until the expiration of the time fixed as the parking limit for the part of the street upon which such meter is placed. Each meter shall also be so arranged that upon the expiration of such parking limit, it will indicate that the lawful parking period as fixed has expired. (Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


521.05 Overtime parking violation.

When any vehicle is parked in an on-street parking meter/machine space, upon entering the parking space, the coin or coins of the United States designated and required for the parking time desired or for the time limit established in each zone as set forth above shall be deposited in the parking meter/machine. If the vehicle shall remain parked beyond the limits prescribed or beyond the time paid for, as set forth in MMC 521.02 or MMC 521.02A as applicable, and the parking meter/machine shall indicate illegal parking, then such vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond the legal time fixed. The parking of a vehicle overtime or beyond the period of time fixed now or hereafter by the provisions of MMC 521.02 or 521.02A as applicable, in any part of a street where a meter/machine is located, shall be a violation of this article and punished as hereinafter provided. No person shall cause, allow or permit any vehicle registered in his name to be parked overtime or beyond the lawful period of time as above described. (Ord. 3668 § 6, 2009; Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


521.06 Deposit to extend fixed time limit a violation.

It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter a coin for the purpose of extending the parking time beyond the time fixed by the ordinances for parking in the parking space alongside of or next to which such parking meter is placed. (Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


521.07 Failure to deposit coin a violation.

It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to permit a vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space alongside of or next to which any parking meter is placed while such meter is displaying a signal showing that such vehicle shall have been already parked beyond the period of time fixed by the ordinance for such parking space. (Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


521.08 Duty of peace officers – Effect of waiver payment.

It shall be the duty of the peace officers of the city, acting in accordance with instructions of the chief of police, to report:

(A) The name of the parking lot and the number of the parking meters therein that indicates that the vehicle occupying the parking space adjacent thereto is, or has been, parked in violation of any of the provisions of this article; 

(B) The date and hour of such violation; 

(C) The state license number of such vehicle; 

(D) Any other facts, the knowledge of which shall be necessary for a full understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. Every such peace officer shall also place upon such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle was parked in violation of the provisions of this article, and instructing such owner or operator that he shall report to the police station and pay, for the use of the city, the sum of $5.00 within 48 hours after the time of such notice, or if he shall place the sum of $5.00, enclosed within the envelope provided, in any of the special parking fine boxes installed at various locations within the city within such time limit, the same shall save such violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine and costs hereinafter provided in this article. (Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


521.09 Manner of parking within meter spaces.

Any vehicle parked in any parking space in any meter zone shall be parked with the front of such vehicle alongside of or next to the parking meter alongside of such parking space in parallel parking spaces, and with the front of the vehicle directed at the meter in diagonal parking spaces. In either event, the vehicle shall be parked within the lines marked on the street for such parking space as provided hereinafter. (Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


521.10 Marking spaces – Parking vehicle within marked lines.

The city manager shall cause lines or marks to be placed on the curb or on the street about or alongside of each parking meter to designate the parking space for which the meter is to be used, and each vehicle parked alongside of or next to any parking meter shall be parked within the lines or markings so established. No person shall park any vehicle across any such line or mark or park such vehicle in such way that the same shall not be within the area so designated by such lines or markings. (Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


521.11 Deposit of slugs or substitute coins prohibited.

No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States. (Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


521.12 Defacing or injuring meter.

No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the terms of this article. (Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


521.13 Days and hours of meter operation.

(A) The provisions of this article regulating parking at on-street metered parking spaces and operation of said parking meters shall be in effect each day between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays.

(B) The city council may temporarily suspend these regulations requiring coin deposit in meters and establishing time limits for meter parking. (Ord. 3731 § 1, 2014; Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


521.14 Parking in handicapped parking spaces.

(A) No person shall park or permit the parking of any vehicle in any on-street parking space marked as “Handicapped” unless the vehicle displays an approved handicapped certificate, sticker or plate. 

(B) Any person parking or permitting the parking of any vehicle in violation of the provisions of subsection (A) of this section shall for each and every violation, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine in accordance with MMC 519.99.

(C) Parking spaces designated as handicap-only parking shall be in accordance with Article 519 MMC, Schedule M. (Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


521.15 Parking meter bags.

(A) The temporary use of parking spaces regulated by parking meters by issuance of parking meter bags to certain persons engaged in certain occupations or pursuits requiring temporary use of parking space(s) is hereby authorized in accordance with a policy formulated by the city manager and approved by resolution of city council and in accordance with the regulations set forth herein.

(B) The words “parking meter bags” as used herein refer to the “No Parking” bags that cover the meter to reserve the space, free from rate charges, to anyone properly obtaining the bags.

(C) Parking meter bags may only be issued for temporary use of metered parking spaces by persons employed in adjacent construction, demolition or repair projects, persons requiring reserved temporary parking for funerals, weddings, charitable events, parades or similar community affairs, and such other similar persons and uses as permitted under the policy adopted by city council.

(D) Parking meter bags will be free of charge for all charitable events, weddings, funerals, elections, parades, or when a family is moving or upon any other request at the discretion of the police department. Bags will also be made available to any city department or contractor involved with a city project free of charge at their request. These bags are to be used for on-street meters only and under no circumstances in parking lots. The police department shall issue or post these parking meter bags, which are orange in color, and shall have them returned or picked up by the department within a reasonable time period. 

(E) Parking meter bags for auctioneers and all contractors with the exception of contractors involved with a job which was contracted by the city itself shall pay a nonrefundable fee of $10.00 per day per bag. Any such parking meter bags that require a fee shall be issued by the zoning administrator.

(F) No person shall use a parking meter bag to reserve parking at a parking meter or to take a meter out of service unless said bag was properly issued by the city. Parking meter bags shall only be used by the person issued the bag(s), and for the purposes and in the manner authorized by the issuance of the bag(s) and these regulations. Parking meter bags shall be and remain the property of the City of Meadville.

(G) Any person in violation of the terms or provisions of subsection (F) of this section shall for each and every violation, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine in accordance with MMC 521.99. (Ord. 3716, 2013; Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


521.16 Special occasion parking permits.

Special occasion parking permits for special events, with advance notice given, will be issued on a per diem basis, nonrefundable $5.00 fee per permit (minimum of five). (Ord. 3716, 2013)


521.99 Penalty.

(A) Any person who violates any provision of this article, except MMC 521.11, 521.12 and 521.15, shall be subject to a penalty as follows:

(1) If penalty paid at courtesy box or city police headquarters within 48 hours of the issuance of the traffic ticket: $10.00.

(2) If penalty paid more than 48 hours, but within 10 days after the issuance of traffic ticket: $15.00.

(3) If penalty paid more than 10 days after the issuance of a traffic ticket, but before the issuance of a citation pursuant to the terms of this article: $30.00.

(4) If penalty is not paid within 15 days after the identity of the owner of the vehicle is determined, a citation shall be filed with the district magistrate and, upon conviction, violators shall be sentenced to pay a fine as set forth below.

(5) Time of payment for the purpose of this article shall be the time of the receipt of payment by the City of Meadville either in a courtesy box or at Police Headquarters, 984 Water Street, Meadville, Pennsylvania.

(6) Each hour or part of an hour during which any person parks or permits or causes a vehicle owned by him to be parked in violation of this article shall be considered separate and distinct offenses for which separate traffic tickets, citations and fines shall be issued, levied and collected.

(7) Any person convicted of the violation of any term or provision of this article (or of aiding, abetting or assisting in the violation of any term or provision of this article) shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $300.00 and may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 10 days.

(B) Any person who violates MMC 521.11, 521.12 and 521.15 shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $30.00 nor more than $300.00, together with costs and, upon failure to pay said fines and costs, may be sentenced to imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 10 days. (Ord. 3668 § 7, 2009; Ord. 3616 §§ 1, 2, 2005; Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


Article 525 OFF‑STREET PARKING

Sections:

525.01    Metered and reserved parking lots established.

525.02    Parking time limits and charges.

525.02A    Parking time limits and charges.

525.02B    Effective date of parking limits and rates set forth in MMC 525.02A.

525.03    Days and hours of operation.

525.04    Placement and characteristics of meters.

525.05    Parked vehicles to be within individual parking spaces.

525.06    Manner of parking at meters.

525.07    Overtime parking violation.

525.08    Unlawful to tamper with meters – Exceptions.

525.09    Metered parking lots for private passenger vehicles only.

525.10    Duty of peace officers – Effect of waiver payment.

525.11    Reserved off-street parking.

525.12    Parking in handicapped parking spaces.

525.13    Parking meter bags.

525.99    Penalty.


525.01 Metered and reserved parking lots established.

The following are hereby established as the metered, unmetered, and reserved parking lots operated by the city, such lots and meter numbers to be indicated on an official map on file in the city engineer’s office: 

(A) “Academy Theatre Lot” bounded on the north by West Cherry Street and on the south by Chestnut Street (metered);

(B) Repealed by Ord. 3684;

(C) “Keystone View Lot” bounded on the north by West Center Street, on the east by Seminary Alley, and on the west by Market Street (metered and reserved);

(D) “Market Square Parking Ramp” with an entrance to Market Square via Mulberry Street (both metered and reserved) and with an exit on West Center Street via Mulberry Street;

(E) “Mill Run Parking Ramp” with entrances and exits on Market Street, Mulberry Street, and Water Street (both metered and reserved plus up to 10 unmetered spaces reserved for DEP visitor parking);

(F) ”Park Avenue Central Lot” bounded on the north by West Center Street, on the south by West Cherry Street, and on the east by North Cottage Street (both metered and reserved);

(G) “Robert Smith Memorial Lot” bounded on the south by Arch Street, on the west by Park Avenue, on the north by Clinton Court, and on the east by Federal Court (both metered and reserved);

(H) Unnamed lot bounded on the east by Mulberry Street and on the west by Water Street (reserved);

(I) Unnamed lot bounded on the south by Pine Street and on the west by Market Street (reserved); (Ord. 3684 § 10, 2011; Ord. 3668 § 8, 2009; Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


525.02 Parking time limits and charges. 

(A) The maximum length of time allowed in metered parking shall be as follows: 

(1) Two hours in the Academy Theatre Lot, Keystone View Lot, Mill Run Parking Ramp, and portions of Market Square Parking Ramp; 

(2) Five hours in the county-owned lot; and 

(3) Twelve hours in the Arch Street Lot, Park Avenue Central Lot, Robert Smith Memorial Lot, and portions of Market Square Parking Ramp. 

(B) The rate charged for metered parking shall be $0.10 for 30 minutes in all lots and parking ramps, and $0.25 for 45 minutes on the first level of Market Square Parking Ramp, for 60 minutes in Mill Run Parking Ramp, and for 90 minutes in the Academy Theatre, Arch Street, county-owned, Keystone View, Park Avenue Central, and Robert Smith Memorial Lots and the sixth level of Market Square Parking Ramp. 

(C) Effective for the city fiscal year beginning January 1, 2005, the city council of the City of Meadville shall establish the monthly per vehicle rental fees for reserved covered parking spaces and reserved uncovered parking spaces for the following year as part of the general fund budget ordinance. Said fees shall be paid to and collected by the city treasurer. These rates shall not apply to parking stalls covered by individual written agreements between the city and renter in existence as of the date of enactment of the ordinance codified in this section. (Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004) 


525.02A Parking time limits and charges.

(A) The maximum length of time allowed in metered parking in the following lots shall be as follows:

(1) Two hours in the Academy Theatre Lot, Keystone View Lot, Mill Run Parking Ramp, and indicated portions of Robert Smith Memorial Lot and Market Square Parking Ramp;

(2) Five hours in the Park Avenue Central Lot and indicated portions of Robert Smith Memorial Lot and Market Square Parking Ramp.

(B) The rate charged for metered parking shall be $0.25 for each one hour in all lots and parking ramps. (Ord. 3684 § 11, 2011; Ord. 3670 § 2, 2009; Ord. 3668 § 9, 2009)


525.02B Effective date of parking limits and rates set forth in MMC 525.02A.

The parking limits and rates set forth in MMC 525.02A shall replace and be in effect at the time each off-street meter/machine within the designated parking lots and ramps is replaced or recalibrated to calculate the time limits and rates based on the parking limits and rates established by MMC 525.02A. At that time, a notice shall be posted on the meter/machine to give notice of the new parking meter/machine limits and rates as established by MMC 525.02A. Until each meter/machine is recalibrated for the new rates and limits, the parking meter/machine limits and rates shall be as set forth in the existing MMC 525.02. MMC 525.02(A) and (B) shall be void and of no effect at the time all off-street parking meters/machines have been recalibrated for the parking limits and meter/machine rates as set forth in MMC 525.02A. (Ord. 3668 § 9, 2009)


525.03 Days and hours of operation.

Each metered parking space in each parking lot in the City of Meadville as identified and set forth above shall be in operation and the provision of this article regulating such operation shall apply only between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. on days other than Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. Each reserved parking space in each parking lot as identified as set forth above shall be in operation and this provision of this article regulating such operation shall apply only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on days other than Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. (Ord. 3731 § 2, 2014; Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


525.04 Placement and characteristics of meters.

Parking meters installed in the lots shall be placed immediately adjacent to the individual parking spaces that shall be marked off in such lots. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such manner as to show whether the parking space adjacent to such meter is or is not legally occupied. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal time established by this article, the duration of the period of legal parking and, on the expiration of such period, shall indicate illegal or overtime parking. (Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


525.05 Parked vehicles to be within individual parking spaces.

Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the various metered parking lots hereby established, adjacent to each parking meter, for the purpose of designating the parking space for which such meter shall be used. Each vehicle parked adjacent to any parking meter shall be parked within the lines or markings so placed and applicable to such meter. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person: 

(A) To park any vehicle across any such line or marking; or 

(B) To park any vehicle in such a position that such vehicle shall not be within the area so designated by such lines or markings; or 

(C) To park a vehicle elsewhere in any such lot other than in an individual parking space adjacent to a parking meter. (Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


525.06 Manner of parking at meters.

No person shall park any vehicle in any of the parking lots otherwise than with the foremost part of the parked vehicle nearest to the parking meter applicable thereto. (Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


525.07 Overtime parking violation.

When any vehicle is parked at a parking meter/machine space in a designated metered lot, when meters/machines are in operation, upon entering the parking space, the coin or coins of the United States designated and required for the parking time desired or for the time limit established in each lot as set forth above shall be deposited in the parking meter/machine. If the vehicle shall remain parked beyond the limits prescribed or beyond the time paid for, as set forth in MMC 525.02 or 525.02A as applicable, and the parking meter/machine shall indicate illegal parking, then such vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond the legal time fixed. The parking of a vehicle overtime or beyond the period of time fixed now or hereafter by the provisions of MMC 525.02 or 525.02A as applicable, in any designated metered parking lot where a meter/machine is located, shall be a violation of this article and punished as hereinafter provided. No person shall cause, allow or permit any vehicle registered in his name to be parked overtime or beyond the lawful period of time as above described. (Ord. 3668 § 10, 2009; Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


525.08 Unlawful to tamper with meters – Exceptions.

It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this article, for any person to deface, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this article. Nothing herein shall apply to the servicing or opening of parking meters by officers, employees and/or peace officers of the city under the direction of the city manager and/or council. (Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


525.09 Metered parking lots for private passenger vehicles only.

The metered and nonmetered parking lots are hereby established for the parking of private passenger vehicles only, and it shall be unlawful, and a violation of this article, for any person to park any vehicle exceeding the size of an automobile, pickup truck or passenger van, including but not limited to bus, tractor, trailer, tractor-trailer, recreational van or commercial truck, in any such lot. (Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


525.10 Duty of peace officers – Effect of waiver payment.

It shall be the duty of the peace officers of the city, acting in accordance with instructions of the chief of police, to report:

(A) The name of the parking lot, and the number of the parking meters therein that indicates that the vehicle occupying the parking space adjacent thereto is, or has been, parked in violation of any of the provisions of this article; 

(B) The date and hour of such violation; 

(C) The state license number of such vehicle; 

(D) Any other facts, the knowledge of which shall be necessary for a full understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. Every such peace officer shall also place upon such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle was parked in violation of the provisions of this article, and instructing such owner or operator

concerning the penalty and payment thereof. (Ord. 3668 § 11, 2009; Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


525.11 Reserved off-street parking.

(A) No person shall park or permit the parking of any vehicle in any off-street parking space marked as a “Reserved” off-street parking place other than the tenant of such space or the permittee of such tenant, during the hours delineated in MMC 525.03.

(B) Any person parking or permitting the parking of any vehicle in violation of the provisions of subsection (A) of this section shall for each and every violation, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of $30.00. (Ord. 3668 § 12, 2009; Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


525.12 Parking in handicapped parking spaces.

(A) Parking spaces designated as handicap-only parking shall be in accordance with Article 519 MMC, Schedule M.

(B) No person shall park or permit the parking of any vehicle in any off-street parking space marked as “Handicapped” unless the vehicle displays an approved handicapped certificate, sticker or plate. 

(C) Any person parking or permitting the parking of any vehicle in violation of the provisions of subsection (B) of this section shall for each and every violation, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine in accordance with MMC 519.99. (Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


525.13 Parking meter bags.

The parking meter bags regulations as set forth in MMC 521.15 or Article 521 MMC are hereby incorporated as the parking meter bags regulations of and for this article. (Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


525.99 Penalty.

Any person who violates any provision of this article, except MMC 525.08, 525.11 and 525.13, shall be subject to a penalty as follows:

(A) If penalty paid at courtesy box or city police headquarters within 48 hours of the issuance of the traffic ticket: $10.00.

(B) If penalty paid more than 48 hours, but within 10 days after the issuance of the traffic ticket: $15.00.

(C) If penalty paid more than 10 days after the issuance of a traffic ticket, but before the issuance of a citation pursuant to the terms of this article: $30.00.

(D) If penalty is not paid within 15 days after the identity of the owner of the vehicle is determined, a citation shall be filed with the district magistrate and, upon conviction, violators shall be sentenced to pay a fine as set forth below.

(E) Time of payment for the purpose of this article shall be the time of the receipt of payment by the City of Meadville either in a courtesy box or at Police Headquarters, 984 Water Street, Meadville, Pennsylvania. 

(F) Each hour or part of an hour during which any person parks or permits or causes a vehicle owned by him to be parked in violation of this article shall be considered separate and distinct offenses for which separate traffic tickets, citations and fines shall be issued, levied and collected.

(G) Any person convicted of the violation of any term or provision of this article (or of aiding, abetting or assisting in the violation of any term or provision of this article) shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $300.00 and may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 10 days. 

Any person who violates MMC 525.08 and 525.13 shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $30.00 and not more than $300.00, together with costs, and upon failure to pay said fines and costs, may be sentenced to imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 10 days. (Ord. 3668 § 13, 2009; Ord. 3616 §§ 3, 4, 2005; Ord. 3610 § 2, 2004)


Article 526 PROHIBITED PARKING AND UNATTENDED VEHICLES

Sections:

526.01    Prohibition of parking in specified places.

526.02    Parking or leaving unattended vehicles on private property.

526.99    Penalty.


526.01 Prohibition of parking in specified places.

Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or to protect the safety of any person or vehicle, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no driver or other person shall stand or park a vehicle or permit a vehicle to stand or be parked:

(A) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street except temporary standing or parking for the purpose of loading or unloading persons or property as permitted by Section 3353(a)(i)(1) of the Vehicle Code;

(B) On a sidewalk;

(C) Within an intersection;

(D) On a crosswalk;

(E) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by official traffic control devices;

(F) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such parking would obstruct traffic;

(G) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway;

(H) On any railroad tracks;

(I) In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers;

(J) In front of a public or private driveway;

(K) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;

(L) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;

(M) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the site of a roadway;

(N) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance;

(O) On a limited access highway unless authorized by official traffic control devices;

(P) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;

(Q) At any place where official signs prohibit standing or parking. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


526.02 Parking or leaving unattended vehicles on private property.

(A) No driver or other person shall park or leave unattended a vehicle on private property without the consent of the owner or other person in control or possession of the property except in the case of emergency or disablement of the vehicle, in which case the operator shall arrange for the removal of the vehicle as soon as possible.

(B) The provisions of this section shall not apply to private parking lots unless such lots are posted to notify the public of any parking restrictions and the operator of the vehicle violates such posted restrictions. For the purposes of this section, “private parking lot” means a parking lot open to the public or used for parking without charge, or a parking lot used for parking with charge. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


526.99 Penalty.

Any driver or other person who parks or stands a vehicle or any person who permits a vehicle of which he is the registered owner to stand or be parked in violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to a penalty as follows:

(A) If penalty paid at courtesy box or city police headquarters within 48 hours of the issuance of the parking ticket: $30.00.

(B) If penalty paid more than 48 hours, but within 10 days of the issuance of the parking ticket: $40.00.

(C) If penalty is not paid within 10 days from the original date of issue, a citation shall be filed with the district magistrate and, upon conviction, violators shall be sentenced to pay a fine as set forth below.

(D) Time of payment for the purpose of this article shall be the time of the receipt of payment by the City of Meadville either in a courtesy box or at Police Headquarters, 984 Water Street, Meadville, Pennsylvania.

(E) Any person convicted of the violation of any term or provision of this article (or of aiding, abetting or assisting in the violation of any term or provision of this article) shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50.00 and, upon default of payment, may be imprisoned for a term not to exceed 10 days. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


Article 530 BRIDGE AND STREET WEIGHT LIMITS

Sections:

530.01    Establishment of weight limits.

530.02    Overweight vehicles prohibited on designated bridges.

530.03    Permits and bonds required for use by overweight vehicles.

530.99    Penalty.


530.01 Establishment of weight limits.

There are hereby established weight limits for certain bridges located within the City of Meadville as is fully set forth upon Schedule N of this section.

Schedule N 

Bridge Weight Limits  

	Route	Over	New Weight Limit (tons)	Except Comb.

	Chestnut Street	Mill Run	31	40T

	Clinton Court	Mill Run	5	17T

Schedule N-1 

Street Weight Limits 

	Route	From	To	Weight Limit (tons)

	Pine Alley	South Main Street	End of Street	4

	Pine Alley	South Main Street	Water Street	2

	Waelde Court	Randolph Street	Dead End	4 

(Ord. 3716, 2013; Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


530.02 Overweight vehicles prohibited on designated bridges.

No vehicle or combination including, but not limited to, any truck, tractor trailer, semi-trailer, commercial vehicle, construction equipment, or other vehicle, equipment, machine or thing, with a gross weight in excess of the weight limit established by this article and set forth in Schedule N, shall be operated or moved on or over a bridge which is subject to a weight restriction imposed by this article unless operating under a permit as provided in this article. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


530.03 Permits and bonds required for use by overweight vehicles.

Any driver or other person desiring to operate or to move any truck, tractor trailer, semi-trailer, commercial vehicle, construction equipment or other vehicle, equipment, or thing of any nature whatsoever in excess of the weight limits provided herein, over the bridges restricted as to weight as provided in Schedule N shall apply to the city manager for a permit for the movement of such vehicle in the manner established by this article. If it is determined by the city manager that such movement requested by the applicant for the permit can be made without causing excessive damage to the bridge or street, then the city manager may grant such permits subject to and conditional upon the execution of an excess maintenance agreement in the form approved by the city, the provision of security in the nature of a surety bond or other security approved by the city for the protection of the city, and the performance of all other requirements imposed by the applicable Pennsylvania Department of Transportation regulations relating to hauling in excess of posted weight limits, as amended, and such other reasonable conditions as may be appropriate under the circumstances. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


530.99 Penalty.

Any driver or other person or entity who shall act in violation of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $150.00, plus $150.00 for each 500 pounds (or part thereof) in excess of 3,000 pounds by which the actual gross vehicle weight of any offending vehicle exceeds the posted weight limit for the subject bridge. Each and every transit of a weight-limited bridge by an overweight vehicle shall constitute a separate offense. In default of payment of the fine, such person shall be sentenced to up to 10 days in prison. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


Article 531 REGULATION OF THE USE OF SKATES, SKATEBOARDS AND SIMILAR DEVICES

Sections:

531.01    Definitions.

531.02    Sidewalk, public parking facility and street riding prohibited.

531.03    Riding upon private property without permission prohibited.

531.04    Special transportation permits.

531.99    Penalties.


531.01 Definitions.

(A) “Parking facilities” shall mean all public parking lots, garages and spaces of all natures and descriptions whatsoever located within the City of Meadville whether owned and operated by the city, the parking authority or by any other public entity.

(B) “Regulated area” shall mean all that area bordered by the following streets:

(1) On the north by the north right-of-way line of Randolph Street.

(2) On the east by the east right-of-way line of Liberty Street.

(3) On the south by the south right-of-way line of Linden Street.

(4) On the west by the west right-of-way line of the French Creek Parkway.

(C) “Similar device” shall mean any and all devices and appliances of any and all descriptions, with wheels, intended for use by one or more persons in moving across the surface of the earth with the exception of tricycles, bicycles and automobiles, trucks and other vehicles licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for use on state highways.

(D) “Skateboard” shall mean any wheeled device intended to be stood upon and used for personal locomotion by the user thereof in lieu of walking.

(E) “Skates” shall mean all forms of wheeled devices intended to be worn or clamped upon the feet and used for personal locomotion by the user thereof in lieu of walking and shall include but not be limited to traditional roller skates and in-line skates.

(F) “Streets” shall mean the public streets, highways, boulevards and alleys of all natures and descriptions of the City of Meadville. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


531.02 Sidewalk, public parking facility and street riding prohibited.

No person shall use, operate or ride upon any skates, skateboard or similar device on sidewalks, public parking facilities or streets, at any time, within the regulated area as defined in this article. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


531.03 Riding upon private property without permission prohibited.

No person shall use, operate or ride upon any skates, skateboard or similar device on any private property within the corporate boundaries of the city without the prior written permission of the owner of such property; provided, that oral permission will be satisfactory with respect to private property owned and occupied by the parents or grandparents of the person using, operating or riding upon any such devices. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


531.04 Special transportation permits.

For reasonable cause shown, the chief of police may issue individual special transportation permits authorizing the holder thereof to utilize roller skates or in-line skates for personal transportation over the streets of the city; provided, that such persons shall be strictly responsible to assure compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and ordinances and shall be solely responsible to conduct transportation pursuant to the special transportation permit in a safe and reasonable manner. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


531.99 Penalties.

Any person convicted of or pleading guilty to a violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $300.00, together with costs of prosecution. (Ord. 3663 § 2, 2009)


PART 7 GENERAL OFFENSES CODE

Articles:

705    Repealed

709    Curfew

713    Disorderly Conduct and Disturbing the Peace

717    Disorderly Houses

721    Pet Code

725    False Fire Alarms – Injuring System

729    Gambling

733    Handbills and Samples

737    Minors and Liquor Control

741    Parade, Public Assemblage, and Diamond Park Gazebo Permits

745    Street and Sidewalk Code

749    Weapons and Explosives

750    Prohibiting the Operation of Motor Vehicles in City Parks and Upon City Property

751    Shopping Carts

755    Damage of Police Department Property


Article 705 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS

(Repealed by Ord. 3676) 


Article 709       CURFEW

Sections:

709.01  Restricted hours for minors under 16 – Exceptions.

709.02  Responsibility of parent, guardian or custodian.

709.03  Apprehension and disposition of minor offenders.

709.04  Fire alarm to be tolled as warning signal.

709.99  Penalty – Parent’s defense.


709.01       Restricted hours for minors under 16 – Exceptions.

No minor under the age of 16 years shall be on the streets, alleys and public places of the city between the hours of 9:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless accompanied by his parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of such minor, or unless such minor possesses a written statement, dated the day it is presented and signed by the minor’s parent, guardian or custodian declaring that the minor is on an emergency errand and describing the nature of such errand. (Ord. 2045 § 1, 1938) 


709.02       Responsibility of parent, guardian or custodian.

No parent, guardian or other person having legal care or custody of any minor under 16 years of age shall allow or permit such minor to be in or upon any of the streets, alleys or public places in the city within the time prohibited in MMC 709.01, except as provided therein. (Ord. 1027 § 2, 1913)   


709.03       Apprehension and disposition of minor offenders.

All police officers are hereby authorized and directed to apprehend on view all minors under 16 years of age violating MMC 709.01. In case of arrest or apprehension the minor is to be dealt with as follows: for the first offense, the officer shall take the minor to his parent, guardian or custodian, and the fact of the taking shall be reported by the officer to police headquarters and a record made of the same, and entered upon the docket of the police magistrate; for a second or subsequent violation by any minor, the minor shall again be apprehended on view by any police officer, and again taken to his parent, guardian or custodian, and such minor shall be proceeded against in the juvenile courts of the county by the chief of police as complainant as an incorrigible, delinquent or neglected child. (Ord. 1027 § 3, 1913) 


709.04       Fire alarm to be tolled as warning signal.

The fire alarm at the Central Fire Station shall be tolled two taps at 9:15 p.m. each night as a notice and warning to the public of the time limit hereinbefore stipulated. However, the neglect or failure to toll the alarm any night at such time shall not constitute a waiver of the requirements and prohibitions of this article. (Ord. 2045 § 2, 1938) 


709.99       Penalty – Parent’s defense.

Any parent, guardian or custodian violating MMC 709.02 shall upon conviction be fined $1.00 and costs for the first offense; $2.00 and costs for a second offense; and $5.00 and costs for a third or any subsequent offense. In default of payment thereof the convicted parent, guardian or custodian shall be imprisoned one day of each $1.00 of fine imposed. However, if the parent, guardian or custodian, when proceeded against under this section, shall make oath before the magistrate hearing the case that the minor he is charged with permitting to be unlawfully upon the streets, alleys or other public places of the city was there contrary to his direction and desire, and that the minor is beyond his control, and is an incorrigible child, such affidavit shall be sufficient defense in the action, and any such minor may then be proceeded against, on complaint of the chief of police, in the juvenile court as an incorrigible child. (Ord. 1027 § 4, 1913) 


Article 713       DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND DISTURBING THE PEACE

Sections:

713.01  Resisting or obstructing a city officer.

713.02  Breach of the peace by conduct or language.

713.03  Drunkenness prohibited.

713.04  Nudity – Indecent dress, exposure or conduct.

713.05  Obscene or profane language.

713.06  Begging prohibited.

713.07  Malicious mischief.

713.08  Defacing or taking city property.

713.09  Defacing or destroying monuments or things.

713.10  Unlawful congregation on sidewalks and public grounds.

713.99  Penalty.


713.01       Resisting or obstructing a city officer.

No person shall resist or obstruct any properly constituted officer of the city who is attempting to enforce any ordinance of the city or rescue or attempt to rescue by threats or otherwise, any person apprehended by such officer for violating any ordinance. (Ord. 49 § 9, 1870) 


713.02       Breach of the peace by conduct or language.

No person shall make or assist in making any unlawful or improper tumult, disturbance or breach of the peace, or use language or exhibit behavior of a violent and disorderly character such as is calculated to produce a breach of the peace. (Ord. 49 § 1, 1870) 


713.03       Drunkenness prohibited.

No person shall be drunk or in a state of intoxication in any public place, or in any private place to the disturbance and annoyance of any other person. (Ord. 49 § 2, 1870)   


713.04       Nudity – Indecent dress, exposure or conduct.

No person shall appear in any public place in a state of nudity, or in a dress not belonging to his or her sex, or in an indecent or lewd dress, or make any indecent exposure of his or her person, or commit any indecent or lewd act or behavior, or exhibit or perform any indecent or lewd play or other representation. (Ord. 49 § 3, 1870) 


713.05       Obscene or profane language.

No person shall publicly use profane or obscene language. (Ord. 49 § 4, 1870)   


713.06       Begging prohibited.

No person shall beg or solicit alms on the streets or in public places or at private residences in the city. (Ord. 1124 § 1, 1914)   


713.07       Malicious mischief.

No person shall: wilfully and maliciously break or injure any electric light or globe or cut or unloosen any rope or wire suspending such light or connected therewith; or cut or break, injure, deface or destroy any property belonging to the city; or break or tear off any door-knocker or door-bell handles; or tear down, destroy or deface any sign, building number or street sign; or break down, remove, injure, cut, mark or deface any building, fence, walks, gate, bridge or other structure of enclosure, whether public or private property; draw upon the walls of any building, fence or other structure or object any obscene picture or delineation, or write thereon any indecent or immodest sentence or words; or in any way to mutilate, injure or destroy any fruit, shade or ornamental tree or shrub, whether public or private. (Ord. 287 § 1, 1887) 


713.08       Defacing or taking city property.

No person shall willfully and maliciously, or wantonly break, injure, destroy, deface or carry away any part of any building, machinery, apparatus, supplies or other property of the city, or to commit any nuisance by putting any filth, grease or other substance upon any buildings, machinery, lamps or other property of the city. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1880) 


713.09       Defacing or destroying monuments or things.

No person shall injure, deface or destroy any monument, fountain or any other thing not his own. (Ord. 3 § 9, 1866)


713.10       Unlawful congregation on sidewalks and public grounds.

No person shall congregate with others on the sidewalks, street corners, or within the parks and public grounds of the city with intent to provoke a breach of the peace, or whereby a breach of the peace may be occasioned by the serious annoyance to pedestrians or by threatening, insulting or abusive conduct to them, and refuse to move on when ordered by a police officer. (Ord. 2742 § 1, 1970) 


713.99       Penalty.

(A) Whoever violates MMC 713.01 shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $50.00 and imprisoned not more than 30 days. 

(B) Whoever violates MMC 713.02 shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $25.00 and imprisoned not more than 30 days. 

(C) Whoever violates any provision of MMC 713.03 or 713.04 shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $20.00 and imprisoned not more than 30 days. 

(D) Whoever violates MMC 713.05 shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $10.00. 

(E) Whoever violates MMC 713.06 shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $10.00 or imprisoned not less than one or more than 30 days. 

(F) Whoever violates MMC 713.07 shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $20.00. 

(G) Whoever violates MMC 713.08 shall be fined not more than $50.00 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. 

(H) Whoever violates MMC 713.09 shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $500.00. 

(I) Whoever violates MMC 713.10 shall be fined not more than $300.00 together with costs of prosecution for each offense, and in default of payment thereof shall be imprisoned for not more than 90 days. (Ord. 2742 § 2, 1970; Ord. 1124 § 2, 1914; Ord. 287 § 1, 1887; Ord. 210 § 4, 1880; Ord. 49 §§ 1 – 4, 9, 1870; Ord. 3 § 9, 1866) 


Article 717       DISORDERLY HOUSES

Sections:

717.01  Keeping disorderly places prohibited.

717.02  Permitting indecency, drunkenness or peace disturbance.

717.03  Duty of police officers to arrest upon complaint or knowledge.

717.99  Penalty.


717.01       Keeping disorderly places prohibited.

No person shall keep a disorderly house or place, or a house or place to which persons of bad reputation or immoral character resort or congregate. (Ord. 1777, 1928)


717.02       Permitting indecency, drunkenness or peace disturbance.

No person shall permit the commission in any house, building, room, or premises of any immoral or indecent acts, any drunkenness, any loud or boisterous conduct or language, or any other conduct or noises offensive to good morals or tending to disturb the public peace and quiet. (Ord. 1777, 1928)


717.03       Duty of police officers to arrest upon complaint or knowledge.

It shall be the duty of city police officers upon complaint made or upon personal knowledge of any such officers that any house, room, building, or other premises is or are used for the purposes aforesaid, to arrest the person in whose possession or occupancy such place may be, together with all persons found therein, and convey such persons before a court of lawful jurisdiction. (Ord. 1777, 1928)


717.99       Penalty.

Any person who allows any house, building, room or premises in his possession or occupancy to be used for any of the purposes prohibited by this article, and any person visiting any such house or other premises for any such purpose, shall be fined not more than $100.00, together with costs, and in default of payment shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days. Each day upon which such violations occur, subsequent to a first conviction therefor, shall be construed as constituting a separate and distinct offense under the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1777, 1928) 


Article 721       PET CODE

Sections:

721.01  Short title.

721.02  Definitions.

721.03  Declaration of public nuisance.

721.04  Restraint.

721.05  Animal care.

721.06  Keeping of wild animals.

721.07  Performing animal exhibitions.

721.08  Animal wastes.

721.09  Animal control officer.

721.10  Impoundment.

721.99  Penalties.


721.01       Short title.

This article shall be known and cited as the pet code of the City of Meadville. (Ord. 2915, 1977)


721.02       Definitions.

Whenever the following terms are used in this article they shall be deemed to have the meanings set forth in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

(A) "Animal" means any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild;

(B) "Animal shelter" means any facility operated by a humane society or municipal agency, or its authorized agents, for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this article or state law;

(C) "Auctions" means any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold, or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this article. This section does not apply to individual sales of animals by owners;

(D) "Circus" means a commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public entertainment;

(E) "Commercial animal establishment" means any pet shop, grooming shop, auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal exhibition, or kennel;

(F) "Humane officer" means any person designated by the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a municipal government, or a humane society, including the Crawford County Humane Society, as a law enforcement officer who is qualified to perform such duties under the laws of this state;

(G) "Kennel" means any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs or cats; 

(H) "Owner" means any person, partnership, or corporation owning, keeping, or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three consecutive days or more;

(I) "Performing animal exhibition" means any spectacle, display, act or event other than circuses, in which performing animals are used;

(J) "Pet" means any animal kept for pleasure or utility;

(K) "Pet shop" means any person, partnership, or corporation, whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise except for a licensed kennel, that buys, sells, or boards any species of animal;

(L) "Public nuisance" means:

(1) Any animal or animals which:

(a) Molests passersby or passing vehicles; 

(b) Attacks other animals;

(c) Trespasses on school grounds;

(d) Is repeatedly not under restraint;

(e) Damages private or public property; 

(f) Barks, cries, whines, or howls in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion;

(2) The maintenance of any animal in a manner which subjects others to offensive odors;

(M) "Restraint" means any animal secured by a leash or lead, or within the real property limits of its owner;

(N) "Vicious animal" means any animal or animals that constitute a physical threat to human beings or other animals;

(O) "Wild animal" means any live monkey (nonhuman primate), raccoon, skunk, fox, poisonous snake, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, or any other warm blooded animal which can normally be found in the wild state. (Ord. 2915, 1977)


721.03       Declaration of public nuisance.

(A) The City of Meadville hereby declares and ordains that any animal or animals which:

(1) Molests passersby or passing vehicles;

(2) Attacks other animals;

(3) Trespasses on school grounds; 

(4) Is repeatedly not under restraint;

(5) Damages private or public property;

(6) Barks, cries, whines, or howls in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion; is and shall be considered a public nuisance. The ownership of any animal which constitutes a public nuisance is hereby declared to be a summary offense and is punishable in accord with the provisions of MMC 721.99.

(B) The City of Meadville hereby declares that the maintenance of any animal in a manner which subjects others to offensive odors is and shall be considered a public nuisance. The maintenance of any animal in a manner which constitutes a public nuisance is hereby declared to be a summary offense and is punishable in accord with the provisions of MMC 721.99. (Ord. 2915, 1977)


721.04       Restraint.

It shall be the duty and obligation of the owner of any animal to control the conduct of such animal as follows:

(A) All animals shall be kept under restraint at all times. 

(B) No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance.

(C) Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding.

(D) Every vicious animal shall be confined by the owner within a building or secure enclosure and shall be securely muzzled or caged whenever off the premises of its owner. (Ord. 2915, 1977)


721.05       Animal care.

(A) No owner or operator of any commercial animal establishment shall fail to provide his animals with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment.

(B) No person shall beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight, or other combat between animals or between animals and humans.

(C) No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.

(D) No person shall crop or cause the cropping of any animal’s ears or tail, except when a licensed veterinarian issues a signed certificate that the operation is necessary for the dog’s appearance, health and comfort, and in no event shall any person except a licensed veterinarian perform such an operation.

(E) Chickens or ducklings younger than eight weeks of age may not be sold in quantities of less than 25 to a single purchaser.

(F) No person shall give away any live animals, fish, reptile, or bird as a prize for, or as an inducement to enter, any contest, game, or other competition, or an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade.

(G) Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal’s owner; in the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at once report the accident to the city police department or to the Crawford County Humane Society. 

(H) No person shall intentionally or negligently expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any animal; provided, that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substances.

(I) No person shall permit any animal to be confined to any parked motor vehicle without adequate ventilation and temperature control sufficient to insure its comfort. (Ord. 2915, 1977)


721.06       Keeping of wild animals.

(A) No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises any wild or vicious animal for display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee without a permit issued by the health officer of the City of Meadville. This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions or circuses.

(B) No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild animal as a pet.

(C) The health officer may issue a temporary permit for the keeping, care and protection of an infant animal native to this area which has been deemed to be homeless.

(D) The health officer shall have the power to release or order the release of any infant wild animal kept under temporary permit which is deemed capable of survival. (Ord. 2915, 1977)


721.07       Performing animal exhibitions.

(A) No performing animal exhibition or circus shall be permitted in which animals are induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical, or manual devices in a manner which will cause, or is likely to cause, physical injury or suffering.

(B) All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working condition. (Ord. 2915, 1977)


721.08       Animal wastes.

The owner of any animal shall use reasonable care to avoid the deposit of excreta by his animal upon any property other than his own. The owner of any animal which deposits excreta upon any property not owned by the animal’s owner (e.g., public walks, recreation areas and private property) shall immediately collect and remove all such excreta. Failure of any owner to collect and remove all excreta deposited by his animal upon the property of another within one hour after receipt of notice of such deposit shall constitute a violation of this code. (Ord. 2915, 1977)


721.09       Animal control officer.

The city manager is hereby authorized to appoint a special police officer who shall be the animal control officer of the City of Meadville. The animal control officer shall be supervised by the city manager or his designate and shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this code. It is the intent of the city council of the City of Meadville that prosecutions for the violation of any provisions of this code shall be instituted and prosecuted by citizens aggrieved by such violations. The city manager may, in his discretion, authorize the institution of proceedings by the city for the enforcement of the provisions of this code when, in the city manager’s opinion, any violation constitutes an imminent threat to the public health or safety or to the health or safety of any animal. (Ord. 2915, 1977)


721.10       Impoundment.

(A) Unrestrained animals and animals which constitute a public nuisance shall be taken by the police, the animal control officer or humane officers and impounded at the Crawford County Humane Society’s shelter and there confined in a humane manner.

(B) Impounded stray dogs and cats shall be kept for not less than three working days unless earlier released to the owner.

(C) If by a license tag or other means the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the animal control officer shall, immediately upon impoundment, notify the owner by telephone or mail.

(D) An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay to the Crawford County Humane Society such fee as the Crawford County Humane Society shall, from time to time, impose for the care and maintenance provided to the animal. 

(E) The Crawford County Humane Society shall, in its discretion, dispose of any animal delivered to it which is diseased, maimed or unclaimed and undesirable. (Ord. 2915, 1977)


721.99       Penalties.

(A) The owner of any animal which constitutes a public nuisance or who maintains any animal in a manner constituting a public nuisance as declared and defined in this code shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not less than $25.00 nor more than $300.00. Each day upon which any animal or owner acts in a manner which constitutes a public nuisance shall constitute a separate offense.

(B) Upon any person’s third conviction within any calendar year of the ownership of any animal which constitutes a public nuisance, such person shall be sentenced to pay a fine not less than $200.00 nor more than $300.00.

(C) Any person who violates any other provision of this code shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not less than $25.00 nor more than $300.00. (Ord. 2915, 1977)


Article 725       

FALSE FIRE ALARMS –  INJURING SYSTEM

Sections:

725.01  False alarms or injury to alarm system.

725.99  Penalty.


725.01       False alarms or injury to alarm system.

No person shall give or cause to be given any false alarm of fire, break or cause to be broken any fire alarm box or any pole, post or wire connected with the fire alarm system, or injure or in any manner interfere with or interrupt the working of the same. (Ord. 2161 § 1, 1946) 


725.99       Penalty.

Any person convicted of violating the provisions of MMC 725.01 shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500.00 together with costs of prosecution and may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. (Ord. 3071 § 1, 1984) 


Article 729       GAMBLING

Sections:

729.01  Aiding exhibition of gambling devices – Common gamblers prohibited.

729.02  Keeping or visiting gambling or fortune telling houses.

729.03  Permitting gambling or pool making.

729.04  Presumed violation for knowledgeable owner or occupant failing to complain.

729.05  Duty of police officers to arrest upon complaint or knowledge.

729.99  Penalty.


729.01       Aiding exhibition of gambling devices – Common gamblers prohibited.

No person shall aid, assist or permit others to keep or exhibit any gambling table, establishment, device or other instrument, article or thing whatsoever to win or gain money or other property of value. No person shall engage in gambling for a livelihood, or be without a fixed residence and in the habit or practice of gambling. (Ord. 1382 § 1, 1918) 


729.02       Keeping or visiting gambling or fortune telling houses.

Any keeper of or visitor at any gaming table, gambling house, house for fortune telling, house of ill or bad repute, or other place of bad device within the city, and any person found in the city who goes about for the purpose of gaming, or who has in his possession any article or thing used for obtaining money under false pretenses, or by not rendering an equivalent value therefor, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1397 § 1, 1918) 


729.03       Permitting gambling or pool making.

No owner, occupant or lessee of any building, room, tent or any other place shall allow the same or any part thereof to be used, occupied or employed for the purpose of pool selling or of playing at, or betting upon any game or device of address or hazard, for money or other valuable things. (Ord. 1397 § 2, 1918) 


729.04       Presumed violation for knowledgeable owner or occupant failing to complain.

If any owner, occupant or lessee has knowledge that any pool selling, or playing at or betting upon any game of address or hazard is set up or conducted upon the premises of which he is the owner, occupant or lessee and he does not immediately make complaint thereof to the proper authorities, he shall be deemed to have knowingly leased, hired or rented such premises for such purpose, and shall be subject to the penalties imposed in MMC 729.99(B). (Ord. 1397 § 3, 1918)   


729.05       Duty of police officers to arrest upon complaint or knowledge.

It shall be the duty of city police officers upon complaint made or upon personal knowledge of any such officers that any house in the city is kept or used for any of the aforesaid purposes to arrest the persons in whose possession or occupancy the house, room or other place may be, together with all persons found therein, and convey such persons before a court of lawful jurisdiction. (Ord. 1788 § 1 1928)   


729.99       Penalty.

(A) Whoever violates MMC 729.01 shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00 and costs, and in default of payment thereof shall be imprisoned not more than 10 days. 

(B) Whoever violates any provision of this article for which no penalty is otherwise provided shall be fined not more than $100.00 for each and every offense together with costs, and in default of payment thereof shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days. (Ord. 1397 §§ 1, 2, 1918; Ord. 1382 § 2, 1918)


Article 733       HANDBILLS AND SAMPLES

Sections:

733.01  Placing of handbills or samples prohibited without consent.

733.02  Exceptions for newspaper delivery.

733.99  Penalty.


733.01       Placing of handbills or samples prohibited without consent.

No person shall place handbills, circulars, pamphlets or other advertising matter or any samples of drugs or merchandise on any of the streets, alleys, private driveways, porches, halls or other parts of private residences or public buildings, or upon or in any motor vehicle without the consent of the owners or custodians of such properties. (Ord. 1859 § 1, 1929) 


733.02       Exceptions for newspaper delivery.

This article shall not be construed to apply to the delivery of any regularly published newspaper to any bona fide subscriber thereto. (Ord. 1859 § 3, 1929) 


733.99       Penalty.

Whoever violates MMC 733.01 shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $50.00 for each and every offense, and in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned not more than three days. (Ord. 1859 § 2, 1929) 


Article 737       MINORS AND LIQUOR CONTROL

Sections:

737.01  Prohibition involving minors.

737.02  Licensee to post prohibitions.

737.03  Violations considered summary offenses.

737.99  Penalty.


737.01       Prohibition involving minors.

(A) No minor under 21 years of age shall enter any premises in the city licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board for the sale of malt or alcoholic beverages for the purpose of purchasing or having served or delivered to him or her any malt or alcoholic beverage. 

(B) No minor under 21 years of age shall consume any malt or alcoholic beverage on premises licensed by the commonwealth for the sale of malt or alcoholic beverages, or purchase, attempt to purchase or have another purchase for him or her any malt or alcoholic beverage. 

(C) No adult shall give or deliver any malt or alcoholic beverage to any minor in or upon any such licensed premises. (Ord. 2508 § 1, 1961) 


737.02       Licensee to post prohibitions.

Any licensee of any premises within the city licensed by the commonwealth for the sale of malt or alcoholic beverages shall post a copy or a summary of this article in a conspicuous and visible place on such premises. (Ord. 2508 § 2, 1961) 


737.03       Violations considered summary offenses.

Charges for violations of this article shall be commenced before a court of lawful jurisdiction in the same manner and under the same procedure as other summary violations and charges are commenced, and the procedures for the enforcement of this article shall be the same as summary offenses presently existing. (Ord. 2508 § 4, 1961) 


737.99       Penalty.

Whoever violates any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00 for each and every such violation, and in default of payment thereof shall be imprisoned not less than 10 nor more than 30 days. (Ord. 2508 § 3, 1961) 


Article 741 PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLAGES

Sections:

741.01    Purpose.

741.02    Definitions.

741.03    Permit required – Parades and public assembly.

741.04    Permit required – Diamond park gazebo rental.

741.05    Permit application – Filing time.

741.06    Final decision by city manager on permit issuance – No charge for parade permit or public assembly permit.

741.07    Permit application information.

741.08    Required findings by city manager prior to permit issuance.

741.09    No use of city property within Diamond Park.

741.10    Compliance with lawful requirements.

741.11    Funerals and governmental agencies excepted.

741.12    Exclusive use of other city facilities.

741.13    Security deposits, reasonable fees and charges.

741.14    Insurance.

741.15    Indemnification.

741.99    Penalty.


741.01 Purpose.

Freedom of speech and association are among those precious rights guaranteed and protected by the United States and Pennsylvania Constitutions. The law gives the city the ability to balance those rights with its interests in regulating competing uses of public space, protecting its citizens, and preserving city and public property. As a municipal government, the city may enact content-neutral restrictions on the time, place, and manner of such expression in order to promote such significant government interests. The purpose of this article is to set forth the circumstances under which the city will regulate First Amendment activity. (Ord. 3651 § 2, 2008)


741.02 Definitions.

For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply:

“Applicant” refers to the person or group sponsoring or organizing an event and applying for a permit required under this article.

“Core First Amendment activity” includes all expressive and associative activity intended to communicate an opinion or to state a grievance and does not include such activities as pet shows, ethnic food festivals, art shows, civic holiday celebrations and similar events.

“Diamond Park gazebo” refers to the gazebo structure and that area of Diamond Park within an area extending 25 feet in any direction from the outer wall of the gazebo.

“First Amendment activity” includes all expressive and associative activity that is protected by the United States and Pennsylvania Constitutions, including speech, press, assembly, and/or the right to petition.

“Parade,” for purposes of this article, means a march, procession, organized movement, or motorcade consisting of persons, vehicles, or a combination thereof that is: (1) held with an intent to attract attention; (2) takes place upon streets within the city or on streets within a city park; and (3) interferes or has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or controls.

“Participant” refers to those individuals, including but not limited to the applicant, who take part in the activities of the parade, public assembly or the rental of the Diamond Park gazebo by invitation of the applicant.

“Person” means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, society, company, or organization of any kind.

“Public assembly” means a group activity of any type including a demonstration, march, meeting, parade, protest, rally, or vigil, festival, show, exhibit, event, etc., as a result of prior planning and that interferes or may interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic upon the streets, parks, sidewalks, or other public grounds within the city or does not comply with normal and usual traffic, regulations or controls; or which occupies any public area open to the general public to the exclusion of others. For purposes of this article, the use associated with the rental of the Diamond Park gazebo or other city structures for weddings, birthday parties and similar private activities is not public assembly. (Ord. 3651 § 2, 2008)


741.03 Permit required – Parades and public assembly.

No person shall engage in, be a part of, participate in, or start any parade or public assembly (as defined in this article) upon any street, lane, alley, highway, sidewalk, park or any other public place within the city unless a permit has first been obtained for such parade or public assembly from the city manager. If such permit shall be for public assembly, as defined by this article, said permit shall be denominated a public assembly permit which must be conspicuously posted by the permittee at the site of the public assembly. If such permit shall be for a parade, said permit shall be denominated a parade permit which must be conspicuously carried by the permittee along the route of the parade for the duration thereof. (Ord. 3651 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2743, 1970. Formerly 741.01)


741.04 Permit required – Diamond park gazebo rental.

No person may use the Diamond Park gazebo to the exclusion of others without first obtaining a Diamond Park gazebo permit and paying the required rental fee. Only those persons with a valid Diamond Park gazebo permit may use the columns and rails of the gazebo itself for bunting, signs, symbols, flags or things of that nature, upon a written commitment by the applicant to remove all items attached pursuant thereto and to indemnify and save the city harmless from any and all costs related to the removal thereof, and to the repair of any defacement or damage to the gazebo as detailed in the application for the rental of the Diamond Park gazebo, along with a detailed description of items intended for display on the columns and rails of the gazebo. No person shall be granted more than four permits in any 12-month period. (Ord. 3651 § 2, 2008)


741.05 Permit application – Filing time.

An applicant seeking issuance of a parade permit, public assembly permit or a Diamond Park gazebo permit not involving core First Amendment activities shall file an application on forms as provided by the city, with the city manager, not less than 15 nor more than 60 days prior to the date, absent reasonable exigent circumstances, on which it is proposed to conduct the parade or public assembly or to rent the Diamond Park gazebo. Persons seeking permits to conduct core First Amendment activities shall, absent reasonably exigent circumstances, file applications not less than four nor more than 60 days prior to the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade or public assembly or to rent the Diamond Park gazebo. (Ord. 3651 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2743, 1970. Formerly 741.02)


741.06 Final decision by city manager on permit issuance – No charge for parade permit or public assembly permit.

The city manager shall make appropriate consultations with the police chief and the fire chief in reviewing applications for permits under this article. The city manager shall make the final decision on the issuance of the permit within three days of the completion of the city manager’s consultations with the police and fire chiefs, and notification shall be given by the city manager to the applicant in writing as to whether the permit shall be issued or denied. If there are reasonable exigent circumstances, the city manager shall attempt to act upon pending applications more quickly. The application for a parade permit and a public assembly permit involving core First Amendment activities as defined in this article shall be free of charge. The application for a Diamond Park gazebo permit shall include the appropriate rental fee with the application. (Ord. 3651 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2743, 1970. Formerly 741.03)


741.07 Permit application information.

An application for a parade permit, public assembly permit, or Diamond Park gazebo permit shall set forth the following information insofar as applicable:

(A) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade, public assembly, or rental of the Diamond Park gazebo.

(B) If the parade, public assembly or rental of the Diamond Park gazebo is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of that organization and of the authorized heads of such organization, and also a communication in writing shall be filed with the city manager by the person proposing to hold the parade, public assembly or to rent the Diamond Park gazebo authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on behalf of the organization.

(C) The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons who will be in charge of and who will be responsible for the conduct of participants.

(D) The date and location of the parade, public assembly or rental of the Diamond Park gazebo to be conducted and the route to be traveled with the starting point and termination point for a parade.

(E) The hours when such parade, public assembly or rental of the Diamond Park gazebo will start and terminate, and the approximate number of persons and/or vehicles constituting or participating in such parade, public assembly or rental of the Diamond Park gazebo.

(F) With respect to a Diamond Park gazebo permit, whether the applicant intends to display bunting, signs, symbols, flags or similar objects, and a description of these items if the applicant desires to attach these items to the gazebo during the rental period. (Ord. 3651 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2743, 1970. Formerly 741.04)


741.08 Required findings by city manager prior to permit issuance.

The city manager shall issue a parade permit, public assembly permit or Diamond Park gazebo permit on a first-come-first-served basis, unless from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may be otherwise obtained he finds that:

(A) The use or activity intended by the applicant would present an unreasonable danger to the health or safety of the applicant, other users of the public property, or of city employees.

(B) The application for the permit (including any required attachments and submissions) is not fully completed and executed.

(C) The application for such permit contains material falsehood or misrepresentation.

(D) The applicant is legally incompetent to contract or to sue and be sued.

(E) The applicant or the person on whose behalf the application for permit was made has, on prior occasions, damaged public property and has not paid in full for such damage.

(F) The use or activity intended by the applicant will conflict with previously planned programs organized and to be conducted by the city or another group scheduled for the same time and place.

(G) A fully executed prior application for permit for the same time and place within the city has been received, and a permit has been or will be granted to a prior applicant authorizing uses or activities which do not reasonably permit multiple occupancy of the particular location within the city. (Ord. 3651 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2743, 1970. Formerly 741.05)


741.09 No use of city property within Diamond Park.

With the exception of the uses provided for under a Diamond Park gazebo permit as set forth above, no person shall make any use of the Diamond Park grounds or any monument or memorial within Diamond Park for the purpose of supporting or exhibiting any signs, symbols, flags or things of any nature or description whatsoever. Nothing in this section shall limit the right of the city to make any and all uses of Diamond Park and all facilities, monuments and memorials therein for public gatherings and observances sponsored and conducted by the city, or the right of any person to hold any sign, flag, poster or thing of any nature or description as a communication within Diamond Park without utilizing the grounds, trees, plants, monuments and memorials within Diamond Park as a support therefor. (Ord. 3651 § 2, 2008)


741.10 Compliance with lawful requirements.

No parade or public assembly shall form, march or assemble except at such time, place or route or be of different character or purpose than as set out in the permit issued pursuant to the application. No person shall participate in a parade or public assembly as described herein prior to the compliance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 3651 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2743, 1970. Formerly 741.06)


741.11 Funerals and governmental agencies excepted.

This article shall not apply to funeral processions or any governmental agency acting within the scope of its authority. (Ord. 3651 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2743, 1970. Formerly 741.07)


741.12 Exclusive use of other city facilities.

In addition to the regulation of exclusive uses of the Diamond Park gazebo provided in this article, no person shall make any use of any other city-owned structure to the exclusion of others without first obtaining a permit therefor and, in the case of activities that are not core First Amendment activities as defined in this article, without paying any security deposit, fee or charge as may from time to time be required hereunder. (Ord. 3651 § 2, 2008)


741.13 Security deposits, reasonable fees and charges.

The city council may, from time to time by resolution, authorize, impose and collect reasonable security deposits, fees and charges for all parades and public assemblies that do not constitute core First Amendment activities as defined in this article. Such fees and charges may be flat fees or charges for the use of specific city facilities (e.g., the Diamond Park gazebo, picnic shelters, etc.) or may be based upon the reasonably anticipated costs to the city arising from each proposed parade or public assembly. (Ord. 3651 § 2, 2008)


741.14 Insurance.

The city council may, from time to time by resolution, establish minimum insurance requirements for uses of any and all city property for any and all activities that do not constitute core First Amendment activities as defined in this article, and may require that the city, its officials, officers, agents and volunteers shall be named as additional insureds upon any and all policies of insurance that provide the required coverage. Proof of the existence of any and all required insurance shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of any permit to which this section applies. (Ord. 3651 § 2, 2008)


741.15 Indemnification.

Each applicant for a parade or public assembly permit or for use of the Diamond Park gazebo or any other city structure not involving core First Amendment activities as defined in this article shall, as a condition of the issuance of any permit, execute an indemnification agreement provided by the city providing that the applicant will indemnify and hold the city harmless with respect to any liability to any person resulting from damage or injury occurring in connection with the permitted event proximately caused by the action of the speaker, applicant or organizer of the parade or public assembly or the rental of the Diamond Park gazebo or other city facility. (Ord. 3651 § 2, 2008)


741.99 Penalty.

Whoever violates any provisions of this article shall be fined not more than $1,000, and in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned not more than five days. (Ord. 3651 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2743, 1970)


Article 745 STREET AND SIDEWALK CODE

Sections:

745.01    Short title.

745.02    Sidewalks mandatory along certain streets and parts of streets.

745.03    Sidewalk standards.

745.04    Permit required to install or replace.

745.05    Sidewalk removal.

745.06    Initial procedure for request to remove or require sidewalks.

745.07    Obstructions prohibited.

745.08    Sliding prohibited.

745.09    Damaging or marking sidewalks.

745.10    Sidewalk openings or projections.

745.11    Playing on streets – Throwing articles.

745.12    Broken glass or injurious substances.

745.13    Penalties.

745.14    Enforcement proceedings.

Prior legislation: Ords. 3209 and 3225.


745.01 Short title.

This article shall be known and cited as the street and sidewalk code of the Meadville Municipal Code. (Ord. 3717 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2903, 1976)


745.02 Sidewalks mandatory along certain streets and parts of streets.

All persons owning property abutting on those streets and parts of streets set forth upon Schedule A, which is the official sidewalk map of the City of Meadville and is hereby incorporated and made a part of this article by reference, shall install sidewalks along the full length of those portions of the properties which abut such streets and parts of streets. (Ord. 3717 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2903, 1976)


745.03 Sidewalk standards.

No person shall install or replace any sidewalk abutting any street in the City of Meadville except in conformity with standards as are, from time to time, promulgated by the city manager and approved by city council. Copies of current sidewalk standards shall be on file and available to the public in the office of the city manager or his designee. (Ord. 3717 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2903, 1976)


745.04 Permit required to install or replace.

No person shall install or replace any sidewalk abutting any street in the City of Meadville without first having obtained a permit from the office designated by the city manager. (Ord. 3717 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2903, 1976)


745.05 Sidewalk removal.

(A) Sidewalks Shall Not Be Removed. No person shall remove any sidewalk abutting any street in the City of Meadville except as hereinafter provided.

(B) City Council May Permit Removal of Sidewalks. Upon application by the owner of any property abutting any street in the City of Meadville, and after obtaining the recommendation of the city manager or his designee, city council may, by resolution or ordinance, permit the removal of sidewalks from the applicant’s property. (Ord. 3717 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2903, 1976)


745.06 Initial procedure for request to remove or require sidewalks.

(A) Application. Any person who desires city council to permit the removal of or require the installation of sidewalks upon land abutting any city street shall make application therefor at the office of the city manager or his designee upon a form prescribed by the city manager.

(B) Requirements for Processing Request. The city manager or his designee shall process all applications filed upon proper forms; provided, that if any application seeks permission to remove sidewalks in any of the following situations, the following additional materials must be filed with the application before any action is taken thereon:

(1) Dead End Streets. Written consent to the proposed removal signed by all persons who own and all persons who occupy properties which:

(a) Are on the same side of the street as the property affected by the application; and

(b) Have sidewalks; and

(c) Are located between the site of the proposed removal and the dead end of the street.

(2) Streets with Partial Sidewalks. Written consent to the proposed removal signed by all persons who own and all persons who occupy properties which:

(a) Are on the same side of the street as the property affected by the application; and

(b) Have sidewalks abutting the street; and

(c) Which are located within the same block as the site of the proposed removal.

(C) Procedure. Upon receipt of any application together with all supplemental data required by this code, the city manager or his designee shall forthwith schedule a public hearing upon any such application within 30 days of his receipt of the said materials. The city manager or his designee shall further cause public notice of the time, place and subject matter of each scheduled hearing by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least seven days before the date of the hearing.

(D) Hearings. The city manager or his designee shall make full inquiry into the facts and circumstances surrounding each application. The city manager or his designee shall hear and make note of such comment as any person may desire to make regarding the application.

(E) Recommendation to City Council. Within 30 days of each hearing, the city manager or his designee shall make a written recommendation thereupon to city council. Such recommendations shall fully describe the property in question, the nature of the application, the identity and comments of each person who appeared at the public hearing and the recommendation for action. Each such recommendation shall note the city manager’s or his designee’s consideration of each of the following factors:

(1) Location of schools.

(2) Pedestrian school children’s existing traffic patterns and volume.

(3) Location of commercial, institutional, industrial and other pedestrian traffic generators.

(4) Existing general pedestrian traffic patterns and volume of general pedestrian traffic.

(5) Sidewalks on one side only or both sides and the percentage, by number and front footage, of properties in the same block and along the same street which have sidewalks.

(6) Sidewalks in suburban type residential developments.

(7) Volume of vehicular traffic.

(8) Maximum permitted speed for vehicular traffic.

(9) Topography or special features.

(10) Lack of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

(F) Recommendations of the city manager or his designee shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. The city clerk shall, upon receipt of any recommendation, forthwith forward a copy thereof to each member of city council and place the recommendation on the agenda of the next public city council meeting which is at least 14 days from the date upon which copies of the recommendation were mailed to the members of council.

(G) Nothing contained herein shall be construed to limit city council from instituting proceedings in accordance with this section to remove or require sidewalks. (Ord. 3717 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2903, 1976. Formerly 745.08)


745.07 Obstructions prohibited.

No person, firm or corporation shall place or permit the placement of any obstructions, including such things as boxes, agricultural products or packing materials, bales, barrels, or other articles of merchandise, lumber, coal, wood, ashes, building materials, or any other article or thing whatever, reasonably deemed by the city to constitute an obstruction, in or upon any of the sidewalks or other portions of streets, lanes or alleys in the city. However, this section shall not be construed to apply to the temporary placing of the above enumerated articles or things upon any sidewalks, street, lane or alley, by the owner, tenant or lawful occupant of the abutting premises for a length of time reasonably necessary to the receipt or delivery of such articles or things. Any person, firm or corporation may, at any time, obtain permission under the provisions of existing ordinances to occupy portions of the streets, alleys and sidewalks of the city for the purpose of placing building materials thereon. (Ord. 3717 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2903, 1976. Formerly 745.11)


745.08 Sliding prohibited.

No person shall engage in the sport of riding or sliding on any street or sidewalk, when the same is covered with snow or ice, on any sled or other similar device. (Ord. 3717 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2903, 1976. Formerly 745.12)


745.09 Damaging or marking sidewalks.

No person shall willfully and maliciously damage or mark, or cause to be damaged or marked, any sidewalk. (Ord. 3717 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2903, 1976. Formerly 745.13)


745.10 Sidewalk openings or projections.

No person shall construct any cellar door stairs, steps, passageway or opening of any kind, or any porch, piazza, veranda or any other projection from a building in any sidewalk, public street, alley or highway in the city without written approval of the city manager or his designee. However, scuttles and skylights may be placed in sidewalks, but in every case they shall be secured in accordance with applicable codes, including but not limited to the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, Americans with Disabilities Act and the Meadville Property Maintenance Code. (Ord. 3717 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2903, 1976. Formerly 745.15)


745.11 Playing on streets – Throwing articles.

No person shall play ball or any other game or amusement upon any of the public streets, alleys or highways, or throw any ball, dart, arrow, other instrument of sport, stone, missile or any other substance whatever across or into any public street, alley or highway. (Ord. 3717 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2903, 1976. Formerly 745.16)


745.12 Broken glass or injurious substances.

No person shall place, leave, or allow to remain on the sidewalks, streets, alleys or places of public travel in the city any broken glass, nails or other sharp substances liable to be injurious to persons, animals or vehicles. (Ord. 3717 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2903, 1976. Formerly 745.17)


745.13 Penalties.

If any person shall violate a provision of this code, or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code, or shall fail to comply with an order issued by the city manager, his designee or the code official, the city is hereby authorized to:

(A) Have the said violation corrected by the city or a contractor hired by the city. The cost of such remedial action and all expenses incidental thereto, together with a penalty of 10 percent of the costs plus attorneys’ fees, may be collected from the owner or other person responsible for the premises in any manner permitted by law.

(B) File a municipal lien or claim in the amount of the costs, related expenses, and penalties against the premises which were in violation.

(C) Prosecute the offense as a summary criminal violation, punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 for any violation which remains uncorrected following written notice of such violation for the city manager or his designee.

(D) Pursue any and all other lawful remedies for the violation. (Ord. 3717 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2903, 1976. Formerly 745.99)


745.14 Enforcement proceedings.

Enforcement proceedings may be instituted by the code official for MMC 745.02 through 745.06 and by the city police for MMC 745.07 through 745.12. (Ord. 3717 § 1, 2013)


Article 749 WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES

Sections:

749.01    Carrying concealed weapons – Exceptions.

749.02    Discharging firearms prohibited.

749.03    Discharging fireworks or explosives prohibited – Exception by council resolution.

749.04    Permit required.

749.05    Permit application – Filing time.

749.06    Final decision by city manager on permit issuance – No charge for permit.

749.07    Permit application information.

749.08    Permit required from the city manager.

749.09    Severability – Validity of remaining provisions.

749.99    Penalty.


749.01 Carrying concealed weapons – Exceptions.

No person shall carry within the city concealed upon his person any firearm, sling shot, handy-billy, dirk-knife, razor or any other deadly weapon. The fact of carrying such weapon shall be deemed sufficient to infer such intent. However, nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent any person from carrying a revolver or gun for the protection of his person and property upon written permission from the police chief, nor to interfere with the right of any person to carry firearms who has been granted such right by the state or federal governments. (Ord. 1376 § 1, 1918) 


749.02 Discharging firearms prohibited.

No person within the city shall discharge any firearms. (Ord. 49 § 6, 1870)


749.03 Discharging fireworks or explosives prohibited – Exception by council resolution.

No person, partnership, association or corporation shall sell, expose or offer for sale, give, discharge, fire, use, set off or explode any rocket, blank cartridge, pistol or other appliance for the use of blank cartridges, torpedoes, Roman candles, squibs, firecrackers, or other toy explosives or fireworks of any kind whatever, or any substance or explosive intended for pyrotechnical display. However, this section shall not apply to city pyrotechnical displays authorized by council resolution and conducted solely at public expense and which are under the supervision of the proper city officials as designated in such resolution; and provided further, that this section shall not apply to pyrotechnical displays authorized by permit of the city manager upon submission of an application for such a display filed with the city manager pursuant to the following MMC 749.04 through 749.08. (Ord. 2898 § 1, 1976; Ord. 2863 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1945 § 1, 1930) 


749.04 Permit required.

No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization shall engage in, be a part of, or participate in or start any pyrotechnical display of any kind whatsoever upon any property or place within the City of Meadville, unless a permit has first been obtained for such pyrotechnical display from the city manager of the City of Meadville. (Ord. 2863 § 2, 1974)


749.05 Permit application – Filing time.

An applicant seeking issuance of a pyrotechnical display permit shall file an application in such manner and on such forms as provided by the city with the city manager, not less than seven or more than 90 days prior to the proposed date on which the pyrotechnical display is to be conducted. (Ord. 2863 § 2, 1974)


749.06 Final decision by city manager on permit issuance – No charge for permit.

The chief of police and the fire chief shall, after concurrence with the city manager, submit their recommendations to the city manager as to the propriety of the issuance of such a permit. The city manager shall make the final decision on the issuance of said permit. Notification shall be given by the city manager to the applicant in writing as to whether the permit shall be issued or denied. Before a permit may be issued, a permit fee shall be paid in accordance with a schedule of fees determined and set from time to time by resolution of the city council. The pyrotechnical display permit fee shall be $100.00 until otherwise determined and set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 3653 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2863 § 2, 1974)


749.07 Permit application information.

Application for a pyrotechnical display permit shall set forth the following information insofar as applicable:

(A) The name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization seeking to conduct such pyrotechnical display. 

(B) If the pyrotechnical display is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of that organization and of the authorized heads of such organization, and also a communication in writing shall be filed with the city manager by person proposing to hold the pyrotechnical display authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on behalf of the organization. 

(C) The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons who will be in charge of and who will be responsible for the conduct of the display. 

(D) The name, address and telephone number of the person, persons or professionals who will be in charge of the igniting of the display or otherwise in charge of said display and also including the prior experience of this person or persons in this field and other expertise acquired. 

(E) The date and location of the pyrotechnical display to be conducted and the safety precautions to be taken for the protection of the persons attending said display. 

(F) The insurance coverage to be in force, including liability and property damage insurance for said pyrotechnical display. 

(G) The time when such pyrotechnical display will start and terminate, and the approximate number and/or vehicles that will be in attendance at such display. 

(H) The number and types of fireworks to be used in the pyrotechnical display. (Ord. 2863 § 2, 1974)


749.08 Permit required from the city manager.

City manager shall issue a pyrotechnical permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as be otherwise obtained or required, he finds that:

(A) The location of said pyrotechnical display is in an area of sufficient size for such a display as indicated by the application and will not constitute a hazard to the safety and well-being of the surrounding areas for pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 

(B) The conduct of the pyrotechnical display will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city or fire department personnel of the city to properly maintain safety of the areas contiguous thereto so as to prevent normal police or fire protection to the City of Meadville. 

(C) The conduct of such pyrotechnical display will not interfere with the movement of fire fighting equipment on route to a fire. 

(D) The conduct of such pyrotechnical display is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or properties, to promote disorderly conduct or to create a disturbance within the City of Meadville. 

(E) The insurance coverage as provided by the application is sufficient to insure the proper protection of the persons and properties of the citizens of the City of Meadville. 

(F) The persons handling said pyrotechnical display have the necessary experience and expertise required to safely conduct such a display.

(G) The necessary safety precautions have been taken by the applicant to insure the safety and well-being of persons attending said display and the persons and property in area contiguous thereto. 

(H) Recognizing that a pyrotechnical display is an ultra hazardous activity, that the conducting of such a display will not in any manner affect the safety and well-being of the persons and property of the city. 

(I) The pyrotechnical display is not to be held for the purpose of advertising any product or goods and is not designated to be held for private profit in that the display is generally in the public interest. (Ord. 2863 § 2, 1974)


749.09 Severability – Validity of remaining provisions.

The provisions of MMC 749.03 through 749.08 are intended to be severable and if any of the sections, provisions, phrases or parts are held unconstitutional or void, the remainder of this article shall continue in full force and effect. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that this article would have been passed even if such unconstitutional or void matter had not been included herein. (Ord. 2863 § 2, 1974)


749.99 Penalty.

Any person convicted of the violation of any provisions of this article shall be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $500.00 or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed six months or both. (Ord. 3001, 1980) 


Article 750       

PROHIBITING THE OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES IN CITY PARKS AND UPON CITY PROPERTY

Sections:

750.01  Definitions.

750.02  Operation of motor vehicles prohibited.

750.03  Permits available for necessary use.

750.99  Penalty.


750.01       Definitions.

(A) "City parks" or "city property", for the purposes of this article, shall mean any and all real property owned by the City of Meadville or over or upon which the City of Meadville owns any right, right-of-way, or easement other than streets designated upon official city maps as public streets having been accepted by formal action of the city council of the City of Meadville as use for public thoroughfares.

(B) "Motor vehicle", for the purposes of this article, shall include any and all devices which employ internal combustion engines or electric motors and which carry or in any way transport one or more human beings whether or not such vehicles are licensed or permitted for use upon the streets and highways of the commonwealth. "Motor vehicles" shall be interpreted to include, but not be limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motorbikes, mopeds, ATVs, and snowmobiles. (Ord. 3054, 1983)


750.02       Operation of motor vehicles prohibited.

No person shall operate, permit or cause the operation of or participate in the operation of any motor vehicle upon or in any city parks or other city property as defined in this article. (Ord. 3054, 1983)


750.03       Permits available for necessary use.

Persons requiring the limited operation of motor vehicles within city parks or upon other city property for the conduct of necessary maintenance may obtain temporary and limited permits for such operation from the office of the chief of police upon showing good and reasonable need therefor. (Ord. 3054, 1983)


750.99       Penalty.

Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $300.00 together with all costs of prosecution. (Ord. 3054, 1983)


Article 751 SHOPPING CARTS

Sections:

751.01    Definitions.

751.02    Shopping cart identification.

751.03    Shopping cart removal warning.

751.04    Shopping cart removal authorization.

751.05    Violation – Penalties.

751.06    Cart impounding.


751.01 Definitions.

The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article only:

(A) “Business premises” means the interior of a cart owner’s commercial establishment, adjacent walkways, loading areas, and the parking area.

(B) “Cart owner” means the owner or operator of a commercial establishment which owns or provides shopping carts for customer use to transport goods.

(C) “Parking area” means a parking lot or other property provided by a cart owner for use by a customer for parking a vehicle.

(D) “Shopping cart” means a framed basket that is mounted on wheels or any similar device which is provided by a commercial establishment for customer use to transport goods. (Ord. 3725 § 1, 2014)


751.02 Shopping cart identification. 

Cart owners shall permanently affix and continuously maintain an easily visible sign, label, or imprinted logo onto each shopping cart identifying the commercial establishment as the cart owner. (Ord. 3725 § 2, 2014)


751.03 Shopping cart removal warning.

Every cart owner shall post a notice on their business premises in public view which shall contain a statement to the effect that unauthorized removal of a shopping cart from the business premises, or possession of a shopping cart in a location outside of the business premises without authorization is a violation of city ordinance and shall be punishable by a fine of up to $300.00 and 90 days in jail. (Ord. 3725 § 3, 2014)


751.04 Shopping cart removal authorization. 

(A) Cart owners may, at their discretion, provide written authorization to customers to remove shopping carts from the business premises.

(B) Such carts permitted to be removed from the business premises shall be stamped or imprinted with a serial number that shall be recorded with the name of the customer who is authorized to remove the shopping cart from the business premises, and such carts shall be affixed with an easily visible colored triangle-shaped sign or label (in addition to the general label or logo required by MMC 751.02).

(C) Customers who have received written authorization to remove shopping carts from business premises must properly store the shopping carts out of the view of their neighbors and the general public. (Ord. 3725 § 4, 2014)


751.05 Violation – Penalties.

(A) Shopping carts that are discovered by city personnel off of the business premises of a commercial establishment that do not contain proper cart identification as described in MMC 751.02 may be disposed of by the City of Meadville without notice to that commercial establishment.

(B) Any individual who removes a shopping cart from the business premises of a commercial establishment without authorization, or is seen in possession of a shopping cart in a location outside of the business premises without authorization shall be in violation of this article and shall be subject to a fine of $50.00 to $300.00 for each offense, and/or up to 90 days in jail.

(C) Any individual with written authorization to remove a shopping cart from the business premises who does not properly store the shopping cart as set forth in MMC 751.04(C) shall be in violation of this article and shall be subject to a fine of $50.00 to $300.00 for each offense, and/or up to 90 days in jail. (Ord. 3725 § 5, 2014)


751.06 Cart impounding. 

(A) Any instance in which a shopping cart owned or provided by a cart owner is found off of the business premises, and the cart owner does not retrieve the shopping cart within 72 hours of having received notice from city personnel, shall be considered a violation by the cart owner of this article. For purposes of this subsection, notice shall be deemed proper by telephone, email, or in writing.

(B) A shopping cart that is not retrieved within 72 hours of the cart owner having received notice from city personnel shall be retrieved by city personnel and placed in storage. Cart owners shall be notified via first-class mail that they have 10 days from the date of receipt of notice to retrieve the cart and pay a redemption fee as specified in the city’s fee schedule, based on the time and difficulty incurred by city personnel in the retrieval of the cart. For the purposes of this subsection, city personnel may additionally contact cart owners via electronic mail to speed collection of the cart by the cart owner.

(C) Shopping carts that are not retrieved after 10 days’ notice to the cart owner may be disposed of by the City of Meadville. (Ord. 3725 § 6, 2014)


Article 755 DAMAGE OF POLICE DEPARTMENT PROPERTY

Sections:

755.01    Definitions.

755.02    Summary offense.

755.03    Restitution.


755.01 Definitions. 

The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article only:

“Biological waste” means a human byproduct, including, but not limited to, blood, urine, feces, and vomit.

“Damage” means any damage or unsanitary condition created by a detainee in a cell or the police station which requires repairs or cleaning services.

“Detainee” means an individual held in custody with the Meadville police department.

“Holding cell” means a cell located within the Meadville police department where detainees are temporarily held after being arrested, pending arraignment, or for other time periods related to court hearings.

“Police department” means the Meadville City police department located in the City Building, Diamond Park, Meadville, including any vehicle owned or operated by the city. (Ord. 3766 § 1, 2017)


755.02 Summary offense.

Any detainee who causes damage within a holding cell, or the police department, or contaminates a holding cell or the police department with biological waste, shall be guilty of a summary offense; such summary offense shall be punishable by fine. The amount of the fine shall be a minimum of $25.00 up to a maximum of $100.00 for each separate offense. (Ord. 3766 § 2, 2017)


755.03 Restitution.

Upon conviction of the summary offense, the court is specifically authorized to order restitution to reimburse the Meadville police department all costs associated with decontaminating and cleaning the holding cell or police department. The amount of restitution shall be a minimum fine of $140.00, or the actual repair/cleaning expense, whichever is greater. (Ord. 3766 § 3, 2017)

 


PART 9 STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE

Articles:

Title 1. Street and Sidewalk Areas

901    Street Base Lines and Datum Line

903    Street Occupancy and Excavations

905    Sidewalk Construction and Repair

907    Repealed

908    Construction of Curb Cuts

909    Trees on Sidewalks

Title 3. Utilities

911    Sewer and Water Connections

912    Publicly Owned Treatment Works Pretreatment Requirements

913    Sanitary Sewer Rentals

915    Water Regulations and Rates

917    Watercourses

Title 5. Other Services

931    Refuse Storage, Collection and Disposal

932    Repealed

933    City Market

935    Parks and Public Property

Title 7. Stormwater Management

941    General Provisions

943    Definitions

945    Stormwater Management Standards

947    Riparian Buffer Standards

949    Design Criteria

951    SWM Site Plan and Report Requirements

953    Easements

955    Maintenance Responsibilities

957    Inspections

959    Enforcement and Penalties

961    Prohibitions

963    Fees and Expenses

965    Stormwater Management Program and User Fee

991    Municipal Energy Aggregation Program


Article 901       STREET BASE LINES AND DATUM LINE

Sections:

901.01  Permanent base lines established.

901.02  Datum line for surveys and grades.


901.01       Permanent base lines established.

(A) The center line of Park Avenue, as presently located, extending from the south to the north line of the city limits, and the center line of Chestnut Street, as presently located, extending from the east to the west line of the city limits are hereby declared the permanent base lines of the city. 

(B) The center of each street or alley intersecting either of these base lines shall be located with reference to and be described by angles or deflections from the line it intersects, and the distance shall be measured from the point of intersection. 

(C) All other streets and alleys which do not intersect either of the base lines as aforesaid shall be located with reference to and be described by angles of deflection from the line which it intersects which has already been established from the base lines. 

(D) It shall be the duty of the city engineer to cause the courses and distances of such base lines to be accurately defined by permanent monuments set apart at proper distances. (Ord. 148 §§ 1 – 4, 1876) 


901.02       Datum line for surveys and grades.

The horizontal datum line for all surveys and grades in the city shall be an imaginary line 100 feet below the top edge of the stone water table of the courthouse in the city, as it stands at the present date, taken immediately under the stone tablet at the southwest corner of the courthouse. (Ord. 95 § 1, 1875) 


Article 903 STREET OCCUPANCY AND EXCAVATIONS

Sections:

903.01    Definitions.

903.02    Prohibited activities.

903.03    Exceptions.

903.04    Application.

903.05    Fees and charges.

903.06    Inspection fees.

903.07    Surety.

903.08    Permit issuance.

903.09    Insurance requirements.

903.10    Indemnification.

903.11    General conditions of permit.

903.12    Additional conditions of work.

903.13    Inspections.

903.14    Emergency work.

903.15    Consent of adjoining property owners.

903.16    Modification of conditions.

903.17    Remedies for violation.

903.18    Revocation of permit.

903.19    Reserved.

903.20    Enforcement procedures.

903.99    Penalty.


903.01 Definitions.

“City council” shall mean the governing body of the City of Meadville.

“City manager” shall mean the City of Meadville city manager or any other city employee or office specifically designated by the city manager to carry out responsibilities set forth in this article.

“City streets” shall mean any of the roadways or alleys within the City of Meadville which have been officially accepted as a street under the control of the city, and which have remained open to and used for public travel, including but not limited to the surface and subsurface structures.

“Persons” shall mean any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation or other group or entity.

“Within city streets” shall mean any area within the right-of-way as designated in the records of the city of a street or roadway officially accepted as a city street, open to and used for public travel within the City of Meadville. (Ord. 3748 §§ 2, 3, 2016; Ord. 3689 § 1, 2011; Ord. 3466 § 2, 1997)


903.02 Prohibited activities. 

It shall be unlawful to engage in any of the following activities and to cause or permit any person to engage in any of the following activities without a permit issued by the city manager and without complying with applicable regulations and specifications pertaining thereto as from time to time prepared by the city manager and adopted by resolution of the city council:

(A) Opening, excavating or digging within city streets;

(B) Constructing or installing any gas pipe, water pipe, electric conduit, sewer pipe or other type of piping or facilities within city streets;

(C) Connecting a driveway to a city street;

(D) Constructing, cutting, altering or repairing a curb marking the boundary of a paved street within a city street;

(E) Installation or erection of any pole or erected structure for telephone, cable, electric or any other service within city streets;

(F) Posting, fastening, marking or placing any sign, bill, notice, advertisement, or any other matter upon any utility pole within city streets;

(G) Placing, constructing or installing any device or thing which obstructs public travel or public use within city streets;

(H) Placing, constructing, or installing any device or thing which allows or directs water to enter on, into or under a city street, whether or not such device or thing is on or within a city street. (Ord. 3748 §§ 2, 4, 2016; Ord. 3466 § 2, 1997)


903.03 Exceptions.

A permit is not required for the following activities: 

(A) Changing or modifying parts of existing permitted facilities, such as cable within conduit, cross arms or transformers on poles, or manhole riser rings prior to roadway resurfacing, if no surface opening is required; 

(B) Stringing overhead utility lines; or 

(C) Accessing an existing utility facility through a manhole. (Ord. 3466 § 2, 1997)


903.04 Application.

The application for a permit shall be on a form prescribed by the city manager and submpitted to the city manager or its designated representative. The application shall include:

(A) A narrative statement of the kind of work to be performed in the street surface and street right-of-way, the amount of road surface to be disturbed, depth of excavations, type of facilities or equipment involved and installed, estimated time of beginning and end of work, and any unusual circumstances or factors;

(B) For driveway construction, a statement of course, grade, structure, materials and drainage facilities, if any, involved in the construction of the driveway;

(C) Two copies of a sketch showing the location of the intended work, driveway, sidewalk, curb, curb cut, facility or equipment, location of any existing facilities, driveway and equipment or structure, width of the traveled roadway, right-of-way lines and dimensions to the nearest intersecting streets;

(D) The name and address of all persons, corporations, partnerships or other entities responsible for the activity for the actual installation or construction work, for the ownership and control of any facility or equipment installed, constructed or erected, and for engineering services; 

(E) Any other information as may reasonably be required to demonstrate the applicant’s ability to completely and properly discharge the construction, restoration, maintenance and financial responsibilities as may be imposed by the applicable regulations; and

(F) Satisfactory evidence that the proposed work facilities will not be detrimental to or inconsistent with the integrity of the right-of-way, other existing facilities, the city’s maintenance responsibilities and the safe and convenient passage of traffic. (Ord. 3748 § 2, 2016; Ord. 3466 § 2, 1997)


903.05 Fees and charges. 

There shall be submitted at the time of application a fee as set forth in a fee schedule adopted from time to time by the city council which shall include the fee for processing the application and the fee for making inspections. The fee schedule shall be posted and made available to all applicants. (Ord. 3466 § 2, 1997)


903.06 Inspection fees.

In the event the work involves substantial road cuts or openings involving more than 200 square feet or more than 200 linear feet, the permittee shall be charged and be liable to the city for the reasonable actual costs of inspection by the city manager’s designated representative, unless in advance the city manager and permittee shall agree upon a unit cost inspection charge to be paid in advance. (Ord. 3748 §§ 2, 5, 2016; Ord. 3466 § 2, 1997)


903.07 Surety. 

(A) In the event the work involves substantial road cuts or openings involving more than 200 square feet or more than 200 linear feet, the city manager may require security, which may include, but need not be limited to:

(1) Surety bonds in a form and amount acceptable to the city manager to guarantee restoration in a manner satisfactory to the city manager and to guarantee necessary maintenance costs for the facility and the right-of-way in which it is located for a period of at least two years after the completion of the permitted work.

(2) An escrow account acceptable to the city manager to fully secure the obligations set forth in subsection (A)(1) of this section as an alternative to obtaining surety bonds.

(B) The amount of the security shall be based upon reasonable estimates of the cost to restore the affected portion of the roadway and for maintenance for a period of at least two years after completion of the work, as determined by a qualified engineer or other person designated by the city manager. (Ord. 3748 §§ 2, 6, 2016; Ord. 3466 § 2, 1997)


903.08 Permit issuance. 

The city manager or its designated representative shall issue a permit upon completion of all application requirements, and upon a determination that the proposed location of the activity is suitable, that the proposed activity appears to pose no hazard or danger to adjacent properties or other facilities, or to the public safety and welfare of the residents of the city, and that the person granted the permit has the qualifications and resources necessary to complete the activity in accordance with the requirements of this code and city regulations. Said permit and the rights created thereby shall be expressly conditional upon the applicant’s compliance of all terms and provisions set forth in this code, the applicable regulations and specifications in the permit, including any conditions added by the city manager. (Ord. 3748 § 2, 2016; Ord. 3466 § 2, 1997)


903.09 Insurance requirements.

All permits shall be subject to the following insurance conditions and requirements:

(A) No work shall be undertaken without current and applicable policies of insurance in effect including workmen’s compensation coverage and vehicle insurance coverage meeting the minimum requirements of Pennsylvania law.

(B) No work shall be undertaken without current and applicable policies of comprehensive general liability and contractors’ liability insurance in effect providing minimum coverage of $1,000,000 per person and $1,000,000 in the aggregate for bodily injuries, death and property damage claims on a per occurrence basis.

(C) Permittee shall require subcontractors or persons engaged in any construction or other work related to the project to obtain and maintain in effect insurance meeting the same requirements as set forth above.

(D) Upon request, permittee shall provide certificates of insurance to the city manager and other information as may be required to confirm that the coverages required are in effect. (Ord. 3748 §§ 2, 7, 2016; Ord. 3466 § 2, 1997)


903.10 Indemnification. 

As a condition of the permit, the permittee shall agree to fully indemnify and save harmless the City of Meadville, its officers, agents and employees of and from liability for damages or injury to persons or property arising out of any act or omission of a contractor, agent, servant, employee or person engaged or employed in, about or upon the work, by, at the instance of or with the approval or consent of the permittee, including a failure of the permittee or a person to comply with the permit, the requirements of this code, the applicable regulations, or any other regulation or law. (Ord. 3466 § 2, 1997)


903.11 General conditions of permit. 

(A) The permit is binding upon the permittee, its agents, contractors, successors and assigns and the permittee is responsible for causing compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit by its employees, agents and contractors.

(B) Responsibility for compliance with the terms of the permit may not be assigned or transferred by the permittee without approval.

(C) No permits for opening or cutting a cartway or street surface shall be granted for work between November 1st and March 31st except for extraordinary reason.

(D) A permit shall establish a reasonable time for completion of the work, which shall not be less than 30 days, and the work shall be completed within that time unless an extension is requested and granted.

(E) There shall be full and complete compliance with all the regulations and specifications established from time to time by the city manager and adopted by the city council, which are applicable to the activity undertaken and for which the permit was issued.

(F) A condition of the permit may be modified by the city manager upon request and for cause shown.

(G) There shall be full compliance with all applicable laws, regulations and rules relating to the work to be performed including, but not limited to, One Call Law (Act No. 287 of December 10, 1974, P.L. 852, No. 287), the Clean Streams Law (Act of June 22, 1937, as amended, found at 35 P.S. 691.1 et seq.) and O.S.H.A. construction safety and health regulations. (Ord. 3748 § 2, 2016; Ord. 3466 § 2, 1997)


903.12 Additional conditions of work. 

All permittees and persons who undertake activity which disturbs the surface of any street or curb which is the subject of this code shall:

(A) Locate, install and maintain all poles, wires, pipe, underground conduits and facilities of every kind to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, and to assure that the safety, functioning and appearance of the property, and the convenience and safety of other persons and the public shall not be adversely affected thereby.

(B) Provide and maintain such traffic control devices and personnel as may be necessary for the safe movement of traffic. The city manager may require a traffic control plan and compliance with applicable Pennsylvania Department of Transportation regulations.

(C) In the case of disturbance of any street, sidewalk, or paved area, the city, in its sole discretion, may perform the final surface repairs. Should the city decide to perform these repairs, the permittee shall be charged a fee as set forth in a fee schedule adopted from time to time by city council by resolution. Should the city decide not to perform these repairs, the permittee shall replace and restore such street or paved area to its original condition, using the same or comparable materials, in a manner meeting the specifications of the city and satisfactory to the city manager, at no expense to the city.

(D) If the permittee, after making an opening in the surface to place or repair a facility or for another purpose, fails to restore a portion of the right-of-way to perform work which conforms to the city standards, the city reserves the right to do the work upon notice to the permittee, if practicable, and the permittee shall be obligated to reimburse the city all costs of the city relating to the work performed and administration thereof, together with an additional 20 percent of such cost. Such amounts shall be payable within 30 days of the date of the bill and may be recovered in any manner provided for in this code or at law.

(E) Where the permittee operates and leaves in place structures or facilities in, upon or along the right-of-way, the permittee or successors shall maintain and keep them in good order and repair.

(F) The permittee shall be responsible for restoration of the street for two years after completion of any activity which disturbed the surface of the street. If there is a failure of the street, including a slope or other appurtenance thereto, in the area of the permitted work within two years after the completion of the permitted work and there is no similar failure of the street beyond the area of the permitted work, the permittee has absolute responsibility to make restoration of this area unless the permittee delivers clear and convincing evidence to the city manager demonstrating that the failure was caused by another person. Having a bond, other security or an agreement to secure restoration costs does not relieve the permittee of the restoration obligations imposed.

(G) Acknowledgment by the city’s inspector that all or part of the permitted work has been completed does not constitute approval or acceptance of the work or agreement that the work was performed in accordance with the applicable standards. Acknowledgment of completion by the inspector will not act as a release of the permittee or waiver by the city of its right to seek performance or restitution from the permittee.

(H) Relocate its facilities and equipment or take such other reasonable action as may be necessary to accommodate public improvements, such as alterations, changes or improvements to or on any street, sidewalk or other public way, at no expense to the city.

(I) If at any time a structure or facility installed by permittee shall become a hazard from any cause whatsoever, the permittee and its successors shall remain responsible for having the hazardous condition removed, repaired, or otherwise corrected within a period of 30 days after receipt of written notice, unless a shorter period of time is established by the city manager due to the emergency nature of the circumstance. (Ord. 3748 § 2, 2016; Ord. 3689 § 2, 2011; Ord. 3466 § 2, 1997)


903.13 Inspections. 

(A) Before undertaking any construction or installation of equipment or facilities, the permittee shall provide the city manager with at least 48 hours’ advance notice of any work to be performed including location and period of time involved in the undertaking.

(B) The city manager shall have the right to inspect the work at any time to be certain it is being done in accordance with the permit, the requirements of this code and applicable city regulations and other applicable laws and regulations.

(C) The city manager or its designated representative shall have the right to stop work that is not being performed in accordance with the requirements of this code and applicable city regulations and the permit.

(D) When completed, a plan shall be submitted to the city manager showing the location of facilities and equipment and identifying same. (Ord. 3748 § 2, 2016; Ord. 3466 § 2, 1997)


903.14 Emergency work.

Emergency repairs involving the placing of facilities or opening of the surface within the right-of-way may be performed prior to obtaining a permit under the following circumstances:

(A) Utility owners or operators may obtain emergency permit cards by submitting an application to the city manager. The application shall be accompanied by payment of the fee established in the applicable schedule of fees. 

(B) The utility facility owner or operator shall, within five days of the emergency, notify the city manager by telephone, electronic mail or facsimile when the necessity for an emergency repair has occurred.

(C) Application for a regular permit shall be made within five days of the emergency to confirm and describe, in detail, the reason for the emergency, the date, time and place the work was done; and a description of work performed. The application number shall then be entered on the emergency permit card by the applicant.

(D) Work performed under authority of an emergency permit card shall conform to the requirements of this code and applicable city regulations.

(E) An emergency permit card shall be valid for one year. It must be renewed each subsequent year.

(F) The utility shall be responsible for assigning the proper emergency permit cards to its work crews. (Ord. 3748 §§ 2, 8, 2016; Ord. 3466 § 2, 1997)


903.15 Consent of adjoining property owners. 

The permission granted under this code does not relieve the permittee and/or its contractors from obtaining any consent otherwise required from the owner or owners of the abutting property and does not confer upon the permittee and/or its contractor the right to cut, remove or destroy trees or shrubbery within the legal limits of the street except under such conditions, restrictions and regulations as the city may prescribe. (Ord. 3466 § 2, 1997)


903.16 Modification of conditions.

When a term or condition of this code or city regulations or specifications cannot be met, an applicant or permittee may request, in writing, that the city manager modify that term or condition. If it is not required by law, the city manager may make a modification under the following circumstances:

(A) The proposed modification represents the minimum feasible deviation from the term or condition to be modified.

(B) The requested modification is necessary to avoid hardship which is not mere economic hardship.

(C) The city engineer or other designated and qualified representative has approved the modification.

(D) If a requested modification is granted by the city manager, the permit will specify the allowable modification. (Ord. 3748 § 2, 2016; Ord. 3466 § 2, 1997)


903.17 Remedies for violation.

Violation of this code, the applicable city regulations and specifications and the permit requirements may result in any one or more of the following actions:

(A) Upon receipt of verbal or written notice of violations from the authorized representative of the city manager, the city manager may order the permittee to cease any further work in the permitted area except to restore the area to a safe condition. No further work may commence in the permitted area until the violations have been remedied. Where the permittee has received verbal notice of the violations, written notice shall be sent to the permittee within two business days of receipt of the verbal notice.

(B) The city manager may revoke the permit or emergency permit card.

(C) The city manager may order the removal of facilities installed without a permit or in violation of the provisions of this article.

(D) The city manager may institute a proceeding before the district judge or in a court of law to recover penalties as provided in this code, or an action in a court of law to abate the violation, or for any other remedy allowed at law.

(E) If the applicant fails to rectify a defect which presents an immediate or imminent safety or health hazard within 48 hours or any other defect within 60 days after written notice from the city manager to do so, the city or a contractor hired by the city may do the work and impose upon the applicant the cost thereof, together with an additional 20 percent of the cost, which may be recovered in the manner provided above.

(F) The city manager may institute an action to recover the penalties and fees imposed by this code which action may include obtaining and executing on a judgment or filing a municipal claim and lien for the amounts due.

(G) The city manager may take such other action as may be allowed at law and necessary or proper to alleviate violations, after consultation with the solicitor. (Ord. 3748 §§ 2, 9, 2016; Ord. 3466 § 2, 1997)


903.18 Revocation of permit. 

A permit may be revoked under the following circumstances:

(A) Whenever the city manager determines that the work is not being performed in accord with the requirements of this code, the city regulations or specifications, or the permit, that the permitted facility is not being properly maintained, is in violation of a condition of the permit or this code, the city regulations or specifications, or where the activity or facility constitutes a hazard to traffic or interferes with the proper use of the highway by the city or the public.

(B) For nonpayment of a fee required by this code including default of a check submitted for payment. (Ord. 3748 § 2, 2016; Ord. 3466 § 2, 1997)


903.19 Reserved. 


903.20 Enforcement procedures.

(A) Notice of Violation. Upon determining that a violation has occurred or is occurring, the city manager shall provide the violator(s) with a written notice of the violation which shall include the following information:

(1) The code and applicable city regulations or specifications being violated, together with reference to the sections involved.

(2) The conduct which constitutes the violation, together with specific location, dates and persons involved.

(3) The penalty imposed under this code due to the violation.

(4) The action to be taken to remedy the violation with a reasonable period of time to make corrections, as appropriate, not to exceed 30 days.

(5) The person(s) to contact concerning remedial action or other concerns.

(6) The additional enforcement action that may be taken if the violation does not cease.

(B) Service of Notice. The notice required above shall be either served personally upon the violator(s) or by registered mail, return receipt requested, or as a last resort by regular mail to the last known address as reasonably ascertained from the public records.

(C) Appeals. A violator receiving a notice of violation may appeal to the code appeals board and request a hearing in accordance with the Local Agency Laws of Pennsylvania. An appeal must be filed with the city manager within 10 days of the date of the notice of violation. (Ord. 3748 §§ 2, 10, 2016; Ord. 3466 § 2, 1997)


903.99 Penalty. 

Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of this code, the applicable city regulations or specifications or condition of permit, or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order or direction of the city manager or its designated representatives, shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine not to exceed $600.00 per violation, plus costs of prosecution including court costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the city in the enforcement proceedings. In default of such payment, such person shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 10 days. Each day or portion thereof that a violation is found to exist shall constitute a separate offense. Each section of the code which is being violated shall also constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 3748 § 2, 2016; Ord. 3466 § 2, 1997. Formerly 903.19.)


Article 905       

SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR

Sections:

905.01  Permit required from city engineer.

905.02  Compliance with plans and specifications of city engineer.

905.03  Permit fee by council resolution.

905.99  Penalty.


905.01       Permit required from city engineer.

No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall construct, pave, curb, repave or recurb any sidewalk fronting on any of the public streets, ways or avenues of the city without first obtaining a repair and improvement permit from the city engineer’s office. (Ord. 2747 § 1, 1970) 


905.02       Compliance with plans and specifications of city engineer.

The construction, paving, curbing, repaving or recurbing of sidewalks shall be in accordance with the plans, specifications and requirements established by the city engineer and approved by resolution of council, and which shall be on file in the city engineer’s office and designated as sidewalk plans and specifications. (Ord. 2747 § 2, 1970) 


905.03       Permit fee by council resolution.

The fee for a repair and improvement permit shall be established by resolution of council, and attached to the sidewalk plans and specifications. (Ord. 2747 § 3, 1970)


905.99       Penalty.

Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be fined not more than $300.00 together with costs of prosecution, and in default thereof shall be imprisoned for not more than 90 days. (Ord. 2747 § 4, 1970)


Article 907       POLES

(Repealed by Ord. 3466)


Article 908       CONSTRUCTION OF CURB CUTS

Sections:

908.01  Curbs protected.

908.02  Permits required.

908.03  Saving clause.

908.99  Penalty.


908.01       Curbs protected.

No person shall drive or park or permit the driving or parking of any vehicle (of any nature or description) over any curb marking the boundary of any paved street (or the cartway of any unpaved street) in the City of Meadville except at the location of a curb cut permitted under and pursuant to the terms of this article and constructed pursuant to plans and specifications approved by the city engineer of the City of Meadville. (Ord. 3187, 1988)


908.02       Permits required.

No person shall cut, modify, alter, repair, or otherwise affect any curb marking the boundary of any paved street (or the cartway of any unpaved street) in the City of Meadville without first obtaining a permit therefore from the office of the city engineer. No person shall construct any curb, cut, modification, alteration or repair except in accord with standards and specifications approved by the city engineer. The city engineer shall promulgate rules and regulations for the grant of curb cut permits which regulations, and all amendments thereto, shall be approved by the vote of the city council of the City of Meadville. Such regulations shall specify standards for the grant of curb cut permits in consideration of traffic flow, safety, land use regulation and other proper considerations. Such regulations shall further contain standards and specifications for the consideration and maintenance of curb cut areas. The regulations shall require the payment of a reasonable fee for review of the request and for the grant of any appropriate permit. (Ord. 3187, 1988)


908.03       Saving clause.

All curb cuts existing on the date of the final enactment of this article which were created by specific permit of the City of Meadville are hereby recognized as and for continuing lawful curb cuts for the purpose of the administration of this article. Any and all cuts or modifications to curbs which were made prior to the date of this article without specific permit of the City of Meadville shall not be recognized as, and for lawful curb cuts and upon restoration of the subject curb, shall not be recreated except in accord with the terms of this article. (Ord. 3187, 1988)


908.99       Penalty.

Any person or entity who or which violates the terms of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine which shall not exceed $300.00. (Ord. 3187, 1988)


Article 909       TREES ON SIDEWALKS

Sections:

909.01  Definitions.

909.02  Prohibited activity.

909.03  Permit application.

909.04  Permit issuance.

909.05  Obligation of owners and possessors.

909.06  Declaration of public nuisance.

909.07  City tree care.

909.08  Responsibilities of office of planning and development.

909.09  Organization and responsibilities of shade tree commission.

909.10  Violations, remedies and penalties.

909.99  Penalty.


909.01       Definitions.

"Office of planning and development" shall mean the City of Meadville office of planning and development and any representative of that office specifically designated by the city manager to carry out responsibilities set forth in this article.

"Persons" shall mean any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation or other group or entity.

"Substantial injury" shall mean such injury and damage which endangers the continued life of any tree.

"Top" or "topping of a tree" shall mean the cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree as to substantially remove the natural canopy.

"Tree" shall mean a woody plant with one main trunk which generally reaches 20 feet or more in height, at maturity, and shall not include shrubs or bushes.

 "Within city streets" shall mean any area within the right-of-way of a street or roadway officially accepted as a city street, open to and used for public travel within the City of Meadville. (Ord. 3338, 1993; Ord. 2831, 1973)


909.02       Prohibited activity.

It shall be unlawful:

(A) To plant, cut down or top, or cause to be planted, cut down or topped any tree within city streets without a permit issued by the office of planning and development pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of this article.

(B) To plant or cause to be planted any tree within city streets except in accordance with spacing requirements set forth in Schedule A which is incorporated herein, which establishes required distances from other trees, street intersections, fire hydrants, curbs, sidewalks, underground water, sewer or other utility and overhead utility wire, cable or facility as measured from the main tree trunk based upon classification of trees by species and size as set forth in the regulations adopted in accordance with this article.

(C) For any person engaged in multiple tree trimming or tree removal activities for or on behalf of any utility company or other person to trim any trees within city streets without a permit issued by the office of planning and development pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of this article, and for any such person to conduct such activities in any manner which is not in conformity with regulations adopted by city council in accordance with the provisions of this article.

(D) To apply chemicals in the nature of fungicides or pesticides to trees within city streets without a permit issued by the office of planning and development pursuant to the provisions of this article and except in accordance with applicable federal or state laws, rules and regulations relating thereto.

(E) To fasten ropes, wires, cables, electric attachments, signs or other devices to a tree within city streets without a permit issued by the office of planning and development pursuant to the provisions of this article, and except in conformity with regulations adopted by city council in accordance with the provisions of this article.

(F) To cut or disturb roots, to obstruct free access of air and water to roots, to maintain fires in close proximity to trees, or to undertake demolition or construction work without protecting or guarding nearby trees, where such activity is likely to cause substantial injury or destruction of a tree within city streets. (Ord. 3338, 1993; Ord. 2831, 1973)


909.03       Permit application.

To obtain any permit to conduct any activities governed by the provisions of MMC 909.02, a written application together with such fee as may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council shall be submitted to the office of the planning and development. The application shall contain the following information:

(A) Name, address and phone number of the applicant.

(B) Location and description of property on which activity requiring permit is to occur.

(C) Owner(s) of the specified property if different from applicant.

(D) A description of activity to be undertaken and requiring a permit including all relevant details including a description of trees affected; their location with respect to streets, property lines, sidewalks and structures; types of chemicals or other matter to be applied; persons doing the work; and any other information requested by the office of planning and development and reasonably necessary to determine whether a permit should be issued.

(E) For persons engaged in multiple tree trimming, cutting, pruning and removal activities for a fee or as a business, the applicant shall be required to demonstrate possession of liability insurance covering the activities involved in minimum amounts of $300,000 for bodily injury or death and $100,000 for property damages. (Ord. 3338, 1993; Ord. 2831, 1973)


909.04       Permit issuance.

A permit shall only be issued after the office of planning and development determines that the planting, trimming or cutting down of a tree, or application of chemicals, or other matter or activity involving a tree or trees within a city street, will be performed in accordance with the regulations promulgated and adopted pursuant to the provisions of this article and will not be detrimental to traffic or to utility services in or about the street, and will not otherwise be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 3338, 1993; Ord. 2831, 1973)


909.05       Obligation of owners and possessors.

(A) Except for trees planted by the city, it shall be the obligation of the owner or possessor of property on which there is a tree within a city street to:

(1) Trim and prune such trees within city streets so that no part of its limbs, branches or foliage shall have a clearance of less that eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk or of less than 14 feet above the surface of the roadway, street or alley. Tree trimmings shall be properly removed and disposed.

(2) Trim and remove dead, diseased, broken and decayed limbs and branches from trees within city streets which constitute a hazard to sidewalk pedestrians, street traffic, or to the public generally. 

(3) Remove from within city streets all dead, diseased or such other trees, including stumps, which constitute a hazard to the public by reason of diseased or other dangerous condition.

(B) All activities required by this section shall be conducted in accord with the requirements adopted by this article and all applicable regulations hereunder, and pursuant to a permit issued as herein provided, if applicable. (Ord. 3338, 1993; Ord. 2831, 1973)


909.06       Declaration of public nuisance.

A tree within a city street which causes a hazard to sidewalk pedestrians, street traffic or to the public generally by reasons of its dead or diseased condition, or dead, diseased, broken or decayed limbs or branches, or limbs, branches or foliage which hang into the path of street traffic or persons using sidewalks shall constitute a public nuisance and be subject to correction or abatement as is generally provided for the abatement of public nuisances at the sole cost and expense of the owner or person in possession of the subject property, except for trees planted by the city. (Ord. 3338, 1993; Ord. 2831, 1973)


909.07       City tree care.

(A) The city shall have the right but not the duty to plant trees within the city streets to preserve and enhance the symmetry and beauty of the city streets.

(B) The city shall have the right, but not the duty, to trim, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within city streets which may be dead, diseased, or in an unsafe condition or which may interfere with or cause harm to sewers, water lines, and other public utilities, or to public improvements; which may pose a hazard to traffic or pedestrians; which may interfere with traffic control devices or street lights; which have been damaged by storm or other occurrences; or which in any other manner may pose a threat to the public health or safety.

(C) Except with respect to trees which have been planted by the city, the city shall make reasonable efforts to provide the owner of adjacent property with notice of its planned action with respect to trees and shrubs within city streets and to obtain consents to proposed actions by such owner.

(D) In the event the city engages in maintenance activities under this article with respect to trees within city streets, not planted by the city, the property owner or possessor shall not be liable for the costs incurred with respect to any tree not planted by the city unless enforcement proceedings have previously been instituted by the city under MMC 909.10 with respect to a violation of MMC 909.05. (Ord. 3338, 1993; Ord. 2831, 1973)


909.08       Responsibilities of office of planning and development.

(A) The office of planning and development shall, in cooperation with the shade tree commission, develop and establish regulations for the various classifications of trees, and the planting, maintenance, protection and removal of trees within the city streets. These regulations shall be effective upon approval by resolution of city council. These regulations may be changed from time to time in accordance with this procedure.

(B) The office of planning and development shall also be responsible for administering the provisions of this article and for enforcing the regulations and provisions of this code. (Ord. 3338, 1993; Ord. 2831, 1973)


909.09       Organization and responsibilities of shade tree commission.

(A) Organization. The shade tree commission will have five members, all of whom shall be residents of the city, who shall be appointed by the city council. In addition, nonvoting associate members who may or may not be residents of the city, may be approved by the city council. The members of the commission shall serve without compensation.

(B) Term of Office. The members of the commission shall be appointed for a term of five years and these terms shall be staggered so that one member’s term expires each year. A vacancy on the commission, which occurs for reason other than the expiration of a term, shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term. A member may remain on the commission after expiration of his or her term until a replacement is duly appointed or qualified.

(C) Officers and Actions. The members of the commission shall elect a chairman, a vice chairman, and such other officers as appropriate. The terms of the officers so elected shall be for one year. All officers shall be eligible for re-election. A majority of the voting members shall be a quorum for the purpose of taking action. A majority of votes cast at any meeting at which a quorum exists shall determine all issues.

(D) Responsibilities and Duties.

(1) The commission shall study and make recommendations to the office of planning and development and to the city council on all matters affecting trees within city streets, including ordinances and regulations for the placement, removal, care and protection of trees.

(2) The commission may, with the approval of city council, solicit and accept grants and contributions. Funds obtained by the commission in the form of grants and contributions shall be placed in the memorial tree fund or other special funds established by the city and may be used by the commission in a manner approved by the city council. Such funds should be deposited and administered as funds and accounts of the city under the supervision of the city finance director.

(3) With the approval of council, the commission may utilize the services of a community forester who shall be responsible to the office of planning and development for the performance of activities authorized by city council and included by council in any annual budget appropriations or special appropriations designated for the commission.

(4) The commission shall make an annual report to the city council by October 31st of each year stating its accomplishments and work for the preceding year. (Ord. 3338, 1993; Ord. 2831, 1973)


909.10       Violations, remedies and penalties.

(A) Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with the requirements or obligations set forth in MMC 909.02 and 909.05 shall be served with a written order issued by the office of planning and development requiring such action as appropriate to correct a hazardous condition or a condition in violation of this article or regulations promulgated pursuant to this article.

(B) The subject orders shall, except in the case of emergency or eminent hazard to the public health or safety, require correction of the hazardous condition or violation within a period of not more than 30 days.

(C) Any person who is aggrieved by any order issued pursuant to this section may appeal the order to a board consisting of the director of public works, a community forester appointed by the city manager and the chairman of the shade tree commission by filing a written notice of appeal with the office of the city manager within 10 days of the date of the subject order or notice and said board shall then conduct a hearing in accord with the Pennsylvania Local Agency Law to determine whether the order was properly issued and whether the appellant is entitled to relief from the order.

(D) In the event a person fails or refuses to comply with any order of the office of planning and development which is not subject to continuing appeal as provided by this article or by general law or otherwise fails to correct any prohibited condition or to cease any continuing violation then the city may take one or more of the following actions:

(1) Revoke any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article.

(2) Correct or remedy the subject condition or violation at the cost of the property owner or possessor, or other person responsible for the violation or subject condition. This cost together with a reasonable administrative fee shall be paid by the property owner or other person responsible for the violation or for failing to take any action required by this article. Property owners and other persons responsible for the violation or subject conditions shall be jointly and severally liable for compliance with the provisions of this article and for the payment of any and all sums which may be due to the city hereunder.

(3) Should any property owner or other person responsible for the subject condition or violation fail to pay the cost of any corrective action together with the administrative fee authorized herein, such costs may be assessed against the subject premises and the owners thereof and collected as a municipal lien or collected otherwise as permitted by law.

(4) Institute a summary proceeding before the district justice for imposition of a penalty as provided for under MMC 909.99.

(5) Proceed with an action as permitted by law for any other appropriate relief at law or in equity. (Ord. 3338, 1993; Ord. 2831, 1973)


909.99       Penalty.

Any persons who shall violate the terms of this article shall, upon summary conviction thereof before a district justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $300.00. Each day during which any violation is continued shall be deemed to be a separate offense. (Ord. 3338, 1993; Ord. 2831, 1973)

Schedule A

(A) No tree shall be planted less than:

(1) Forty feet from any street corner as measured from the point of the nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines.

(2) Ten feet from any driveway as measured from the edge of the driveway nearest the tree.

(3) Ten feet from any utility pole.

(4) Fifteen feet from any fire hydrant.

(B) No tree classified by size as small, medium or large and as established by regulations duly adopted by city council pursuant to this article shall be planted less than the following distances from the items listed below as measured from the nearest point of the items indicated:

From curbs and sidewalks:

	Small trees	2 feet

	Medium trees	3 feet

	Large trees	4 feet

From underground water, sewer or other utility facility:

	Medium trees	5 feet

	Large trees	5 feet

From overhead utility cable, wire or similar utility facility:

	Medium trees	10 feet

	Large trees	10 feet

(C) No tree classified by size as small, medium or large and as established by regulations duly adopted by the city council pursuant to this article shall be planted less than the following distances from other trees as so classified:

	Small trees	25 feet

	Medium trees	35 feet

	Large trees	45 feet 

(Ord. 3338, 1993; Ord. 2831, 1973)


Article 911       SEWER AND WATER CONNECTIONS

Sections:

911.01  Tap-on or connection permit required from city engineer.

911.02  Compliance with regulations of city engineer.

911.03  Tap-on fee and permit fee by council resolution.

911.04  Connections for or discharge of roof or surface water into sanitary sewers prohibited.

911.99  Penalty.


911.01       Tap-on or connection permit required from city engineer.

No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall tap on or connect a private drain or water line with any public or private sewer and any water line or supply now built or to be built and laid in any public street, alley or legal right-of-way or with any public sewer or water supply of and in the city, without first obtaining a tap-on permit from the city engineer’s office for such purpose. (Ord. 2748 § 1, 1970) 


911.02       Compliance with regulations of city engineer.

Whoever desires to tap on to the various systems set forth in MMC 911.01 shall comply with the plans, specifications and requirements of the tap-on regulations as prepared and amended by the city engineer and approved by resolution of council, and which shall be on file in the city engineer’s office. (Ord. 2748 § 2, 1970)   


911.03       Tap-on fee and permit fee by council resolution.

A tap-on fee and a permit fee shall be charged for connections to city sewer and water facilities at a rate as established by resolution of council upon recommendation of the city engineer. Permit and tap-on fees shall be on file in the city engineer’s office and shall be part of the tap-on regulations. (Ord. 2748 § 3, 1970) 


911.04       Connections for or discharge of roof or surface water into sanitary sewers prohibited.

(A) No person shall connect any drain pipe or conduit of any kind in the city to the sanitary sewers or to any pipe leading thereto for the purpose of discharging any roof or surface drainage water into such sanitary sewers. 

(B) No person by any means shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sanitary sewers of the city any roof or surface water, or maintain any pipe or conduit by which roof or surface water shall be discharged into the sanitary sewers or into any pipe or connections leading into such sanitary sewers. (Ord. 882 §§ 1, 2, 1908) 


911.99       Penalty.

Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be fined not more than $300.00 together with costs of prosecution, and in default thereof shall be imprisoned for not more than 90 days. (Ord. 2748 § 4, 1970) 


Article 912 PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

I. General Provisions

912.01    Purpose and policy.

912.02    Administration.

912.03    Abbreviations.

912.04    Definitions.

II. General Sewer Use Requirements

912.05    Prohibited discharge standards.

912.06    National categorical pretreatment standards.

912.07    State pretreatment standards.

912.08    Local limits.

912.09    Owner’s right of revision.

912.10    Special agreements and waivers.

912.11    Dilution.

III. Pretreatment of Wastewater

912.12    Pretreatment facilities.

912.13    Additional pretreatment measures.

912.14    Accidental discharge/slug control plans.

912.15    Hauled wastewater.

IV. Wastewater Discharge Permit Application

912.16    Wastewater analysis.

912.17    Wastewater discharge permit – Requirement.

912.18    Wastewater discharge permit – Existing connections.

912.19    Wastewater discharge permit – New connections.

912.20    Wastewater discharge permit – Changed circumstances.

912.21    Wastewater discharge permit – Application contents.

912.22    Application signatories and certification.

912.23    Wastewater discharge permit – Decisions.

V. Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process

912.24    Wastewater discharge permit – Duration.

912.25    Wastewater discharge permit – Contents.

912.26    Wastewater discharge permit – Appeals.

912.27    Wastewater discharge permit – Modification.

912.28    Wastewater discharge permit – Transfer.

912.29    Wastewater discharge permit – Revocation.

912.30    Wastewater discharge permit – Reissuance.

VI. Reporting Requirements

912.31    Baseline monitoring reports.

912.32    Compliance schedule progress reports.

912.33    Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.

912.34    Periodic compliance reports.

912.35    Reports of changed conditions.

912.36    Reports of potential problems.

912.37    Reports from unpermitted users.

912.38    Notice of violation – Repeat sampling and reporting.

912.39    Analytical requirements.

912.40    Periodic calibration.

912.41    Approval of analytical laboratories.

912.42    Sample collection.

912.43    Timing.

912.44    Record keeping.

VII. Compliance Monitoring

912.45    Right of entry – Inspection and sampling.

912.46    Search warrants.

VIII. Information

912.47    Confidential information.

IX. Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance

912.48    Publication of users in significant noncompliance.

X. Administrative Enforcement Remedies

912.49    Notification of violation.

912.50    Consent orders.

912.51    Show cause hearing.

912.52    Compliance orders.

912.53    Cease and desist orders.

912.54    Administrative civil penalties.

912.55    Emergency suspensions.

912.56    Termination of discharge.

XI. Judicial Enforcement Remedies

912.57    Injunctive relief.

912.58    Civil penalties.

912.59    Criminal prosecution.

912.60    Remedies nonexclusive.

XII. Supplemental Enforcement Action

912.61    Financial assurances.

XIII. Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations

912.62    Upset.

912.63    Prohibited discharge standards.

912.64    Bypass.

912.65    Reservation of rights.

XIV. Pretreatment Charges and Fees

912.66    Pretreatment charges and fees.

I. General Provisions


912.01 Purpose and policy.

This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works (“POTW”) from the City of Meadville and enables the City of Meadville and the Meadville area sewer authority to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403), the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law (35 P.S. Section 691.1 et seq.), the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Standards for Discharges of Industrial Waste to POTWs (25 PA Code Section 97.91 et seq.) and NPDES Permit No. PA0026271 issued to the Meadville area sewer authority. The objectives of this article are:

(A) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which interfere with operation of a POTW, including interference with its use or disposal of municipal sludge;

(B) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW;

(C) To protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public;

(D) To improve opportunities to recycle and reclaim municipal and industrial wastewaters and sludges;

(E) To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the POTW; and

(F) To enable the Meadville area sewer authority to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject.

This article shall apply to all users of the POTW. This article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. (Ord. 3698 § 1(1.2), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.02 Administration.

It is intended that this article will be implemented, administered and enforced by the Meadville area sewer authority (“MASA” or “owner”). The City of Meadville hereby designates MASA as its representative and agent for implementation, administration and enforcement of this article and grants MASA and its duly appointed agents and representatives such power as necessary to fully implement and enforce the provisions of this article, including, without limitation, the power to obtain search warrants, assess and collect civil and criminal penalties, issue enforcement orders and seek judicial enforcement. The use of the term “owner” in this article is intended to acknowledge this delegation of power and responsibility to MASA, as the owner of the POTW and is not intended to diminish or negate the city’s authority to administer and enforce this article, which powers are reserved to the city. Accordingly, the term “owner” as used in this article may also include the City of Meadville as necessary to assist MASA, as necessary to comply with federal and state laws or regulations where MASA has failed to act, or as necessary to protect the POTW or the environment where MASA has failed to act. (Ord. 3698 § 1(1.3), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.03 Abbreviations.

The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings:

	BOD	-	Biochemical oxygen demand

	BMP	-	Best management practice

	BMR	-	Baseline monitoring report

	CBOD	-	Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand

	CFR	-	Code of Federal Regulations

	CIU	-	Categorical industrial user

	COD	-	Chemical oxygen demand

	EPA	-	U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

	gpd	-	Gallons per day

	IU	-	Industrial user

	mg/l	-	Milligrams per liter

	MASA	-	Meadville area sewer authority

	NPDES	-	National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System

	NSCIU	-	Nonsignificant categorical industrial user 

	POTW	-	Publicly owned treatment works

	RCRA	-	Resource Conservation and Recovery Act

	SIC	-	Standard industrial classification

	SIU	-	Significant industrial user

	SNC	-	Significant noncompliance

	TSS	-	Total suspended solids

	U.S.C.	-	United States Code

(Ord. 3698 § 1(1.4), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.04 Definitions.

Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.

(A) “Act” or “the Act” means the federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.

(B) “Approval authority” means the regional administrator of EPA Region III.

(C) Authorized or Duly Authorized Representative of the User.

(1) If the user is a corporation: 

(a) The president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation; or

(b) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.

(2) If the user is a partnership, or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively.

(3) If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee.

(4) The individuals described in subsections (C)(1) through (3) of this section may designate a duly authorized representative if:

(a) The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in subsections (C)(1) through (3) of this section;

(b) The authorization specifies either an individual or a position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and

(c) The written authorization is submitted to the owner.

(5) If an authorization under subsection (C)(4) of this section is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of subsection (C)(4) of this section must be submitted to the owner prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.

(D) Best Management Practices. The term “best management practices” or “BMPs” means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Division II of this article and 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. A BMP should include the following elements, to the extent applicable: (1) there should be specific notice to those users to which the BMP applies and what is required; (2) there should be specifications or criteria that any required control equipment must meet; (3) there should be specific requirements for or prohibitions on certain practices, activities and/or discharges to ensure that use of the BMP is protective; (4) there should be operation and maintenance requirements specified; (5) there should be timeframes directing when BMPs must be implemented; (6) there should be compliance certification, reporting and record keeping requirements; (7) there should be a provision allowing the owner to reopen or revoke the BMP conditions, including allowing the addition of numerical limits; and (8) such other requirements as the owner determines. 

(E) “Biochemical oxygen demand” or “BOD” means a measure of the molecular oxygen utilized during a five-day incubation period for the biochemical degradation of organic material and the oxygen used to oxidize inorganic material, at 20 degrees Celsius.

(F) “Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand” or “CBOD” means a measure of the molecular oxygen utilized during a five-day incubation period for the biochemical degradation of organic material and the oxygen used to oxidize inorganic material, at 20 degrees Celsius, except that oxygen used to oxidize reduced forms of nitrogen has been prevented by an inhibitor. 

(G) “Categorical industrial user” means an industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard.

(H) “Categorical pretreatment standard” or “categorical standard” means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N.

(I) “Chemical oxygen demand” or “COD” means a measure of the oxygen equivalent of the organic matter content of a sample that is susceptible to oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant.

(J) “Composite sample” means a sample formed by mixing discrete samples or aliquots.

(K) “Daily maximum” means the arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day.

(L) “Daily maximum limit” means the maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.

(M) “Environmental Protection Agency” or “EPA” means the United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water protection division director, or other duly authorized official of said agency.

(N) “Existing source” means any source of discharge that is not a “new source.”

(O) “Flow-proportional composite sample” means a composite sample in which each individual sample or aliquot is collected after the passage of a defined volume of discharge.

(P) “Grab sample” means a sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.

(Q) “Indirect discharge” or “discharge” means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act.

(R) “Industrial waste” means any liquid, gaseous or water borne wastes from industrial processes or commercial establishments as distinct from sewage.

(S) “Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit” means the maximum concentration or mass loading limit of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.

(T) “Interference” means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and, therefore, is a cause of a violation of the owner’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.

(U) “Mass loading limit” means the pounds per day (or other specific interval) of a particular pollutant allowed to be discharged to the POTW at any time.

(V) “Medical waste” means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.

(W) “New source” means:

(1) Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standard under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section; provided, that:

(a) The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or

(b) The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or

(c) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.

(2) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (W)(1)(b) or (c) of this section, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.

(3) Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or operator has:

(a) Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program:

(i) Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or

(ii) Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or

(b) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.

(X) “Noncontact cooling water” means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.

(Y) “Owner” shall mean the Meadville area sewer authority which is a municipal authority formed by the City of Meadville and the township of West Mead to own, possess and control the sanitary sewage systems of the City of Meadville and the township of West Mead and to accept wastewater from a portion of Vernon Township.

(Z) “Pass through” means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the owner’s NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.

(AA) “Person” means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities.

(BB) “pH” means a mathematical expression of the intensity of the acidic or basic character of a solution or -log [H+].

(CC) “Pollutant” means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).

(DD) “Pretreatment” means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.

(EE) “Pretreatment requirements” means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.

(FF) “Pretreatment standards” or “standards” shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.

(GG) “Prohibited discharge standards” or “prohibited discharges” means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in MMC 912.05.

(HH) “Publicly owned treatment works” or “POTW” means a “treatment works,” as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1292) which is owned by the Meadville area sewer authority. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.

(II) “Septic tank waste” means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.

(JJ) “Sewage” means human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).

(KK) Significant Industrial User.

(1) A “significant industrial user” is:

(a) A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or

(b) A user that:

(i) Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater);

(ii) Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or

(iii) Is designated as such by the owner on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.

(2) Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (KK)(1)(b) of this section has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the owner may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.

(3) The owner may determine that a categorical industrial user is a nonsignificant categorical industrial user (“NSCIU”) and should not be considered a significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met:

(a) The industrial user, prior to the owner’s finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements;

(b) The industrial user annually submits the certification statement required by MMC 912.06(M), together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and

(c) The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater.

Where the owner has determined that an industrial user meets the criteria for classification as a nonsignificant categorical industrial user, the owner shall evaluate, at least once per year, whether an industrial user continues to meet the criteria in 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2).

(LL) Slug Discharge. A “slug discharge” is any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s regulations, local limits or permit conditions.

(MM) “Slug load” or “slug” means any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, or at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in MMC 912.05.

(NN) “Standard industrial classification (SIC) code” means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget.

(OO) “Storm water” means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.

(PP) “Suspended solids” means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.

(QQ) “Time-proportional composite sample” means a composite sample in which each individual sample or aliquot is collected after the passage of a defined period of time, regardless of the rate of flow during that period of time.

(RR) “User” or “industrial user” means a source of indirect discharge.

(SS) “Wastewater” means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.

(TT) “Wastewater treatment plant” or “treatment plant” means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. (Ord. 3698 § 1(1.5), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)

II. General Sewer Use Requirements


912.05 Prohibited discharge standards.

(A) General Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.

(B) Specific Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:

(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;

(2) Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 12.5 (unless the owner has waived the upper limit), or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;

(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater than two inches or 5.08 centimeters in any dimension;

(4) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 

(5) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65.5 degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius); 

(6) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;

(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems;

(8) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the owner in accordance with MMC 912.15;

(9) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;

(10) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations, and specifically authorized by the owner;

(11) Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the owner;

(12) Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes, and specifically authorized by the owner;

(13) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the owner; 

(14) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test included in the owner’s NPDES permit;

(15) Any waste which is classified as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261 or applicable state regulations; and

(16) Detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW or receiving waters.

Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed, handled, stored or disposed in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. (Ord. 3698 § 1(2.1), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.06 National categorical pretreatment standards.

The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, are hereby incorporated, as though fully set forth herein. Copies of these standards are available for examination by the public in the office of the owner. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutants, substances or wastewater in violation of any federal categorical pretreatment standard applicable to such user.

(A) Expansion of Limits. Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the owner may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with subsections (F) and (I) of this section. When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the owner may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant developed per day or effluent concentration for purpose of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users. 

(B) Combined Wastestream. When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the owner shall impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).

(C) Variance. Pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13, EPA may grant an industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard a variance from that categorical pretreatment standard. If EPA has granted an industrial user such a variance, the owner shall treat that variance as the categorical pretreatment standard applicable to that industrial user.

(D) Net Gross Adjustment. A user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard may obtain a net/gross adjustment to the categorical pretreatment standard in accordance with the following provisions.

(1) Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the presence of pollutants in the industrial user’s intake water in accordance with this section. Any industrial user wishing to obtain credit for intake pollutants must make application to the owner. Upon request of the industrial user, the applicable standard will be calculated on a “net” basis (i.e., adjusted to reflect credit for pollutants in the intake water) if the requirements of subsection (D)(2) of this section are met.

(2) Criteria.

(a) Either (i) the applicable categorical pretreatment standards contained in 40 CFR Subchapter N specifically provide that they shall be applied on a net basis; or (ii) the industrial user demonstrates that the control system it proposes or uses to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standard would, if properly installed and operated, meet the standards in the absence of pollutants in the intake waters.

(b) Credit for generic pollutants such as biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), and oil and grease should not be granted unless the industrial user demonstrates that the constituents of the generic measure in the user’s influent are substantially similar to the constituents of the generic measure in the intake water or unless appropriate additional limits are placed on process water pollutants either at the outfall or elsewhere.

(c) Credit shall be granted only to the extent necessary to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standard(s), up to a maximum value equal to the influent value. Additional monitoring may be necessary to determine eligibility for credits and compliance with standard(s) adjusted under this section.

(d) Credit shall be granted only if the user demonstrates that the intake water is drawn from the same body of water as that to which the POTW discharges. The owner may waive this requirement if it finds that no environmental degradation will result.

(E) BMPS. To the extent provided by a categorical pretreatment standard, the owner may allow the use of best management practices as an alternative means of complying with, or in place of, the applicable categorical pretreatment standard.

(F) Conversion from Mass Loading Limits. The owner may convert the mass loading limits of the categorical pretreatment standards at 40 CFR Parts 414, 419, and 455 to concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to individual industrial users under the following conditions. When converting such limits to concentration limits, the owner must use the concentrations listed in the applicable subparts of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419, and 455 and document that dilution is not being substituted for treatment as prohibited by MMC 912.11.

(G) Removal Credits. The owner may grant removal credits to industrial users subject to a categorical pretreatment standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.7.

(H) Waiver of Monitoring. The owner may authorize the industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the industrial user. This authorization is subject to the following conditions:

(1) The owner may authorize a waiver where a pollutant is determined to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility; provided, that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable categorical standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater;

(2) The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective period of the permit or other equivalent individual control mechanism, but in no case longer than five years. The industrial user must submit a new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent control mechanism;

(3) In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility’s process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes;

(4) The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance with subsection (M) of this section and include the certification statement in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii);

(5) Nondetectable sample results may only be used as a demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR Part 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis;

(6) Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the owner shall be included as a condition in the industrial user’s control mechanism. The reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the industrial user in its request for the waiver shall be maintained by the owner for three years after expiration of the waiver;

(7) Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the industrial user’s control mechanism by the owner, the industrial user must certify on each report with the statement below, that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream due to activities of the industrial user:

Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR ____________________ [specify applicable National Pretreatment Standard part(s)], I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of ____________________ [list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since filing of the last periodic report under 40 CFR § 403.12(e)(1);

(8) In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is expected to be present based on changes that occur in the industrial user’s operations, the industrial user must immediately: comply with the monitoring requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(e)(1) or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the owner; and notify the owner; and

(9) This provision does not supersede certification processes and requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard. 

(I) Conversion of Concentration Limits. When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may request that the owner convert the limits to equivalent mass loading limits. The determination to convert concentration limits to mass loading limits is within the discretion of the owner. The owner may establish equivalent mass loading limits only if the industrial user meets all the following conditions in subsections (I)(1)(a) through (e) of this section.

(1) To be eligible for equivalent mass loading limits, the industrial user must:

(a) Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water conservation methods and technologies that substantially reduce water use during the term of its control mechanism;

(b) Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standard, and not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment;

(c) Provide sufficient information to establish the facility’s actual average daily flow rate for all wastestreams, based on data from a continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the facility’s long-term average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and long-term average production rate must be representative of current operating conditions;

(d) Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not appropriate to control the discharge; and

(e) Have consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards during the period prior to the industrial user’s request for equivalent mass loading limits.

(2) An industrial user subject to equivalent mass loading limits must:

(a) Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass loading limits;

(b) Continue to record the facility’s flow rates through the use of a continuous effluent flow monitoring device;

(c) Continue to record the facility’s production rates and notify the owner whenever production rates are expected to vary by more than 20 percent from its baseline production rates determined in subsection (I)(1)(c) of this section. Upon notification of a revised production rate, the owner must reassess the equivalent mass loading limit and revise the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and

(d) Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to subsection (I)(1)(a) of this section, so long as it discharges under an equivalent mass loading limit.

(3) An owner which chooses to establish equivalent mass loading limits:

(a) Must calculate the equivalent mass loading limit by multiplying the actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of the industrial user by the concentration-based daily maximum and monthly average standard for the applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit conversion factor;

(b) Upon notification of a revised production rate, must reassess the equivalent mass loading limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and

(c) May retain the same equivalent mass loading limit in subsequent control mechanism terms if the industrial user’s actual average daily flow rate was reduced solely as a result of the implementation of water conservation methods and technologies, and the actual average daily flow rates used in the original calculation of the equivalent mass loading limit were not based on the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to MMC 912.11. The industrial user must also be in compliance with 40 CFR 403.17 (regarding the prohibition of bypass).

(4) The owner may not express limits in terms of mass for pollutants such as pH, temperature, radiation, or other pollutants which cannot appropriately be expressed as mass. 

(J) Equivalent Limitations. Once included in its permit, the industrial user must comply with the equivalent limitations developed in this section in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived. 

(K) Use of Production or Flow Figures. Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for calculating maximum monthly average, or four-day average, limitations. Where such standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure shall be used in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent limitation.

(L) Production Changes. Any industrial user operating under a permit incorporating equivalent mass loading or concentration limits calculated from a production-based categorical pretreatment standard shall notify the owner within two business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not notifying the owner of such anticipated change will be required to meet the mass loading or concentration limits in its permit that were based on the original estimate of the long-term average production rate.

(M) Annual Certification by Nonsignificant Categorical Industrial Users. A facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user pursuant to MMC 912.04(KK) must annually submit the following certification statement, signed by an authorized or duly authorized representative of the user. This certification must accompany any report required by the owner:

Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR ____________________, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period from _______________, to ____________________ [month, days, year]:

(a) The facility described as ___________ [facility name] met the definition of a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User as described in § 403.3(v)(2); (b) the facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards and requirements during this reporting period; and (c) the facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period. This compliance certification is based upon the following information:

____________________

____________________

(Ord. 3698 § 1(2.2), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.07 State pretreatment standards.

Reserved. (Ord. 3698 § 1(2.3), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.08  Local limits.

As necessary to prevent interference with the POTW, to prevent pass through or sludge contamination with the POTW, to comply with its NPDES permit, to comply with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations, and to protect the POTW, human health and the environment, the owner may establish by ordinance, resolution, individual wastewater discharge permits, or otherwise, and review from time to time, local limits regulating the discharge of specific pollutants by users, which local limits may be more stringent than those set forth in MMC 912.05, 912.06 and/or 912.07.

(A) Local limits may be established for any substance which is discharged or is likely to be discharged to the POTW sewer system.

(B) Local limits may limit concentration, mass, or a combination of the two.

(C) Local limits may be established as necessary by the owner to prevent interference, pass through, sludge contamination, violations of the owner’s NPDES permit, or otherwise to protect the POTW, human health and the environment.

(D) Local limits may be included in individual wastewater discharge permits or otherwise applied to users as deemed appropriate by the owner.

(E) The owner may develop best management practices (BMPs), by ordinance, in individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits to implement local limits and the requirements of MMC 912.05. 

(F) Any discharge by a user of any pollutant in excess of any applicable local limit constitutes a violation of this article. (Ord. 3698 § 1(2.4), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.09 Owner’s right of revision.

As necessary to prevent interference with the POTW, to prevent pass through or sludge contamination with the POTW, to comply with its NPDES permit, to comply with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations, and to protect the POTW, human health and the environment, the owner reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. (Ord. 3698 § 1(2.5), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.10 Special agreements and waivers.

Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as prohibiting any special agreement or arrangement between the owner and any person, or for the owner to otherwise waive requirements herein, when conditions and circumstances making such special agreement(s), arrangement(s), or waiver(s) advisable and/or necessary, in the opinion of the owner, are present. In no event shall special agreement(s), arrangement(s), or waiver(s) permit any user to violate minimum federal pretreatment requirements (e.g., national categorical pretreatment standards).

In no case shall a special agreement, arrangement, or waiver of local limits allow for a user to discharge any pollutant which, alone or in combination with other user regulated discharges, would reasonably be expected to exceed the mass loadings determined by the owner as acceptable to the treatment plant based upon considerations of, among other things, interference, pass through, and sludge contamination. The owner may consider other factors (e.g., effect of the discharge on the POTW, future expansion, etc.) as it deems appropriate. In no event shall any special agreement, arrangement, or waiver allow the actual total industrial loadings to exceed the values set forth in the local limits’ analyses submitted by the owner to EPA and approved by EPA as part of the Meadville area sewer authority pretreatment program, if applicable.

The owner may require a user requesting a special agreement, arrangement, or waiver adjusting effluent limitations to submit supporting documentation indicating why the user cannot reasonably expect to meet the effluent limitation contained in its wastewater discharge permit, setting forth an expeditious schedule for obtaining compliance with such limitations, and including such other information as the owner may require. In granting any special agreement, arrangement or waiver, the owner may impose time limitations upon any reduced requirements and a compliance schedule for achieving full compliance. In granting any special agreement, arrangement or waiver, the owner may impose any other conditions deemed necessary to implement the purposes of the regulation.

If granting a special agreement, arrangement, or waiver would result in increased costs to the owner (e.g., treatment or sludge disposal costs), the owner may condition the special agreement, arrangement, or waiver upon the agreement of the user to pay those costs, and to provide security adequate in the judgment of the owner to assure payment of said costs. (Ord. 3698 § 1(2.6), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.11 Dilution.

No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The owner may impose mass loading limits on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass loading limits is appropriate. (Ord. 3698 § 1(2.7), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)

III. Pretreatment of Wastewater


912.12 Pretreatment facilities.

Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in MMC 912.05 within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the owner, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the owner for review, and shall be acceptable to the owner before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the owner under the provisions of this article. (Ord. 3698 § 1(3.1), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.13 Additional pretreatment measures.

(A) The owner may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to prevent interference, pass through and/or sludge contamination, to comply with its NPDES permit, to comply with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations and/or to protect the POTW, human health and/or the environment.

(B) The owner may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.

(C) Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided by the user when, in the opinion of the owner, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the owner and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense.

(D) Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. (Ord. 3698 § 1(3.2), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.14 Accidental discharge/slug control plans.

The owner may require any significant industrial user to develop, submit for approval, and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. Alternatively, the owner may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:

(A) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;

(B) Description of stored chemicals;

(C) Procedures for immediately notifying the owner of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by MMC 912.36 and providing written notification within five days; and

(D) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. (Ord. 3698 § 1(3.3), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.15 Hauled wastewater.

(A) No load of hauled wastewater may be discharged to the POTW without the prior consent of the owner, which consent is within its sole discretion. Hauled wastewater may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the owner, and at such times as are established by the owner. Such waste shall not violate Division II of this article or any other requirements established by the owner. The owner may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The owner may require the wastewater hauler to sample and provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.

(B) The owner may require all wastewater haulers who discharge to the POTW to obtain wastewater discharge permits. All waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the source and any known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 

(C) The owner may require generators of hauled industrial waste which is discharged to the POTW to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this article. (Ord. 3698 § 1(3.4), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)

IV. Wastewater Discharge Permit Application


912.16 Wastewater analysis.

When requested by the owner, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request or within such other time period as may be requested by the owner. The owner is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require the user to update this information. (Ord. 3698 § 1(4.1), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.17 Wastewater discharge permit – Requirement.

(A) No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the owner, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to MMC 912.18 may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein.

(B) The owner may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article.

(C) Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Divisions IX through XII of this article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal, state and local pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. (Ord. 3698 § 1(4.2), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.18 Wastewater discharge permit – Existing connections.

Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 90 days after said date, apply to the owner for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with this Division IV, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 180 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article without a wastewater discharge permit issued by the owner. If a permit is not issued within the 180 days, the permit is considered to have been denied unless a modification of the 180-day period is obtained from the owner. (Ord. 3698 § 1(4.3), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.19 Wastewater discharge permit – New connections.

Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. A complete application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with MMC 912.21, must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. (Ord. 3698 § 1(4.4), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.20 Wastewater discharge permit – Changed circumstances.

Any user who is required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit due to the promulgation of a new categorical pretreatment standard, or upon the discharger being newly identified as a significant industrial user, either of which arise after the enactment of the ordinance codified in this article, shall, within 90 days after the promulgation of a new categorical pretreatment standard, or after the discharger is identified as a significant industrial user, apply to the owner for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with MMC 912.21, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 180 days of the date the user was notified of the need to make application for a permit to discharge, without a wastewater discharge permit issued by the owner. If a permit is not issued within the 180 days, the permit is considered to have been denied unless a modification of the 180-day period is obtained from the owner. (Ord. 3698 § 1(4.5), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.21 Wastewater discharge permit – Application contents.

(A) All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application, along with a permit application fee as established from time to time by the owner. Unless the owner agrees otherwise, all users shall submit as part of an application the following information:

(1) All information required by MMC 912.31(B);

(2) Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;

(3) Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation;

(4) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production;

(5) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);

(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;

(7) Time and duration of discharges; 

(8) Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge based on MMC 912.06(H); and

(9) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the owner to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.

(B) The owner may require any significant industrial user applying for a permit to develop, submit for approval, and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan as the owner deems appropriate. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:

(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;

(2) Description of stored chemicals;

(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the owner of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by MMC 912.36; and

(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.

(C) Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. The owner reserves the right to deny a permit to any user who submits an incomplete or inaccurate application. (Ord. 3698 § 1(4.6), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.22 Application signatories and certification.

All wastewater discharge permit application and user reports must be signed by an authorized or duly authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement:

I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.

(Ord. 3698 § 1(4.7), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.23 Wastewater discharge permit – Decisions.

The owner will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. The owner may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. If a wastewater discharge permit application is not acted upon within 180 days, it shall be deemed denied unless the time period has otherwise been extended. (Ord. 3698 § 1(4.8), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)

V. Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process


912.24 Wastewater discharge permit – Duration.

A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the owner. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.

The terms and conditions of an expired wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed to continue in effect pending a decision on a reissued permit, if (1) the discharger filed a timely complete application and (2) the wastewater discharge permit, through no fault of the discharger, is not reissued with an effective date on or before the expiration date of the existing permit. (Ord. 3698 § 1(5.1), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.25 Wastewater discharge permit – Contents.

A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the owner to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.

(A) Wastewater discharge permits must contain:

(1) A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years;

(2) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the owner in accordance with MMC 912.28, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;

(3) Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards;

(4) Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, including but not limited to notification to the owner of noncompliance, of new introduction of wastewater constituents; any substantial change in the volume or characteristic of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system, or anticipated changes in user production, and record keeping requirements. These requirements may include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; 

(5) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements; and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law;

(6) The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in accordance with MMC 912.06(H);

(7) Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the owner to be necessary; and

(8) Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the owner must be included as a condition in the user’s permit.

(B) Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but not be limited to, the following conditions:

(1) Compliance schedules, including, but not limited to, compliance schedules to meet local limits;

(2) Conditions pertaining to transfer, modification, revocation and reissuance, and termination of permits; 

(3) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;

(4) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;

(5) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;

(6) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;

(7) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;

(8) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;

(9) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and

(10) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the owner to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. (Ord. 3698 § 1(5.2), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.26 Wastewater discharge permit – Appeals.

The owner shall provide written notice to the user or applicant of the issuance, reissuance, modification, transfer, suspension, revocation or denial of a wastewater discharge permit. Such decision is not a final administrative action for purposes of subsection (E) of this section. Any user or applicant who wishes to appeal the issuance, reissuance, modification, transfer, suspension, revocation or denial of a wastewater discharge permit shall first petition the owner to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of receipt of the written notification.

(A) Failure to submit a timely written petition for reconsideration to the owner shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. The date of submission shall be the date the owner receives the petition.

(B) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit.

(C) The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal; however, the owner, upon its own initiative or in response to a request, may stay contested permit conditions.

(D) If the owner fails to act on a petition within 60 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied and shall be considered a final administrative action for purposes of subsection (E) of this section. Decisions by the owner on the petition within 60 days shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of subsection (E) of this section.

(E) Any user or applicant seeking judicial review of the final administrative action must do so by filing a complaint with the Court of Common Pleas for Crawford County, Pennsylvania within 30 days after the final administrative action. (Ord. 3698 § 1(5.3), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.27 Wastewater discharge permit – Modification.

The owner may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:

(A) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements;

(B) To address significant alterations or additions to the user’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;

(C) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;

(D) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the owner’s POTW, operating personnel, or the receiving waters;

(E) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit or violation of any requirement set forth in an applicable pretreatment law, ordinance, regulation or rule;

(F) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;

(G) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;

(H) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit;

(I) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator, as provided in MMC 912.28; or

(J) Any cause set forth in MMC 912.29. (Ord. 3698 § 1(5.4), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.28 Wastewater discharge permit – Transfer.

Unless otherwise provided by the owner, wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days’ advance notice to the owner and the owner approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the owner must include a complete application by the present permittee and proposed new permittee which:

(A) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility’s operations and processes;

(B) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; 

(C) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit; and

(D) Any other information requested by the owner.

Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. (Ord. 3698 § 1(5.5), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.29 Wastewater discharge permit – Revocation.

The owner may revoke or suspend a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:

(A) Failure to notify the owner of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;

(B) Failure to provide prior notification to the owner of changed conditions pursuant to MMC 912.35;

(C) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;

(D) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;

(E) Tampering with monitoring equipment;

(F) Refusing to allow the owner timely access to the facility premises and records;

(G) Failure to meet effluent limitations or violation of any requirement set forth in an applicable pretreatment law, ordinance, regulation or rule;

(H) Failure to pay fines;

(I) Failure to pay sewer charges;

(J) Failure to meet compliance schedules;

(K) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;

(L) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or

(M) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article.

Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. (Ord. 3698 § 1(5.6), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.30 Wastewater discharge permit – Reissuance.

Unless otherwise provided by the owner, a user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with MMC 912.21, a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 3698 § 1(5.7), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)

VI. Reporting Requirements


912.31 Baseline monitoring reports.

(A) Within 180 days after either the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the owner a report which contains the information listed in subsection (B) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard shall submit to the owner a report which contains the information listed in subsection (B) of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. The requirements of this subsection (A) apply to all categorical industrial users, even if they have been designated as nonsignificant categorical industrial users.

(B) Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:

(1) Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner;

(2) Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility;

(3) Description of Operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes;

(4) Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e);

(5) Measurement of Pollutants.

(a) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process;

(b) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the owner, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in MMC 912.39;

(c) Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in MMC 912.42;

(d) In cases where the standard requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the owner or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard; and

(e) Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass loading limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the owner;

(6) Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user’s authorized representative and certified by a professional engineer registered in the state of Pennsylvania, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements;

(7) Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in MMC 912.32; and

(8) Signature and Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with MMC 912.22. (Ord. 3698 § 1(6.1), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.32 Compliance schedule progress reports.

The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by MMC 912.31(B)(7):

(A) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);

(B) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;

(C) The user shall submit a progress report to the owner, signed and certified in accordance with MMC 912.22, no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and

(D) In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the owner. (Ord. 3698 § 1(6.2), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.33 Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.

Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the owner a report containing the information described in MMC 912.31(B)(4) and (5). For users subject to equivalent mass loading or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with MMC 912.22. (Ord. 3698 § 1(6.3), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.34 Periodic compliance reports.

(A) All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the owner but in no case less than twice per year, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (or pollution prevention alternative), the user shall submit documentation required by the owner or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with MMC 912.22.

(B) All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.

(C) If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the owner, using the procedures prescribed in MMC 912.42, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.

(D) The owner may reduce the requirement in subsection (A) of this section to a requirement to report no less frequently than once a year, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the owner, where the user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard meets all of the following conditions:

(1) The user’s total categorical wastewater flow does not exceed any of the following:

(a) One-hundredth percent of the design dry weather hydraulic capacity of the POTW, or 5,000 gallons per day, whichever is smaller, as measured by a continuous effluent flow monitoring device unless the user discharges in batches;

(b) One-hundredth percent of the design dry weather organic treatment capacity of the POTW; and

(c) One-hundredth percent of the maximum allowable headworks loading for any pollutant regulated by the applicable categorical pretreatment standard for which approved local limits were developed by a POTW.

(2) The user has not been in significant noncompliance, as defined in Division IX of this article, for any time in the past two years;

(3) The user does not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that decreasing the reporting requirement for this user would result in data that are not representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period;

(4) The user must notify the owner immediately of any changes at its facility causing it to no longer meet conditions of subsection (D)(1) or (2) of this section. Upon notification, the industrial user must immediately begin complying with the minimum reporting in subsection (A) of this section; and

(5) The owner must retain documentation to support the owner’s determination that a specific user qualifies for reduced reporting requirements under this section for a period of three years after the expiration of the term of the control mechanism. (Ord. 3698 § 1(6.4), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.35 Reports of changed conditions.

Each user must notify the owner of any planned significant changes to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, including but not limited to the concentration and mass of the pollutants, or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change.

(A) The owner may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under Division IV of this article.

(B) The owner may issue a wastewater discharge permit under Division IV of this article or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under MMC 912.27 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.

(C) For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. (Ord. 3698 § 1(6.5), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.36 Reports of potential problems.

(A) In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the owner of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.

(B) Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the owner, submit a detailed written report, signed and certified in accordance with MMC 912.22, describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 

(C) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (A) of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure.

(D) Significant industrial users are required to notify the owner immediately of any changes at its facility affecting potential for a slug load. Such notice shall be signed and certified in accordance with MMC 912.22. (Ord. 3698 § 1(6.6), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.37 Reports from unpermitted users.

All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the owner as the owner may require. Such reports shall be signed and certified by the user in accordance with MMC 912.22. (Ord. 3698 § 1(6.7), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.38 Notice of violation – Repeat sampling and reporting.

If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the owner as soon as possible but in any event no later than 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the owner within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the owner monitors at the user’s facility at least once a month, or if the owner samples between the user’s initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling, or if the owner has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user. (Ord. 3698 § 1(6.8), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.39 Analytical requirements.

(A) All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA.

(B) Unless otherwise specified in this article, a wastewater discharge permit, notification by the owner or in an applicable federal, state or local pretreatment standard, calculations for effluent limitations which require averaging of measurements shall utilize an arithmetic mean. In calculating an average (e.g., 30-day average), a value of zero may be used for any monitoring result indicating that the measured pollutant is not detectable or below the detection limit subject to such conditions as the owner deems appropriate. (Ord. 3698 § 1(6.9), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.40 Periodic calibration.

Users are required to ensure that all monitoring, analytical and sampling equipment are periodically calibrated and maintained at intervals which ensure the accuracy of the measurements. (Ord. 3698 § 1(6.10), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.41 Approval of analytical laboratories.

The owner reserves the right to approve or disapprove the use of analytical laboratories. (Ord. 3698 § 1(6.11), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.42 Sample collection.

(A) Except as indicated in subsections (B) and (C) of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the owner. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the owner, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides, the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the owner, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits.

(B) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques.

(C) For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports required in MMC 912.31 and 912.33, a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the owner may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by MMC 912.34, the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. (Ord. 3698 § 1(6.12), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.43 Timing.

Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. (Ord. 3698 § 1(6.13), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.44 Record keeping.

Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with best management practices established under MMC 912.06(E) and/or 912.08(E). Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least five years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the owner, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the owner. (Ord. 3698 § 1(6.14), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)

VII. Compliance Monitoring


912.45 Right of entry – Inspection and sampling.

The owner shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the owner ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.

(A) Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the owner will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.

(B) The owner shall have the right to set up on the user’s property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user’s operations and discharge.

(C) The owner may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at least annually to ensure their accuracy.

(D) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the owner and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.

(E) Unreasonable delays in allowing the owner access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this article. (Ord. 3698 § 1(7.1), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.46 Search warrants.

If the owner has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the owner designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the owner may seek issuance of a search warrant from the district justice and/or the Court of Common Pleas of Crawford County. (Ord. 3698 § 1(7.2), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)

VIII. Information


912.47 Confidential information.

Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the owner inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the owner, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public to the extent possible under applicable laws, rules and regulations, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other “effluent data” as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. (Ord. 3698 § 1(8), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)

IX. Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance


912.48 Publication of users in significant noncompliance.

The owner shall publish annually, in a newspaper(s) of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction(s) served by the owner, a list of industrial users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term “significant noncompliance” shall be applicable to all significant industrial user (or any industrial user which violates subsection (C), (D) or (H) of this section) and shall mean:

(A) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, incorporated or established under Division II of this article;

(B) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, incorporated or established under Division II of this article, multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 

(C) Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement incorporated or established under Division II of this article (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 

(D) Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in owner exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;

(E) Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;

(F) Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 

(G) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or

(H) Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices, which the POTW determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. (Ord. 3698 § 1(9), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)

X. Administrative Enforcement Remedies


912.49 Notification of violation.

When the owner finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the owner may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within the 30 days or such other time period specified in the notice of violation, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the owner. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the owner to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. (Ord. 3698 § 1(10.1), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.50 Consent orders.

The owner may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to MMC 912.52 and 912.53 and shall be judicially enforceable. (Ord. 3698 § 1(10.2), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.51 Show cause hearing.

The owner may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the owner and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 3698 § 1(10.3), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.52 Compliance orders.

When the owner finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the owner may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service and/or water service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 3698 § 1(10.4), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.53 Cease and desist orders.

When the owner finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the owner may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:

(A) Immediately comply with all requirements; and

(B) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.

Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 3698 § 1(10.5), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.54 Administrative civil penalties.

(A) When the owner finds that an industrial user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the owner may assess a civil penalty against such user in an amount not to exceed $25,000 per day for each violation. Each violation for each separate day shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, civil penalties may be assessed for each day during the period of violation. The civil penalty may be assessed whether or not the violation was willful or negligent.

(B) The procedures for assessing and appealing such administrative civil penalties, and the relevant factors to be considered in assessing such penalties, shall be as set forth in the Meadville area sewer authority civil penalty assessment policy.

(C) In addition to the civil penalties provided herein, the owner may recover interest, damages, reasonable attorneys’ fees, expert witness fees, administrative or show cause proceedings costs and/or court costs, court reporter fees and other administrative enforcement, proceedings, and/or litigation expenses against the person or user found to be in violation of this article.

(D) Assessment of an administrative civil penalty hereunder shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 3698 § 1(10.6), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.55 Emergency suspensions.

The owner may immediately suspend a user’s discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The owner may also immediately suspend a user’s discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.

(A) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the owner may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The owner may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the owner that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in MMC 912.56 are initiated against the user.

(B) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, signed and certified in accordance with MMC 912.22, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the owner within five days thereof.

Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. (Ord. 3698 § 1(10.7), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.56 Termination of discharge.

In addition to the provisions in MMC 912.29, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:

(A) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;

(B) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;

(C) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;

(D) Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or

(E) Violation of the pretreatment standards incorporated or established under Division II of this article.

Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under MMC 912.51 why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the owner shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 3698 § 1(10.8), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)

XI. Judicial Enforcement Remedies


912.57 Injunctive relief.

When the owner finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the owner may petition the Court of Common Pleas of Crawford County, Pennsylvania, through the owner’s attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The owner may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (Ord. 3698 § 1(11.1), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.58 Civil penalties.

(A) An industrial user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the owner for a maximum civil penalty of not more than $25,000 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.

(B) In addition to the civil penalties provided herein, the owner may recover interest, reasonable attorneys’ fees, expert witness fees, court costs, court reporter fees, and other expenses associated with enforcement and/or litigation activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the owner.

(C) In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user’s violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.

(D) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (Ord. 3698 § 1(11.2), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.59 Criminal prosecution.

Any person who willfully violates a provision of this article or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice or order of the owner or any other authorized representative of the owner shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine not to exceed $1,000 per violation, plus costs of prosecution, including court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the owner in the enforcement proceedings. In default of such payment, such person shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that a violation is found to exist shall constitute a separate offense. Each section of this article violated shall also constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 3698 § 1(11.3), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.60 Remedies nonexclusive.

The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The owner may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the owner’s enforcement response plan. However, the owner may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the owner is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. (Ord. 3698 § 1(11.4), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)

XII. Supplemental Enforcement Action


912.61 Financial assurances.

The owner may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. (Ord. 3698 § 1(12.1), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)

XIII. Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations


912.62 Upset.

(A) For the purposes of this section, “upset” means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.

(B) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (C) of this section are met.

(C) A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that:

(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;

(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and

(3) The user has submitted the following information to the owner as soon as possible but in any event no later than 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days:

(a) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;

(b) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and

(c) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.

(D) In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.

(E) Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.

(F) Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. (Ord. 3698 § 1(13.1), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.63 Prohibited discharge standards.

A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in MMC 912.05(A) or the specific prohibitions in MMC 912.05(B)(3) through (7) and (B)(9) through (14) and (16) if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either:

(A) A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or

(B) No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge when the owner was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and, in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. (Ord. 3698 § 1(13.2), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.64 Bypass.

(A) For the purposes of this section:

(1) “Bypass” means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user’s treatment facility; and

(2) “Severe property damage” means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.

(B) A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections (C) and (D) of this section.

(C) Bypass Notification.

(1) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the owner, at least 10 days before the date of the bypass, if possible.

(2) A user shall submit oral notice to the owner of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards as soon as possible but in any event no later than 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The owner may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.

(D) Bypass.

(1) Bypass is prohibited, and the owner may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 

(a) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;

(b) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and

(c) The user submitted notices as required under subsection (C) of this section.

(2) The owner may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the owner determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (D)(1) of this section. (Ord. 3698 § 1(13.3), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


912.65 Reservation of rights.

Notwithstanding any other pretreatment requirements to the contrary, nothing in this article or elsewhere in the Meadville area sewer authority’s pretreatment program shall be deemed to be a legally binding commitment under the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., the Clean Streams Law, 35 PA Stat 691.1 et seq., and applicable regulations (e.g., 40 CFR Part 403, Title 25 PA Code) for the owner to undertake pretreatment implementation or enforcement activities beyond the minimum otherwise required by these laws and regulations. Nevertheless, the owner maintains its discretionary authority to undertake pretreatment activities beyond the minimum required. (Ord. 3698 § 1(13.4), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)

XIV. Pretreatment Charges and Fees 


912.66 Pretreatment charges and fees.

The owner may adopt by resolution reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the pretreatment program which may include:

(A) Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications;

(B) Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user’s discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;

(C) Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction;

(D) Fees for filing appeals; and

(E) Other fees as the owner may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the owner. (Ord. 3698 § 1(14), 2012; Ord. 3514 § 1, 1998)


Article 913       SANITARY SEWER RENTALS

Sections:

913.01  Rental charge imposed for use of sewers.

913.02  Base and rental rate schedules – Exceptions by council resolution.

913.03  Sewer rental bills rendered concurrently with water bills.

913.04  Penalty for bill payment delinquency.

913.05  Liability for bill payment – Remedies for collection of delinquent accounts.

913.06  Rate for service outside the city by council resolution.

913.07  Special rates established by city council.


913.01       Rental charge imposed for use of sewers.

From and after January 1, 1963, there is hereby imposed and established an annual rental, rate or charge for the use of the sanitary sewer system owned and operated by the city, to be paid by the owners or users of all real property connected to the sewer system and water system. (Ord. 2562 § 1, 1962) 


913.02       Base and rental rate schedules – Exceptions by council resolution.

(A) Base Rate Schedule. Effective January 1, 1997, a base (monthly minimum) rate shall be computed, imposed and charged for sewer service monthly based upon the size of the water meter servicing the premises and in accordance with the following rate table:

	Meter Size 	Monthly

	(inches)	Base Rate

	1/2, 5/8, 3/4	$2.00

	1	$2.60

	1-1/2	$3.80

	2	$5.50

	3	$17.00

	4	$23.00

	6, 8, 10	$55.00

(B) Rental Rate Schedule. Effective January 1, 1997, a rental, rate and sewage charge shall be computed, imposed and charged for sewer service monthly and shall be determined by the quantity of water used upon the premises as evidenced by the water meter readings in accordance with the following sewage service rate table as applied to each water meter reading and billing:

First 800 cubic feet per month	$3.30

Next 2,600 cubic feet per month	$3.22

All in excess of 3,400 cubic feet per month	$3.15

(C) When a property is connected to the city sanitary sewer system but is not connected to the city water system, or where it can be proved by the property owner that a substantial amount of water being used is not discharged to the city sewer system, or where other conditions exist which in the opinion of council cause the use of the water meter reading for sewer rental charge to be improper and unfair, council may by resolution establish charges and rates which shall apply to these special conditions. Council may require the installation of additional water meters at the owner’s cost if they deem this necessary to establish proper sewer rental charges. (Ord. 3424 § 1, 1995; Ord. 3420 § 1, 1995; Ord. 3404 § 1, 1995; Ord. 3386 § 1, 1994; Ord. 3374 § 1, 1994; Ord. 3357 § 1, 1993; Ord. 3304 § 1, 1991; Ord. 2562 § 2, 1962) 


913.03       Sewer rental bills rendered concurrently with water bills.

Bills for sewer rentals and charges hereby imposed shall be rendered concurrently with the bills for water services rendered by the city to its users and shall be due and payable concurrently with such bills for water service. (Ord. 2562 § 3, 1962) 


913.04       Penalty for bill payment delinquency.

(A) Penalty and Service Fees for Delinquent Bill Paying. All billings for sanitary sewage service shall be due on the due date shown thereon. Bills not paid on or before the due date shown on each billing will be delinquent and are subject to the following penalties and service fees:

(1) A flat special service fee of $1.00 per month or part of month by which the billing is delinquent; plus

(2) A late charge for residential customers equal to 1.5 percent of the delinquent bill for each month or part of month by which any bill is delinquent; or

(3) A late charge for commercial and industrial customers equal to five percent of the delinquent bill for each month or part of month by which any bill is delinquent; 

(4) For the purpose of this section, premises containing six or more residential dwelling units which are serviced by a common (master) water meter shall be deemed to be commercial customers; all residential premises serviced by separate water meters and all premises containing fewer than six residential premises serviced by a common (master) water meter shall be deemed to be residential customers. 

(B) Shut-Off. Premises serviced by accounts with bills which are delinquent 60 days or more are subject to termination of service (shut-off) at which time the customer’s water meter will be removed. Upon the posting of any shut-off notice, a separate shut-off service fee of $15.00 shall become immediately due and payable and shall be added to the billing and all other penalties and service fees. The customer’s meter will be removed 10 days after posting of the shut-off notice. Upon reconnection after any actual shut-off, a reconnection service fee of $15.00, together with any other costs occasioned by collection efforts, shall become immediately due and payable and shall be added to the billing and all other penalties and service fees.

The city may, in its discretion, allow residential customers to enter into a payment plan to allow customers who are in extreme financial circumstances to pay sanitary sewage bills over an extended period of time, not to exceed four months. During the period of the payment plan, the customer will be required to pay any current sanitary sewage charges in a timely fashion.

Payment plans will not be available to commercial customers.

(C) Identity of Occupants of Rental Real Estate. In no event will the city provide separate billing to any premises, except in the name of a named occupant or owner who or which applies for service. No "occupant" accounts will be carried by the city. (Ord. 3446 § 1, 1996; Ord. 3374 § 2, 1994; Ord. 2562 § 4, 1962)


913.05       Liability for bill payment – Remedies for collection of delinquent accounts.

Owners of real property served by the sewer system shall be responsible for the sewer rentals or charges established and imposed herein for sewer services rendered to any tenant or occupant of such property. Such sewer rentals or charges shall be a lien on the properties charged with the payment thereof from the date such sewer service is rendered, and, if not paid within 30 days after notice the charge or rental is past due, may be collected by an action in assumpsit in the name of the city against the owner of the property charged or the occupant or user, or by distress of personal property on the premises, or by a lien filed in the nature of a municipal lien. (Ord. 2562 § 5, 1962) 


913.06       Rate for service outside the city by council resolution.

This article shall not apply to sewer service rendered outside the city limits. The rental rate or charge to be imposed for sewer service rendered by the city to users residing outside the city shall be established by resolution of council. (Ord. 2729 § 2, 1969) 


913.07       Special rates established by city council.

The city council may, in its sole and absolute discretion, provide for special rates for exceptional circumstances as the same shall be from time to time recognized by said city council in its sole discretion. All such special rates shall apply uniformly to any and all sewer customers experiencing the exceptional circumstance giving rise to the establishment of such rates. Such rates shall be established by resolution duly adopted by the city council and shall continue in force and effect for the term set therefor by the council in any such resolution or, absent the statement of any time limitation, until such special rates shall be changed by further action of the city council. (Ord. 3081 § 1, 1984) 


Article 915       WATER REGULATIONS AND RATES

Sections:

915.01  Rate schedules.

915.02  Rules and regulations.

915.03  Use of hydrant water – Use of city water without prior approval.

915.99  Penalty.


915.01       Rate schedules.

The following shall be the rates charged by the water and light department of the City of Meadville for the various classes of service enumerated:

(A) Meter Rate Schedules.

(1) Schedule A applying to general water service: 

	Net Rate 

	for 100 

	Cubic Feet

For the first	2,500 cubic feet per quarter	$1.32 (I)*

For the next	7,500 cubic feet per quarter	$0.92 (I)*

For the next	40,000 cubic feet per quarter	$0.62 (I)*

All over	50,000 cubic feet per quarter	$0.47 (I)*

*(I) Indicates Increase

Provided, however, that no bill will be rendered for less than the minimum charge as indicated under MMC 915.01(A)(2). 

(2) Minimum meter charge: 

	Net Quarterly

	Minimum Charge 

	Per Customer

	For 1/2", 5/8" and 3/4" meters	$9.76 (I)*

	For 1" meters	$29.27 (I)*

	For 1-1/2" meters 	$41.65 (I)*

	For 2" meters	$59.83 (I)*

	For 3" meters	$89.45 (I)*

	For 4" meters	$151.24 (I)*

	For 6" meters	$596.84 (I)*

*(I) Indicates Increase

(B) Fire Service Charges. 

(1) For each fire hydrant: $106.50 per year (I).

(2) For each fire line connection:

	2" in size	$98.00 per year (I)

	3" in size	$391.00 per year (I)

	4" in size	$391.00 per year (I)

	5" in size	$880.00 per year (I)

	6" in size	$880.00 per year (I)

	8" in size	$1,565.00 per year (I)

	10" in size	$1,925.00 per year

	12" in size	$2,770.00 per year

(3) Building, Construction and Other Short Time Service. Water will be furnished for building, construction, cleaning or other purposes under the meter rate schedules as set out in subsection (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section. In cases where it is not practical to install a meter, the amount of water will be estimated by the water and light department. 

(4) Penalty. Bills will be rendered for water service furnished by meter measurement and are due and payable at the end of each quarter. If a bill is not paid within 25 days of the date rendered, a penalty of five percent will be added for late payment. If a bill is not paid within 45 days of the date rendered, water service to the customer’s premises may, after five days’ written notice to the customer, be terminated, and shall not be restored until all back bills, penalties and an additional service charge of $5.00 are paid. Bills for water furnished by meter measurement to the commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any department or institution thereof shall be due and payable at the end of each quarter. If the billed sum to such departments, institutions or the commonwealth are not paid within 30 days of the date rendered, a penalty of five percent will be added to such bill. The commonwealth of Pennsylvania, its departments and institutions are subject to all other penalties, including termination of service and service charges imposed upon general water customers. (Ord. 3044 § 1, 1982; Ord. 3004 § 1, 1980; Ord. 2880 § 1, 1975) 


915.02       Rules and regulations.

The rules and regulations for the management, operation and control of the water and light department of the City of Meadville contained in Supplement No. 13 to Water-Pennsylvania P.U.C. No. 2 Tariff Filing by the City of Meadville are hereby approved, adopted and incorporated herein by reference. The full text of said rules and regulations is on file with the public utility commission and copies thereof are on file and available with and from the water and light department of the City of Meadville and the city clerk of the City of Meadville. Said rules and regulations govern the following: application for service, service connections, metered customers, billings, general regulations and definitions, complete regulation of the placement and operation of fire hydrants, and requirements for the payment of deposits, penalties and service charges. Said regulations are 56 in number. The application for water service by a customer and the use of city water service shall constitute a contract between the customer and the water and light department of the City of Meadville. Each customer applying for use of the water service of the City of Meadville shall agree to be bound by the aforesaid rules and regulations of the water and light department of the City of Meadville. (Ord. 3044, § 2, 1982; Ord. 2880 § 2, 1975)


915.03       Use of hydrant water – Use of city water without prior approval.

No person, except authorized city employees, shall take water from any hydrant, plug or fountain. No person shall, in any way, use or take for private use any water which is furnished by the city unless such person has first obtained the necessary permission from the city engineer or water and light department. (Ord. 2854 § 1, 1974) 


915.99       Penalty.

In case of any violation of this article or a violation of any of the rules and regulations provided for therein, for which a penalty has not been provided, the person guilty of such violation shall be subject to a fine not more than $100.00 and cost of prosecution, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days or both. (Ord. 2854 § 1, 1974) 


Article 917       WATERCOURSES

Sections:

917.01  Obstructing watercourses prohibited.

917.02  Failure to comply with removal notice a violation.

917.03  City may remove obstructions and recover costs.

917.99  Penalty.


917.01       Obstructing watercourses prohibited.

No person shall erect or place any building, wharfing, filling or other structure or thing in the actual or established channel of any stream or watercourse in the city, whereby the water of the same may be obstructed or the channel altered. (Ord. 183 § 1, 1878) 


917.02       Failure to comply with removal notice a violation.

Whoever is the owner, occupant or person in charge of any lands or premises on which there is any obstruction of any watercourse, as is prohibited in MMC 917.01, and neglects or refuses to remove the same within 24 hours after being notified to do so by the city engineer or city manager, shall be liable to the penalties prescribed in MMC 917.99. Every 24 hours after such notice during which an obstruction is permitted to remain shall be deemed a new offense. (Ord. 183 § 2, 1878) 


917.03       City may remove obstructions and recover costs.

In any case where the owner, occupant or person in charge of any lands or premises neglects or refuses to remove an obstruction from any watercourse on notice, the city through its authorized officials or employees may enter upon the premises and remove all such obstructions. The cost of such removal shall be collected from the owner, occupant or person in charge, as like claims due the city are collectible by law, either by action of debt or by filing a lien against the property. (Ord. 185 § 1, 1878)


917.99       Penalty.

Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be fined not more than $100.00 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. (Ord. 183 § 1, 1878)


Article 931 REFUSE STORAGE, COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL

Sections:

931.01    Definitions.

931.02    Mandatory collection by city contractor.

931.03    Unacceptable waste.

931.04    Refuse and recycling containers.

931.05    Place of collection.

931.06    Time for collection.

931.07    Yard waste collection.

931.08    Large items, bulk items and white goods collection.

931.09    Recyclables collection.

931.10    Prohibited conduct.

931.11    Administration.

931.12    Solid waste collection and disposal fee.

931.13    Enforcement.

931.14    Criminal penalty provision.


931.01 Definitions.

For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.

(A) “Ashes” means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials.

(B) “Bags” means plastic sacks designated for refuse with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the top, securely tied at the top for collection, with a capacity not to exceed 32 gallons and a loaded weight not to exceed 25 pounds.

(C) “Bulk waste” or “bulk items” means a piece of furniture or waste material from a residential source other than construction debris or hazardous waste, with a weight greater than 25 pounds and volume greater than that allowed for carts. Pianos, organs, spas, hot tubs, and furnaces are excluded from the definition of bulk waste.

(D) “Cart” means a 35-, 64-, or 95-gallon plastic container, provided by the city, equipped with wheels, handles and a tight-fitting cover. Carts are capable of being mechanically unloaded into the contractor’s collection vehicles. The terms “cart” and “wheeled container” shall be considered interchangeable.

(E) “City” means the City of Meadville, Pennsylvania.

(F) “City billing agent” means the person and/or entity designated by the city to act as the billing agent to send invoices and receive fees related to refuse and recyclables.

(G) “City contractor” means the person holding the refuse collection and disposal contract with the city.

(H) “Curbside” means the nearest point at the side of a roadway.

(I) “Demolition waste” or “construction debris” means the waste materials generated by the construction, alteration or demolition of buildings or structures and shall include but is not limited to lumber, masonry, plaster, concrete, asphalt, shingles, siding, glass, fixtures, piping, wiring and similar materials. It shall not include items designated as “hazardous materials.” The terms “demolition waste” and “construction debris” shall be considered interchangeable.

(J) “Detachable container” or “dumpster” means a watertight, all-metal container, not less than three quarter cubic yards in capacity and equipped with a tight-fitting metal or plastic cover. The term shall also apply to containers of other material of similar size when approved by the city. Detachable containers two cubic yards and under shall be equipped with at least four wheels. Detachable containers shall have no jagged edges or holes.

(K) “Food waste” means vegetable and other food scraps, including meat, dairy products, grease and bones, paper which has been contaminated with food, fat or grease, and compostable paper including paper towels, paper plates, tissue and waxed paper.

(L) “Garbage” means all discarded putrescible waste matter but not including sewage or sewage sludge, human excrement, source separated recyclables or leaf waste.

(M) “Generator” means a person or municipality that produces or creates municipal waste.

(N) “Hazardous waste” means waste designated as hazardous by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.

(O) “Large items” means items that are too large to be placed inside the cart or inside of a 32-gallon bag, with an individual weight no greater than 25 pounds and which do not meet the definition of a bulk item. These items include lamps, bicycles, large toys and swing sets, vacuum cleaners, and other small household appliances, aluminum and plastic resin lawn furniture, an individual cut and tied bundle of carpeting measuring no more than four feet in length and meeting the weight requirements, as well as other items of similar size, weight and compactable nature.

(P) “Leaf waste” or “yard waste” means plant material (leaves, branches, brush, flowers, roots, wood waste, etc., but not including grass clippings); debris commonly thrown away in the course of maintaining yards and gardens. Leaf waste does not include loose soils, sod, food waste including from gardens or orchards, food compost, plastics and synthetic fibers, lumber, any wood or tree limbs over four inches in diameter, human or animal excrement, noxious weeds and soil contaminated with hazardous substances. With the exception of holiday trees, materials larger than four inches in diameter and four feet in length shall not be considered leaf waste and shall not be subject to collection.

(Q) “Multifamily dwelling” means structures containing four or more dwelling units within a single structure. This shall include apartment buildings, but shall not include rooming houses or single-family dwellings converted into rental units with common kitchen and bath facilities or attached single-family residences.

(R) “Municipal waste” means any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste Management Act from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term does not include source-separated recyclable materials.

(S) “Owner” shall be the person(s) identified as owners of the real estate among the official records of the county and such other persons who may have the right of possession and control of the premises under a lease, agreement or similar arrangement.

(T) “Person” means every natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or other entity.

(U) “Recyclables” means mixed waste paper (including corrugated), newspapers, magazines, bi-metal and aluminum cans, glass bottles and jars, plastic containers Numbers 1 through 7 and other items as designated by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.

(V) “Refuse” means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, and includes but is not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid industrial and mercantile wastes.

(W) “Residential dwelling unit” or “dwelling unit” means a group of rooms located within a building and forming a single, habitable unit with facilities that are used or are intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. A rooming house, single-family residence converted into rental units with common kitchen and bathroom facilities and attached single-family residences shall be considered a single residential dwelling unit for purposes of this code.

(X) “Residential” or “residence” means any house, dwelling, multifamily dwelling, apartment house or any building put to residential use or containing one or more residential dwelling units.

(Y) “Rubbish” means nonputrescible solid wastes, except ashes, and consists of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, metal containers, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.

(Z) “Solid waste” means ashes, garbage, refuse and rubbish and municipal waste as heretofore defined.

(AA) “White goods” means all major appliances, such as washers, dryers, refrigerators, freezers, stoves, dishwashers, hot water tanks, and trash compactors and other items of similar weight, material, size and nature. (Ord. 3711 § 1, 2012)


931.02 Mandatory collection by city contractor.

(A) All solid wastes generated by or accumulated at a residence in the City of Meadville shall be collected by the city contractor for disposal in accordance with the city contract.

(B) Exceptions. Exceptions to the mandatory use of the city contractor for solid waste collection include the following:

(1) Multifamily dwellings within a single structure, containing four or more dwelling units.

(2) Buildings and facilities used for commercial, industrial and institutional uses, including but not limited to uses such as schools, colleges including dormitories, hospitals, nursing and personal care facilities, manufacturing facilities, retail sales facilities, professional offices and governmental facilities.

(3) Buildings located in the central business zoning district which contain both commercial and residential uses.

(C) Persons generating solid waste may contract with private haulers to collect materials which are not collected under the city contract.

(D) Generators of solid waste or owners of real estate may contract with private haulers for the collection of any refuse which is in excess of the quantity permitted under the city contract.

(E) All solid wastes accumulated within the city as a result of commercial, mercantile or industrial usage of real estate and improvements thereupon located within the corporate boundaries of the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the owner of either the real estate upon which said waste was generated or by the owner of the real estate upon which said solid waste was accumulated, by collectors or haulers of such owner’s choice.

(F) Persons responsible for the collection and disposal of solid waste from commercial or industrial property may contract with the city for collection and disposal of such solid wastes from the commercial or industrial property, provided:

(1) The waste is comparable in quantity and quality to that of a residential dwelling unit;

(2) The required collection is compatible with the city’s collection schedule;

(3) The city’s standard collection and disposal fee is paid. (Ord. 3711 § 1, 2012)


931.03 Unacceptable waste.

The following items or materials shall not be placed for collection or put in containers set out for collection:

(A) Hazardous waste.

(B) Flammable liquids.

(C) Explosives or fireworks.

(D) Radioactive material.

(E) Infectious or toxic household waste.

(F) Ammunition.

(G) Paints or varnishes.

(H) Photo chemicals.

(I) Insecticides.

(J) Weed killers.

(K) Pool/spa chemicals.

(L) Propane tanks.

(M) Oxygen tanks.

(N) Solvents.

(O) Lead acid batteries.

(P) Vehicle oil and fluids.

(Q) Vehicle tires.

(R) Televisions.

(S) Computers, computer printers, and computer components. (Ord. 3711 § 1, 2012)


931.04 Refuse and recycling containers.

(A) All residences required to use the city contractor for collection services shall put the solid waste in carts provided by the city or bags to which is attached a tag purchased from the city, for collection.

(B) Each residence will be provided with a cart to be used for recyclable collection. The cart shall be specifically identified by color designated by the city and other means of identification. This cart shall be used for collection of recyclables.

(C) Each residence will be provided with a separate cart; either a 35-gallon, 64-gallon or 95-gallon cart as determined by the owner, which shall be specifically identified by color designated by the city and other means of identification. This cart shall be used for collection of acceptable solid waste and refuse.

(D) An owner may choose to not acquire a cart for collection of solid waste or refuse for a particular residence in which case the owner shall acquire tags from the city administrator, the treasurer’s office, police dispatch or online at the city’s website, www.cityofmeadville.org, for application to bags which shall be used for collection of acceptable solid waste and refuse. If a cart is not used, all refuse and solid waste must be placed in a bag with a tag and set out for collection.

(E) Owners of premises may change the size of the refuse collection container or change from bags to cart for refuse collection in accordance with the policy and procedure and upon payment of fees adapted from time to time by resolution of city council. Owners of new residences, or vacated residences without cart refuse service, shall be given the choice of cart size at no charge at the time of their initial occupation of the residence. Further cart size requests will require payment of a cart exchange fee, which will be a minimum of $25.00, and which will be adjusted by the city on an annual basis as part of its general fee ordinance.

(F) All bags shall be securely fastened at the top, watertight, leak proof and in good condition. All carts shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.

(G) Bags shall not have a capacity greater than 32 gallons or weigh more than 25 pounds.

(H) Carts filled with refuse shall not weigh more than 60 pounds for each 35 gallons of capacity and shall be loaded so that the cover or lid fits on top of the waste in the container.

(I) Carts are owned by the city and are city property. The carts delivered to each residence shall be identified as the cart or carts to be used for services at that location and remain with the residence for use by current and successive owners, and current and successive residents of the premises.

(J) Damage to carts shall be reported to the city contractor or city administrator so that the carts can be repaired or replaced as necessary.

(K) Owners of residences provided with carts by the city for refuse or recycling collection shall be liable for all carts lost, destroyed or damaged, except when the loss or damage has been caused by the city contractor or by persons over whom and under circumstances where the owner had no control. (Ord. 3711 § 1, 2012)


931.05 Place of collection.

(A) All solid waste, yard waste and recyclables shall be placed for collection at curbside as follows:

(1) If the property abutting the street is reasonably level, the carts or bags shall be placed on the owner’s driveway or yard area adjacent to the street within eight feet of the curb or street.

(2) If the property abutting the street is sloped at a grade making placement of a cart difficult, a cart may be placed at the nearest reasonably level area.

(B) Where extraordinary circumstances exist, as determined by the city, the city shall make arrangements with the owner of the property and the city contractor for a suitable location which shall be designated and used. (Ord. 3711 § 1, 2012)


931.06 Time for collection.

(A) Solid waste, yard waste and recyclables shall be set out for collection on the day of the week for which collection is scheduled. Notice regarding the collection schedule shall be provided by the city.

(B) Carts and bags may not be placed at the curb for collection before 5:00 p.m. (prevailing time) on the day before the scheduled day for collection, and must be removed from the curb and stored within 24 hours after collection. For the purposes of this subsection, “stored” means placed and kept while not at the curb for collection either (a) behind the front wall of the house or building (including porches) the carts serve; or (b) within three feet of the front of the house or building (including porches) the carts serve and screened from view of the abutting public right-of-way by an opaque fence, wall or hedge to a height of at least the height of the refuse cart; or (c) inside of an enclosed structure. In the event that the city, through its designated agent and upon request by an affected property owner, determines that compliance with the cart storage criteria is impossible or unduly burdensome due to specific structural or topographic issues, such requirement can be waived in the city’s sole discretion with respect to such specific property. (Ord. 3750 § 1, 2016; Ord. 3711 § 1, 2012)


931.07 Yard waste collection.

(A) Between April 1st and November 30th, yard waste may be placed for collection on days scheduled for such collection, which collection shall occur every other week, as designated by the city, on refuse collection day.

(B) Curbside collection of falling leaves from trees will be provided in the fall of each year in accordance with a schedule established by the city and subject to the rules and regulations adopted by the city.

(C) Yard waste may include plant materials from yards or gardens, such as leaves, branches, brush, flowers, roots and wood waste, but shall not include loose soil, grass clippings, garbage, food waste, plastic or synthetic fibers, lumber, wood or tree limbs over four inches in diameter or four feet in length or fecal matter.

(D) Yard waste must be placed in biodegradable paper bags approved by the city and available from the city or designated retail outlets. These bags placed at the curb for collection shall not exceed 40 pounds. (Ord. 3711 § 1, 2012)


931.08 Large items, bulk items and white goods collection.

(A) Large items and bulk items shall be collected on the days scheduled for refuse collection at an additional cost to owner. White goods will be collected on a day scheduled by the city and collected by the city.

(B) Residents may purchase tags for large items which do not exceed 25 pounds in weight. Tags will be available for purchase from the city. Each individual large item shall be considered one unit and the equivalent of one tagged bag of garbage. The contractor shall collect all such tagged units from the structures serviced.

(C) Residents may purchase tags for bulk items and white goods from the city. Bulk items and white goods shall not be placed for collection on the curbside as to interfere with the collection of carts or any street right-of-way.

(D) Tags for bulk items, white goods, large items and bagged garbage will all have an appearance and cost different from each other.

(E) Under extraordinary circumstances, residents may make special arrangements with the city and city contractor for collection at other times. (Ord. 3711 § 1, 2012)


931.09 Recyclables collection.

(A) Recyclables shall be collected on a periodic schedule to be determined by the city from all premises mandated to use the refuse collection services of the city contractor on the same day scheduled for refuse collection. Owners will be notified of the schedule.

(B) All persons in the City of Meadville shall separate recyclables from the solid waste; place recyclables in the cart designated for recyclable collection, and place the recyclables cart out for collection on the day for scheduled collection.

(C) Only the materials defined and officially designated as recyclable materials shall be placed for collection or put in the recyclables cart for collection. Materials and items which are and are not recyclable shall be identified and described in a policy adopted from time to time by resolution of city council and notice of this policy shall be delivered to each customer. 

(D)(1) Persons must separate recyclables as designated in the refuse and recyclable collection contract in effect from other municipal waste generated at their homes, apartments and other residential establishments and to store such materials until collection.

(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to impair the ownership of separated materials by the person who generated them unless and until such materials are placed at curbside or similar location for collection by the city or its agents.

(3) Persons must separate leaf waste from other municipal waste generated at their homes, apartments and other residential establishments until collection unless those persons have otherwise provided for the composting of leaf waste. Such composting shall include mulching and similar activities.

(4) Owners of multifamily rental housing properties with four or more units may comply with its responsibilities under this section by establishing a collection system for recyclable materials at each property. The collection system must include suitable containers for collecting and sorting materials, easily accessible locations for the containers and written instructions to the occupants concerning the use and availability of the collection system. Owners who comply with this act shall not be liable for the noncompliance of occupants of their buildings.

(E)(1) Persons must separate high grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated paper and leaf waste and other materials deemed appropriate by the city generated at commercial, municipal or institutional establishments and from community activities and to store the material until collection. 

(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to impair the ownership of separated materials by the person who generated them unless and until such materials are placed at curbside or similar location for collection by the city or its agents.

(3) Persons occupying commercial, institutional and municipal establishments shall be exempt from the requirements of this section if those persons have otherwise provided for the recycling of materials they are required by this section to recycle. To be eligible for an exemption under this subsection, a commercial or institutional solid waste generator must annually provide written documentation to the municipality of the total number of tons recycled. (Ord. 3734 § 1, 2015; Ord. 3711 § 1, 2012)


931.10 Prohibited conduct.

It shall be unlawful for any owner or other responsible person to:

(A) Fail to comply with the regulations set forth in this article for the handling, collection, storage and disposal of refuse, solid waste and recyclable materials.

(B) To dispose of solid waste refuse and recyclables except in conformity with the regulations of this article.

(C) To place solid waste or refuse or recyclables out for collection except in the designated and permitted containers. 

(D) For any person to transport any refuse off a premises or onto or across a public right-of-way except by a licensed and permitted hauler in an authorized vehicle. This would not include transportation of recyclables as defined herein to an approved recycling facility. (Ord. 3734 § 2, 2015; Ord. 3711 § 1, 2012)


931.11 Administration.

The regulations set forth in this article shall be administered and enforced by a city official or officials designated by the city manager. For purposes of this article, the person so designated shall be referred to as “refuse and recycling administrator” or “administrator.” (Ord. 3711 § 1, 2012)


931.12 Solid waste collection and disposal fee.

An annual solid waste collection and disposal fee for each residential dwelling unit shall be collected from the owner of each parcel of real estate within the city upon which one or more residential dwelling units are located. The director of public works shall determine the number of residential dwelling units existing upon each such parcel. Said fees shall be paid in equal monthly installments. Said fees shall be paid to and collected by the Meadville area water authority. Accounts shall be considered delinquent if not paid on or before the due date shown on each billing. Premises serviced by accounts with bills which are delinquent 60 days or more are subject to termination of services (shut-off). Unless the entire balance due and owing together with a service charge of $4.00 per unit for each month or part of month by which such payment is late is paid within seven days of the date of mailing of notice from the billing agent, service may be terminated. Service shall be resumed after any termination only upon repayment of the bill and all accumulated service charges plus an additional service resumption fee of $15.00. Said fees shall be assessed as follows:

(1) The following annual rates per residential dwelling unit for customers with fewer than 50 billable units billed on one bill; and 

(a) No cart service: $252.00.

(b) Thirty-five-gallon cart service: $282.00.

(c) Sixty-four-gallon cart service: $288.00.

(d) Ninety-five-gallon cart service: $294.00.

(2) An annual rate of $264.00 per residential dwelling unit for customers with 50 or more billable units all billed on one bill.

(3) Additional rates per residential dwelling unit for tag items.

(a) Tag per large item bag: $1.25.

(b) Tag per bulk item: $20.00.

(c) Tag per white goods item: $25.00. (Ord. 3756 § 4, 2016; Ord. 3739 § 1, 2015; Ord. 3711 § 1, 2012)


931.13 Enforcement.

(A) Any person who is not acting in compliance with the requirements of this article as determined by the administrator shall be given a written notice by hand delivery, or regular mail, at the last known or readily ascertainable address, of the violation and action required to avoid further enforcement proceedings. If corrective action is not taken in a timely manner, the administrator, with the approval of the city manager, may institute enforcement proceedings in the district magistrate court or in any other court of law for a penalty or such other legal relief as proper and available at law.

(B) For purposes of this article, persons responsible for compliance with these regulations shall include the owners of record of the premises subject to the regulations, as well as all other persons in possession of the subject premises, including but not limited to tenants or managers. (Ord. 3711 § 1, 2012)


931.14 Criminal penalty provision.

Any owner as defined herein who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution or, in default of payment of such fines and costs, to undergo imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation and shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 3711 § 1, 2012)


Article 932 SOURCE-SEPARATION AND COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS

(Repealed by Ord. 3711) 




Article 933       CITY MARKET

Sections:

933.01  Dedication of grounds for market purposes.

933.02  Control by market master – Rules and regulations.

933.03  Market master to establish rental schedule.

933.04  Weekly deposit of moneys collected and report.

933.05  General market days and hours.

933.06  Market master may order removal of persons or articles.

933.07  Other public food sales prohibited – Farmers exception.

933.08  Fee payment prior to sale – Receipt to be given.

933.09  Prohibited and limited sale of certain articles.

933.10  Killing animals – Nuisances, posting bills and property destruction prohibited.

933.11  Sale of unwholesome or unripe foods prohibited.

933.12  Removal of articles after closing – Sanitation of occupied space.

933.13  Resale prohibited.

933.14  Use and placement of signs.

933.15  Solicitation for regular retail merchants prohibited.

933.16  Meat sale prohibited outside market building.

933.17  Space allocated for sale of nursery stock or trees.

933.18  Obstructions within building prohibited.

933.19  Projections into traveled roadway prohibited.

933.20  Space width regulated and limited.

933.21  Space sublease prohibited.

933.99  Penalty.


933.01       Dedication of grounds for market purposes.

The grounds upon which the market house is situated and the alleys adjacent thereto are hereby dedicated and set apart as market grounds and spaces, to be known as the city market, and shall be used for the purpose of buying and selling provisions and other articles necessary for the sustenance and convenience of city inhabitants, subject to the following regulations. (Ord. 2213 § 1, 1948) 


933.02       Control by market master – Rules and regulations.

The market master under the supervision of the city manager shall have full charge of the city market and may make and enforce such rules and regulations as necessary for the proper use and control of the city market. (Ord. 2213 § 17, 1948)   


933.03       Market master to establish rental schedule.

The market master, subject to approval by the city manager, shall fix a schedule for rental, by the day, month or year, of booths, stalls, space and benches in and about the market house, covering those cases for which no schedule has been fixed by ordinance. Booths, stalls, space and benches may be leased or rented by responsible parties for a term not to exceed one year at the price fixed by such schedule, and shall be numbered or otherwise marked to insure ready and positive identification. (Ord. 1131 § 6, 1914) 


933.04       Weekly deposit of moneys collected and report.

All revenues from market rental fees collected by the market master for the use of the city shall be turned over to the city treasurer on Monday of each week or on Tuesday when a legal holiday falls on Monday. A report showing in detail the source of such revenues shall be given to the city controller at the same time, to include a statement of moneys due but not collected with a sufficient reason therefor. (Ord. 1131 § 5, 1914) 


933.05       General market days and hours.

Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday shall be general market days and the hours shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. No sales shall be made after 5:00 p.m. (Ord. 2213 § 2, 1948) 


933.06       Market master may order removal of persons or articles.

(A) The market master may order the removal from the market of any person violating any city ordinance, or who conducts himself in a disorderly manner, or who fails to obey the lawful orders of the market master. He may order the removal from the market of any vehicle or article brought or left therein contrary to law. He may call on police officers as may be necessary to aid him in enforcing such provisions. 

(B) No person shall resist, hinder or obstruct the market master in the lawful discharge of his duties. (Ord. 2213 §§ 3, 4, 1948)   


933.07       Other public food sales prohibited – Farmers exception.

No person, except farmers selling their own produce, shall offer for sale, during market hours, at any public place, street or alley other than the market grounds of the city any fruit, fish, meat, butter, eggs, poultry, vegetables or other provisions. (Ord. 2213 § 5, 1948)


933.08       Fee payment prior to sale – Receipt to be given.

Persons shall, before offering for sale any food or merchandise at the city market, pay to the market master the prescribed fee, for which the market master shall make out and give a receipt, setting forth the name of the party, the article to be vended and the date given. (Ord. 2213 § 6, 1948) 


933.09       Prohibited and limited sale of certain articles.

No person shall offer for sale or sell in the city market any jewelry (except hand-made), medicine, dry goods, groceries or hardware, or sell, give away or bring upon the market grounds any liquor or beer. No furniture, machinery, vehicles, tools or implements of any kind shall be brought, stored or exposed for sale at any time in or about the city market, except by special consent of the market master. (Ord. 2213 § 8, 1948) 


933.10       Killing animals – Nuisances, posting bills and property destruction prohibited.

No person shall kill, slaughter or dress any animal in the market house or on the grounds, or deposit any animal or vegetable offals, filth, dead animal or fowl, fish or any noisome substance, nor permit thereon any nuisance, nor shall any person without approval post bills, advertisements or signs, nor break, injure or deface in any way any part of the market house. (Ord. 2213 § 10, 1948)   


933.11       Sale of unwholesome or unripe foods prohibited.

No person shall offer for sale or sell in the city market any unwholesome or unsound meat, fish, eggs or poultry, or any unripe berries or other fruit or vegetables. (Ord. 2213 § 11, 1948) 


933.12       Removal of articles after closing – Sanitation of occupied space.

Every person renting and occupying space in the city market shall, within one hour after the time of closing, cause his articles and provisions to be removed from the market grounds. Any person occupying space in the city market shall keep such space in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. (Ord. 2213 § 12, 1948)   


933.13       Resale prohibited.

No person shall purchase any food or other articles at the city market for the purpose of reselling the same. (Ord. 2213 § 13, 1948)   


933.14       Use and placement of signs.

All signs used by persons occupying any space shall be of such size and character as may be approved by the market master, and the same shall be fastened or placed in such manner as shall be approved by the market master. (Ord. 2213 § 14, 1948)   


933.15       Solicitation for regular retail merchants prohibited.

No person shall solicit orders for or deliver groceries or provisions from any mail order house, department store or other person doing a general mercantile business, nor shall any merchant have his food or produce offered for sale on commission on the market grounds during market hours. (Ord. 2213 § 15, 1948)   


933.16       Meat sale prohibited outside market building.

No person shall offer for sale or sell upon the market grounds, except inside the market building, any fresh or salt meat which has been sliced or cut into small pieces for retail trade. (Ord. 2213 § 18, 1948) 


933.17       Space allocated for sale of nursery stock or trees.

No nursery stock or Christmas trees or material of like nature shall be displayed or offered for sale upon the market grounds, except in such space as is allotted by the market master. (Ord. 2213 § 21, 1948) 


933.18       Obstructions within building prohibited.

No person shall at any time place any obstruction in the aisles, entrance or stairways of the market building. (Ord. 2213 § 22, 1948) 


933.19       Projections into traveled roadway prohibited.

No person shall cause any vehicle or any produce located on Market Place and on Cherry Alley to project more than 10 feet, six inches east of a straight line tangent to the front or east side of the market building. (Ord. 2213 § 23, 1948) 


933.20       Space width regulated and limited.

The width of stalls or spaces shall be determined by the market master provided no stall or space shall exceed seven feet in width. (Ord. 2213 § 24, 1948) 


933.21       Space sublease prohibited.

No person shall assign or sublet his stall, space or reservation. (Ord. 2213 § 25, 1948) 


933.99       Penalty.

Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $100.00, together with costs, and in default of payment thereof shall be imprisoned not less than five nor more than 30 days. Market privileges shall be forfeited if the violator is a lessee of space at the city market. (Ord. 2213 § 26, 1948) 


Article 935       PARKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY

Sections:

935.01  Injury or destruction to trees or other public property.

935.02  Fires prohibited.

935.03  Littering or dumping prohibited.

935.04  Regulations for Diamond Park – Obstructions and trespass.

935.99  Penalty.


935.01       Injury or destruction to trees or other public property.

No person shall destroy, injure, cut down, dig up, break down, or in any manner mutilate any tree, shrub or plant, or in any manner deface any ornament, monument, seat or building in or upon, or hereafter to be placed in or upon any park or property belonging to the city. (Ord. 1256 § 1, 1916) 


935.02       Fires prohibited.

No person shall kindle a fire in or upon any park or other property belonging to the city. (Ord. 1256 § 2, 1916) 


935.03       Littering or dumping prohibited.

No person shall throw or leave any litter, paper, rubbish or garbage in or upon any park or other property belonging to the city. (Ord. 1256 § 3, 1916) 


935.04       Regulations for Diamond Park – Obstructions and trespass.

(A) No person shall drive or ride in or upon any vehicle, motorized, or otherwise, or any horse or other animal, across, in or upon the public square known as Diamond Park, nor shall any person place or erect any booth, shed, tent or other obstruction or structure in or upon the public square known as Diamond Park, except as provided for in this article. 

(B) Upon application made by any person in connection with a special event to be conducted with city approval on or near the public square known as Diamond Park, the city manager may issue a permit for the temporary placement of vehicles, equipment, animals, obstructions or structures, including booths, sheds, tents, across, in or upon Diamond Park, pursuant to guidelines and regulations established by city council. 

(C) No person shall trespass upon such parts of the public square known as Diamond Park as council shall designate by posted signs. (Ord. 3099 §§ 1, 2, 1985; Ord. 1132 § 1, 1914)


935.99       Penalty.

Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $100.00, and in default thereof shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days. (Ord. 1230 § 4, 1916) 


Article 941 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

941.01    Short title.

941.02    Statement of findings.

941.03    Purpose.

941.04    Statutory authority.

941.05    Applicability.

941.06    Repealer.

941.07    Severability.

941.08    Compatibility with other ordinance requirements.

941.09    Duty of persons engaged in the development of land.

941.10    Municipal liability disclaimer.


941.01 Short title.

This title shall be known and may be cited as “The City of Meadville Stormwater Management Ordinance.” (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005)


941.02 Statement of findings.

The governing body of the City of Meadville finds that:

A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood reduction efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public health and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of water resources.

B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including reasonable regulation of development and activities causing accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare, and the protection of the people of the City of Meadville and all the people of the commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.

C. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic patterns; accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion of streambeds and stream banks thereby elevating sedimentation); destroying aquatic habitat; and elevating aquatic pollutant concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals, and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss of recharge. 

D. Stormwater is an important water resource which provides groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams, which also protects and maintains surface water quality.

E. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an essential component in successfully addressing stormwater issues.

F. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005)


941.03 Purpose.

The purpose of this title is to promote health, safety, and welfare within the City of Meadville, Crawford County, by minimizing the harms and maximizing the benefits described in MMC 941.02 through provisions intended to:

A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including regulations at 25 PA Code Chapter 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of the commonwealth.

B. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems close to their source, by regulating activities that cause these problems.

C. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.

D. Maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality, and to otherwise protect water resources.

E. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses. 

F. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams and prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.

G. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, with a minimum of structures and a maximum use of natural processes.

H. Provide procedures, performance standards, and design criteria for stormwater planning and management.

I. Provide proper operations and maintenance of all temporary and permanent stormwater management facilities and best management practices (BMPs) that are constructed and implemented.

J. Provide standards to meet the NPDES permit requirements.

K. Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program to address nonstormwater discharges to the City of Meadville’s separate storm sewer system. (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005)


941.04 Statutory authority.

A. Primary Authority. The City of Meadville is empowered to regulate these activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, 32 P.S., P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. Section 680.1 et seq., as amended, the “Storm Water Management Act,” and the Third Class City Code, Title 53 P.S. Section 35101 et seq.

B. Secondary Authority. The City of Meadville also is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


941.05 Applicability.

In the City of Meadville, all regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff, including land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to regulation by this title.

Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management controls are also regulated under existing state law and implementing regulations. This title shall operate in coordination with those parallel requirements; the requirements of this title shall be no less restrictive in meeting the purposes of this title than state law. 

“Regulated activities” are any earth disturbance activities or any activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff. “Regulated activities” include, but are not limited to, the following listed items: 

A. Earth disturbance activities;

B. Land development;

C. Subdivision where earth disturbance activities are proposed;

D. Construction of new or additional impervious or semi-pervious surfaces;

E. Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings;

F. Diversion or piping of any natural or manmade stream channel;

G. Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances thereto;

H. Installation of stormwater BMPs.

See MMC 945.02 for exemption/modification criteria. (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005. Formerly 941.04)


941.06 Repealer.

Any ordinance, ordinance provision(s), or regulation of the City of Meadville inconsistent with any of the provision(s) of this title is hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


941.07 Severability.

In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section(s) or provision(s) of this title invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining section(s) or provision(s) of this title. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


941.08 Compatibility with other ordinance requirements.

Approvals issued and actions taken pursuant to this title do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to comply with or to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable codes, laws, rules, statutes, or ordinances. To the extent that this title imposes more rigorous or stringent requirements for stormwater management, the specific requirements contained in this title shall be followed. (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005. Formerly 941.05)


941.09 Duty of persons engaged in the development of land.

Notwithstanding any provision(s) of this title, including exemptions, any landowner or any person engaged in the alteration or development of land which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety, or other property. Such measures also shall include actions as are required to manage the rate, volume, direction, and quality of resulting stormwater runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property, and water quality. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


941.10 Municipal liability disclaimer.

A. Neither the granting of any approval under this title, nor the compliance with the provisions of this title, or with any condition imposed by a municipal official hereunder, shall relieve any person from any responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the City of Meadville for damages to persons or property. 

B. The granting of a permit which includes any stormwater management facilities shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the City of Meadville, or by an official or employee thereof, of the practicability or safety of any structure, use or other plan proposed, and shall create no liability upon or cause of action against such public body, official or employee for any damage that may result pursuant thereto. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


Article 943 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

943.01    Definitions.


943.01 Definitions.

For the purpose of this title, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:

A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the plural; and the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.

B. The word “includes” or “including” shall not limit the term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.

C. The word “person” includes an individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any other similar entity.

D. The words “shall” and “must” are mandatory; the words “may” and “should” are permissive.

E. The words “used or occupied” include the words “intended, designed, maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained.”

“Accelerated erosion” means the removal of the surface of the land through the combined action of human activity and natural processes at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.

“Agricultural activities” means activities associated with agriculture such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops, tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops, or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural activity.

“Alteration” means, as applied to land, a change in topography as a result of the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less impervious; land disturbance.

“Applicant” means a landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an application for approval to engage in any regulated activities at a project site within the City of Meadville.

“Best management practices (BMPs)” means activities, facilities, designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes of this title. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories or measures: “nonstructural” or “structural.” “Nonstructural” BMPs are measures referred to as operational and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas “structural” BMPs are measures that consist of a physical device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. “Structural” BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and manufactured devices. “Structural” stormwater BMPs are permanent appurtenances to the project site.

“Channel erosion” means the widening, deepening, and headward cutting of small channels and waterways, due to erosion caused by moderate to large floods.

“Cistern” means an underground reservoir or tank used for storing rainwater.

“The City of Meadville” means Crawford County, Pennsylvania.

“Conservation district” means the Crawford County conservation district. The Crawford County conservation district has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with the Department of Environmental Protection to administer and enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated under 25 PA Code Chapter 102.

“Culvert” means a structure with appurtenant works that carries a stream and/or stormwater runoff under or through an embankment or fill.

“Dam” means an artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works, constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.

“Design storm” means the magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., a 25-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see “return period.”

“Designee” means the agent of the City of Meadville and/or agent of the governing body involved with the administration, review or enforcement of any provisions of this title by contract or memorandum of understanding.

“Detention basin” means an impoundment structure designed to manage stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate.

“Detention volume” means the volume of runoff that is captured and released into waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.

“Developer” means a person, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes any regulated activity of this title.

“Development site (site)” means the specific tract of land for which a regulated activity is proposed. Also see “project site.”

“Disturbed area” means an unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.

“Downslope property line” means that portion of the property line of the lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located such that all overland or pipe flow from the site would be directed toward it.

“Drainage conveyance facility” means a stormwater management facility designed to convey stormwater runoff and shall include streams, channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.

“Drainage easement” means a right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing the use of private land for stormwater management, drainage, or conveyance purposes.

“Drainageway” means any natural or artificial watercourse, trench, ditch, pipe, swale, channel, or similar depression into which surface water flows.

“Earth disturbance activity” means a construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land development, agricultural plowing or tilling, timber harvesting activities, road maintenance activities, mineral extraction, and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.

“Erosion” means the movement of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice, or other natural forces.

“Erosion and sediment pollution control plan” means a plan which is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.

“Exceptional value waters” means surface waters of high quality, which satisfies PA Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, 93.4b(b) (relating to anti-degradation).

“Existing conditions” means the initial condition of a project site prior to the proposed construction. If the initial condition of the site is undeveloped land and not forested, the land use shall be considered as “meadow” unless the natural land cover is documented to generate lower curve numbers or rational “C” coefficient.

“FEMA” means the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

“Flood” means a general but temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of the commonwealth.

“Flood fringe” means the remaining portions of the 100-year floodplain outside of the floodway boundary.

“Floodplain” means any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any natural source or delineated by applicable Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard Boundary – mapped as being a special flood hazard area. Included are lands adjoining a river or stream that have been or may be inundated by a 100-year flood. Also included are areas that comprise Group 13 soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to time by PADEP).

“Floodway” means the channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge the 100-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the 100-year frequency floodway, it is assumed – absent evidence to the contrary – that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet landward from the top of the bank of the stream.

“Forest management/timber operations” means planning and activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.

“Freeboard” means a vertical distance between the elevation of the design high water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge. The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.

“Grade” means a slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground specified in percent and shown on plans as specified herein. 

“(To) Grade” means to finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment or bottom of excavation.

“Groundwater recharge” means replenishment of existing natural underground water supplies.

“HEC-HMS model calibrated (Hydrologic Engineering Center Hydrologic Modeling System)” means a computer-based hydrologic modeling technique adapted to the watershed(s) in Crawford County for the Act 167 Plan. The model has been calibrated by adjusting key model input parameters.

“High quality waters” means surface water having quality which exceeds levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife and recreation in and on the water by satisfying PA Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, 93.4b(a).

“Hydrologic soil group (HSG)” means infiltration rates of soils vary widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates. Soils are classified into one of four HSG (A, B, C, and D) according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) of the U.S. Department of Agriculture defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the area of interest may be identified from a soil survey report from the local NRCS office or the county conservation district.

“Impervious surface (impervious area)” means a surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surface (or areas) include, but is not limited to: roofs, additional indoor living spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures, parking or driveway areas, and any new streets and sidewalks. Any surface areas proposed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious surfaces. 

“Impoundment” means a retention or detention basin designed to retain stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.

“Infiltration structures” means a structure designed to direct runoff into the ground (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench, etc.).

“Inlet” means a surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the diversion end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.

“Land development (development)” means (i) the improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving (a) a group of two or more buildings, or (b) the division or allocation of land or space between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features; (ii) any subdivision of land; (iii) development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the PA Municipalities Planning Code.

“Low impact development (LID)” means an approach to land development that uses various land planning and design practices and technologies to simultaneously conserve and protect natural resource systems and reduce infrastructure costs. LID still allows land to be developed, but in a cost-effective manner that helps mitigate potential environmental impacts.

“Main stem (main channel)” means any stream segment or other runoff conveyance facility used as a reach in the Crawford County Act 167 watershed hydrologic model(s).

“Manning equation (Manning formula)” means a method for calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope. “Open channels” may include closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.

“National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)” means the federal government’s system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act, which is delegated to PADEP in Pennsylvania.

“NOAA Atlas 14” means the Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service, Hydro-meteorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland (2004). NOAA’s Atlas 14 can be accessed at Internet address http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.

“Nonpoint source pollution” means pollution that enters a water body from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible, confined, or discrete conveyances.

“NRCS” means Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service (SCS)).

“Open channel” means a drainage element in which stormwater flows with an open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and manmade drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes not under pressure.

“Outfall” means (i) point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain; (ii) “point source” as described in 40 CFR Section 122.2 at the point where the City of Meadville’s storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of the commonwealth.

“Outlet” means points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater, or artificial drain.

“PADEP” means the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.

“Parking lot storage” involves the use of impervious parking areas as temporary impoundments with controlled release rates during rainstorms.

“Peak discharge” means the maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm event.

“Person” means an individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, or a governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. 

“Pervious area” means any area not defined as impervious.

“Pipe” means a culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.

“Planning commission” means the planning commission of the City of Meadville.

“Point source” means any discernible, confined, or discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to: any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state regulations at 25 Pennsylvania Code Section 92.1. 

“Probable maximum flood (PMF)” means the flood that may be expected from the most severe combination of critical meteorological and hydrologic conditions that are reasonably possible in any area. The PMF is derived from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP) as determined on the basis of data obtained from the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

“Project site” means the specific area of land where any regulated activities in the City of Meadville are planned, conducted, or maintained.

“Qualified professional” means any person licensed as a professional engineer by the Pennsylvania Department of State.

“Rational formula” means a rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak flow.

“Redevelopment” means earth disturbance activities on land, which has previously been developed.

“Regulated activities” means any earth disturbance activities or any activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff. 

“Regulated earth disturbance activity” means activity involving earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 PA Code Chapter 92, Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.

“Release rate” means the percentage of pre-development peak rate of runoff from a site or subwatershed area to which the post-development peak rate of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.

“Release rate district” means those subwatershed areas in which post-development flows must be reduced to a certain percentage of pre-development flows as required to meet the plan requirements and the goals of Act 167.

“Retention basin” means an impoundment in which stormwater is stored and not released during the storm event. Stored water may be released from the basin at some time after the end of the storm.

“Retention volume/removed runoff” means the volume of runoff that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this commonwealth during or after a storm event.

“Return period” means the average interval, in years, within which a storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the 25-year return period rainfall would be expected to recur on the average once every 25 years; or stated in another way, the probability of a 25-year storm occurring in any one given year is 0.04 (i.e., a four percent chance).

“Riparian buffer” means a vegetated area bordering perennial and intermittent streams and wetlands that serves as a protective filter to help protect streams and wetlands from the impacts of adjacent land uses. 

“Riser” means a vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.

“Road maintenance” means earth disturbance activities within the existing road right-of-way, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches, and other similar activities. Road maintenance activities that do not disturb the subbase of a paved road (such as milling and overlays) are not considered earth disturbance activities. 

“Rooftop detention” means temporary ponding and gradual release of stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.

“Runoff” means any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.

“Runoff capture volume” means the volume of runoff that is captured (retained) and not released into surface waters of the commonwealth during or after a storm event.

“Sediment” means soils or other materials transported by surface water as a product of erosion.

“Sediment basin” means a barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material transported by stormwater runoff.

“Sediment pollution” means the placement, discharge, or any other introduction of sediment into waters of the commonwealth occurring from the failure to properly design, construct, implement or maintain control measures and control facilities in accordance with the requirements of this title.

“Sedimentation” means the process by which mineral or organic matter is accumulated or deposited by the movement of water.

“Seepage pit/seepage trench” means an area of excavated earth filled with loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is directed for infiltration into the ground.

“Separate storm sewer system” means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff. 

“Sheet flow” means runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin, even layer, not concentrated in a channel.

“Soil cover complex method” means a method of runoff computation developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/cover to a runoff parameter called curve number (CN).

“Spillway (emergency)” means a depression in the embankment of a pond or basin, or other overflow structure, that is used to pass peak discharges greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the pond or basin.

“State water quality requirements” means the regulatory requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.

“Storage indication method” means a reservoir routing procedure based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and depth.

“Storm frequency” means the number of times that a given storm “event” occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See also “return period.”

“Storm sewer” means a system of pipes and/or open channels that convey intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.

“Stormwater” means drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation, snow, or ice melt.

“Stormwater hotspot” means a land use or activity that generates higher pollutants than are found in typical stormwater runoff and have a high potential to endanger local water quality, and could potentially threaten ground water reservoirs.

“Stormwater management facilities” means any structure, natural or manmade, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to: detention and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes and infiltration facilities.

“Stormwater management plan” means the Crawford County stormwater management plan for managing stormwater runoff in Crawford County as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167) and known as the “Storm Water Management Act.”

“Stormwater management site plan (SWM site plan)” means the plan prepared by the applicant or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be managed at the project site in accordance with this title. 

“Stream enclosure” means a bridge, culvert, or other structure in excess of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses regulated waters of the commonwealth.

“Subdivision” means the division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential dwellings, shall be exempt (Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247).

“Subwatershed area” means the smallest drainage unit of a watershed for which stormwater management criteria have been established in the stormwater management plan.

“Swale” means a low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface water runoff.

Timber Operations. See “forest management.”

“Time of concentration (Tc)” means the time for surface runoff to travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.

“USDA” means the United States Department of Agriculture.

“Watercourse” means a channel or conveyance of surface water, such as a stream or creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.

“Waters of the commonwealth” means rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

“Watershed” means an area drained by a river, watercourse, or other surface water, whether natural or artificial.

“Wetland” means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. (The term includes but is not limited to wetland areas listed in the state water plan, the United States Forest Service Wetlands Inventory of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Coastal Zone Management Plan and a wetland area designated by a river basin commission. This definition is used by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and the United States Army Corps of Engineers.) (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005)


Article 945 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS

Sections:

945.01    General requirements.

945.02    Exemptions/modifications.

945.03    Waivers.

945.04    Volume controls.

945.05    Rate controls.

945.06    Sensitive areas and stormwater hotspots.


945.01 General requirements.

A. For all regulated activities, unless specifically exempted in MMC 945.02:

1. Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is required.

2. No regulated activities shall commence until the City of Meadville issues written approval of a SWM site plan, which demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this title. 

3. The SWM site plan shall demonstrate that adequate capacity will be provided to meet the volume and rate control requirements, as described under MMC 945.04 and 945.05.

4. The SWM site plan approved by the City of Meadville shall be on-site throughout the duration of the regulated activities.

B. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g., during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this title and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code (including but not limited to Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment Control) and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual (E&S Manual), No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as amended and updated.

C. For all regulated activities, stormwater BMPs shall be designed, installed, implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and requirements of this title and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law, conform to the state water quality requirements, meet all requirements under the Storm Water Management Act and any more stringent requirements as determined by the City of Meadville.

D. The City of Meadville may, after consultation with PADEP, approve measures for meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in this title; provided, that they meet the minimum requirements of, and do not conflict with, state law, including, but not limited to, the Clean Streams Law.

E. All regulated activities shall include, to the maximum extent practicable, measures to:

1. Protect health, safety, and property.

2. Meet the water quality goals of this title by implementing measures to:

a. Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes, existing native vegetation and woodlands.

b. Create, maintain, or extend riparian buffers and protect existing forested buffers. 

c. Provide trees and woodlands adjacent to impervious areas whenever feasible.

d. Minimize the creation of impervious surfaces and the degradation of waters of the commonwealth and promote groundwater recharge.

e. Protect natural systems and processes (drainageways, vegetation, soils, and sensitive areas) and maintain, as much as possible, the natural hydrologic regime.

f. Incorporate natural site elements (wetlands, stream corridors, mature forests) as design elements.

g. Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.

h. Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction.

i. Minimize thermal impacts to waters of the commonwealth.

j. Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious areas, wherever possible, and decentralize and manage stormwater at its source.

F. Impervious Areas.

1. The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the impervious areas in the total proposed development, even if development is to take place in stages.

2. For developments taking place in stages, the entire development plan must be used in determining conformance with this title.

3. For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the city engineer, in his discretion, may require that the total impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this title.

G. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto adjacent property, the applicant must document that adequate downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion, sedimentation, flooding, or other harm will result from the concentrated discharge.

1. The applicant must provide an easement for proposed concentrated flow across adjacent properties to a drainage way or public right-of-way.

2. Such stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this title.

H. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent with this title.

I. Where watercourses traverse a development site, drainage easements (to encompass the 100-year flood elevation with a minimum width of 20 feet) shall be provided conforming to the line of such watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the easement. Also, maintenance, including mowing of vegetation within the easement, may be required, except as approved by the appropriate governing authority.

J. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainage ways shall be subject to approval by PADEP under regulations at 25 PA Code Chapter 105 through the joint permit application process or, where deemed appropriate by PADEP, through the general permit process.

K. Any stormwater management facilities or any facilities that constitute water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges, outfalls, or stream enclosures, etc.) that are regulated by this title, that will be located in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth (including wetlands), shall be subject to approval by PADEP under regulations at 25 PA Code Chapter 105 through the joint permit application process or, where deemed appropriate by PADEP, the general permit process. When there is a question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility of the applicant or his agent to show that the land in question cannot be classified as wetlands; otherwise, approval to work in the area must be obtained from PADEP.

L. Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety permit under PADEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105 concerning dam safety.

M. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this title that will be located on or discharged onto state highway rights-of-way shall be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PENNDOT).

N. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., are encouraged, where soil conditions and geology permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need for detention facilities.

O. Infiltration BMPs should be dispersed throughout the site, made as shallow as practicable, and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while still meeting the other requirements of this title.

P. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers, or roadside ditches in order to promote overland flow and infiltration/percolation of stormwater where it is advantageous to do so. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, then the City of Meadville shall permit it on a case-by-case basis.

Q. Applicants are encouraged to use low impact development practices to comply with the requirements of this title and the state water quality requirements.

R. When stormwater management facilities are proposed within 1,000 feet of a downstream municipality, the SWM plan shall be submitted to the downstream municipality’s engineer for review and comment. (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005)


945.02 Exemptions/modifications.

A. Under no circumstance shall the applicant be exempt from implementing such measures as necessary to:

1. Meet state water quality standards and requirements.

2. Protect health, safety, and property.

B. The applicant must utilize the following BMPs to the maximum extent practicable to receive consideration for the exemptions:

1. Design around and limit disturbance of floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes over 15 percent, existing native vegetation, and other sensitive and special value features.

2. Maintain riparian and forested buffers.

3. Limit grading and maintain nonerosive flow conditions in natural flow paths.

4. Maintain existing tree canopies near impervious areas.

5. Minimize soil disturbance and reclaim disturbed areas with topsoil and vegetation.

6. Direct runoff to pervious areas.

C. The applicant’s proposed development/additional impervious area may not adversely impact the following:

1. Capacities of existing drainageways and storm sewer systems.

2. Velocities and erosion.

3. Quality of runoff if direct discharge is proposed.

4. Existing known problem areas.

5. Safe conveyance of the additional runoff.

6. Downstream property owners.

D. An applicant proposing regulated activities, after demonstrating compliance with applicable sections of this title, may be exempted from the SWM site plan, rate control, or volume control requirements of this title according to the following table:

Exemption Table 

	New Impervious Area1, 2

(square footage)	Applicant Must Provide

	0 – 1,000	—

	>1,000 – 2,500	Documentation of new impervious surface3

	>2,500 – 5,000	Volume controls and small project SWM application3

	>5,000	Rate controls, volume controls and SWM site plan

Notes:

1 New impervious area since the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title. 

2 Gravel in existing condition shall be considered pervious and gravel in proposed condition shall be considered impervious. Existing maintained municipal roads are considered impervious.

3 The small project stormwater management application shall be used to establish eligibility for the exemptions listed in the above table for projects under 5,000 square feet or for single-family home construction. The small project SWM application satisfies the requirement for demonstrating compliance with subsections (A), (B), and (C) of this section and for documentation of new impervious surface; credits for disconnection of impervious surfaces and tree planting; and for computing the size of volume control BMPs, when required.

E. An applicant proposing regulated activities, after demonstrating compliance with subsections (A), (B), and (C) of this section may be exempted from various requirements of this title if documentation can be provided that a downstream manmade water body (i.e., reservoir, lake, or manmade wetlands) has been designed or modified to address the potential stormwater flooding impacts of the proposed development.

F. The purpose of this section is to ensure consistency of stormwater management planning between local ordinances and NPDES permitting (when required) and to ensure that the applicant has a single and clear set of stormwater management standards to which the applicant is subject. The City of Meadville may accept alternative stormwater management controls under this section; provided, that:

1. The City of Meadville, in consultation with the PADEP, determines that meeting the volume control requirements (see MMC 945.04) is not possible or places an undue hardship on the applicant.

2. The alternative controls are documented to be acceptable to PADEP for NPDES requirements pertaining to post construction stormwater management requirements.

3. The alternative controls are in compliance with all other sections of this title, including but not limited to MMC 945.01(D) and subsections (A) through (C) of this section.

G. Agricultural activity is exempt from the rate control and SWM site plan preparation requirements of this title provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 PA Code Chapter 102.

H. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the rate and volume control requirement and SWM site plan preparation requirement of this title provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 PA Code Chapter 102. It should be noted that temporary roadways are not exempt. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


945.03 Waivers.

A. The provisions of this title are the minimum standards for the protection of the public welfare.

B. All waiver requests must meet the provisions of subsections (G) and (H) of this section. Waivers shall not be issued from implementing such measures as necessary to:

1. Meet state water quality standards and requirements.

2. Protect health, safety, and property.

The City of Meadville then will consider waiver requests in accordance with MMC 945.01(D), except that requests for waivers from the design requirements of MMC 949.01 and 949.02 will be considered by the City of Meadville at its sole discretion.

C. If an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the governing body of the City of Meadville that any mandatory provision of this title is unreasonable or causes unique or undue unreasonableness or hardship as it applies to the proposed project, or that an alternate design may result in a superior result within the context of MMC 941.02 and 941.03, the governing body of the City of Meadville upon obtaining the comments and recommendations of the municipal engineer may grant a waiver or relief so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest is secured; provided, that such waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this title.

D. The applicant shall submit all requests for waivers in writing and shall include such requests as a part of the plan review and approval process. The applicant shall state in full the facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based, the provision or provisions of this title that are involved, and the minimum waiver or relief that is necessary. The applicant shall state how the requested waiver and how the applicant’s proposal shall result in an equal or better means of complying with the intent or purpose and general principles of this title.

E. The City of Meadville shall keep a written record of all actions on waiver requests.

F. The City of Meadville may charge a fee for each waiver request, which shall be used to offset the administrative costs of reviewing the waiver request. The applicant shall also agree to reimburse the City of Meadville for reasonable and necessary fees that may be incurred by the municipal engineer in any review of a waiver request.

G. In granting waivers, the City of Meadville may impose reasonable conditions that will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements that are to be modified. 

H. The City of Meadville may grant applications for waivers when the following findings are made, as relevant: 

1. That the waiver shall result in an equal or better means of complying with the intent of this title.

2. That the waiver is the minimum necessary to provide relief.

3. That the applicant is not requesting a waiver based on cost considerations.

4. That existing down gradient stormwater problems will not be exacerbated.

5. That runoff is not being diverted to a different drainage area.

6. That increased flooding or ponding on off-site properties or roadways will not occur.

7. That potential icing conditions will not occur.

8. That increase of peak flow (design storms up to 100-year) or volume (design storms up to two-year) from the site will not occur. 

9. That erosion causing conditions due to increased peak flows or volume will not occur.

10. That adverse impact to water quality will not result.

11. That increased 100-year floodplain levels will not result.

12. That increased or unusual municipal maintenance expenses will not result from the waiver.

13. That the amount of stormwater generated has been minimized to the greatest extent allowed.

14. That infiltration of runoff throughout the proposed site has been provided where practicable and predevelopment groundwater recharge protected.

15. That peak flow attenuation of runoff has been provided. 

16. That long-term operation and maintenance activities are established.

17. That the receiving streams and/or water bodies will not be adversely impacted in flood-carrying capacity, aquatic habitat, channel stability and erosion and sedimentation. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


945.04 Volume controls.

A. The low impact development practices provided in the BMP manual and in the city’s stormwater procedures manual shall be utilized for all regulated activities to the maximum extent practicable.

B. Stormwater runoff volume controls shall be implemented using the design storm method or the simplified method as defined below:

1. The design storm method (CG-1 in the BMP manual) is applicable to any sized regulated activity. This method requires detailed modeling based on site conditions.

a. Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume when compared to the pre-development total runoff volume for the two-year/24-hour storm event. 

b. For hydrologic modeling purposes:

i. Existing nonforested pervious areas must be considered meadow (good condition) for predevelopment hydrologic calculations.

ii. Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present within the proposed project site, shall be considered meadow (good condition) for predevelopment hydrologic calculations for redevelopment.

2. The simplified method (CG-2 in the BMP manual) is independent of site conditions and should be used if the design storm method is not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated activities greater than one acre or for projects that require detailed design of stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:

a. Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.

b. At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e., it shall not be released into surface waters of the commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration.

c. Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.

d. Actual field infiltration tests at the location of the proposed elevation of the stormwater BMPs are required. Infiltration test shall be conducted in accordance with the BMP manual. Notification of the City of Meadville shall be provided to allow witnessing of the testing.

3. In cases where it is not possible or desirable to use infiltration-based best management practices to partially fulfill the requirements in subsection (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section, the following procedure shall be used:

a. At a minimum, the following documentation shall be provided to justify the decision to not use infiltration BMPs:

i. Description of and justification for field infiltration/permeability testing with respect to the type of test and test locations.

ii. An interpretive narrative describing existing site soils and their structure as these relate to the interaction between soils and water occurring on the site. In addition to providing soil and soil profile descriptions, this narrative shall identify depth to seasonal high water tables and depth to bedrock, and provide a description of all subsurface elements (fragipans and other restrictive layers, geology, etc.) that influence the direction and rate of subsurface water movement. 

iii. A qualitative assessment of the site’s contribution to annual aquifer recharge shall be made, along with identification of any restrictions or limitations associated with the use of engineered infiltration facilities. 

iv. The provided documentation must be signed and sealed by a professional engineer or geologist.

b. The following water quality pollutant load reductions will be required for all disturbed areas within the proposed development:

	Pollutant Load	Units	Required Reduction (%)

	Total Suspended Solids (TSS)	Pounds	85

	Total Phosphorus (TP)	Pounds	85

	Total Nitrate (NO3)	Pounds	50

c. The performance criteria for water quality best management practices shall be determined from the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, most current version. 

C. The applicable worksheets from the BMP manual must be used in calculations to establish volume control. Worksheets documenting volume control credits are also acceptable. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


945.05 Rate controls.

A. Lands contained within Crawford County that have not had release rates established under an approved Act 167, Stormwater Management Plan:

1. Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the pre-development discharge rates for the one-year, two-year, 10-year, 25-year, 50-year, and 100-year storms. 

B. Lands contained within Crawford County that have had release rates established under an approved Act 167, Stormwater Management Plan:

1. The post-development peak discharge rates shall be in accordance with the approved release rate map for the individual watershed. 

a. Conneaut Outlet Watershed. For the two-year, 10-year, 25-year and 100-year storms, post-development peak discharge rates shall follow the approved release rate map. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


945.06 Sensitive areas and stormwater hotspots.

A. Sensitive Areas, Defined as Follows, and Stormwater Hotspots Which Require Special Consideration with Regard to Stormwater Management. 

1. “Sensitive areas” are defined as those areas that, if developed, have the potential to endanger a water supply. These areas consist of the delineated one-year zone of contribution and direct upslope areas tributary to the water supply wells. Municipalities may update the sensitive area boundaries based on new research or studies as required. 

2. “Stormwater hotspots” are land development projects that have a high potential to endanger local water quality, and could potentially threaten ground water reservoirs. The municipal engineer will determine what constitutes these classifications on a case-by-case basis. The PADEP wellhead protection contaminant source list shall be used as a guide in these determinations. Industrial manufacturing site and hazardous material storage areas must provide NPDES SIC codes. Industrial sites referenced in 40 CFR 125 are also examples of hotspots.

B. Performance Standards.

1. The location of the boundaries of sensitive areas is set by drainage areas tributary to any public water supply. The exact location of these boundaries, as they apply to a given development site, shall be determined using mapping at a scale which accurately defines the limits of the sensitive area. If the project site is within the sensitive area (in whole or in part), two-foot contour interval mapping shall be provided to define the limits of the sensitive area. If the project site is adjacent to but within 500 linear feet of a defined sensitive area, a five-foot contour interval map defining the limits of the sensitive area shall be included in the stormwater management plan to document the site’s location relative to the sensitive area. 

2. Stormwater hotspot developments may be required to prepare and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan and file notice of intent as required under the provision of the EPA Industrial Stormwater NPDES permit requirements. 

3. Stormwater hotspot developments must use an acceptable pretreatment BMP prior to volume control and/or rate control BMPs. Acceptable pretreatment BMPs for these developments include those based on filtering, settling, or chemical reaction processes such as coagulation. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


Article 947 RIPARIAN BUFFER STANDARDS

Sections:

947.01    Riparian buffer requirements.

947.02    Riparian buffer easement.


947.01 Riparian buffer requirements.

Where a regulated activity is proposed, the riparian buffer shall be established as follows:

A. The buffer shall be measured perpendicularly from the top of the stream bank landward.

1. Impaired watersheds: a minimum of 150 feet; 

2. All other watersheds: a minimum of 50 feet; or

3. As determined by a stream corridor study approved by PADEP and the City of Meadville.

B. The riparian buffer shall be located on both sides of all perennial and intermittent streams. The perennial and intermittent streams and the riparian buffer boundaries shall be shown on all applications for building permits, subdivision, or land development. Existing uses within the buffer are permitted to continue but not be expanded. Placement of new structures or roadways within the riparian buffer shall be prohibited except as listed in subsection (E) of this section. Where a wetland exists within the buffer area, the buffer shall be extended landward to provide a minimum buffer of 25 feet, as measured perpendicularly from the wetland boundary.

C. The buffer, if existing, shall be undisturbed forest consisting of appropriate native species; if a buffer is not currently nonexistent, it shall be established using the appropriate native species.

D. Where wetlands are located partially or entirely within a buffer, the buffer shall be extended to encompass the wetland and shall be widened by a distance sufficient to provide a 25-foot forested buffer measured perpendicularly from the wetland boundary.

E. The following uses shall be permitted in the buffer:

1. Footpaths, trails and bike paths; provided, that:

a. Width is limited to five feet; 

b. Width may be increased provided a corresponding increase in the buffer is provided;

c. Construction shall have minimal impact to the buffer.

2. Stream crossings, provided the crossing is designed and constructed in such a manner as to minimize the impact to the buffer. The riparian buffer shall be restored to its original condition, to the maximum extent practical, upon completion of construction.

3. Utility lines; provided, that the crossing is designed and constructed in such a manner as to minimize the impact to the inner buffer; and provided, that there is no practical alternative to locating the utility line within the buffer. The riparian buffer shall be restored to its original condition, to the maximum extent practical, upon completion of construction.

4. Maintenance and restoration of the riparian buffer.

5. Projects conducted with the objective of improvement, stabilization, restoration, or enhancement of the stream bank, stream channel, floodplain, watershed hydrology, riparian buffers, or aquatic habitat and maintenance activities associated with such projects. These projects include, but are not limited to, agricultural and stormwater management best management practices. Such projects must receive appropriate permits and approvals from PADEP prior to starting the project.

6. Minor private recreational uses for the property owner. Such uses include benches, fire rings, and similar uses. Such uses do not include structures such as cabins, sheds, pavilions, garages, dwellings or similar structures.

7. Boat launches, docks, nonmotorized vehicle and pedestrian trails and any use of the same general character as any of the uses above.

F. Disturbance of the riparian buffer shall be limited to the area necessary to perform an allowable use.

G. Where possible and practical, disturbances shall be phased with each phase restored prior to beginning the next phase.

H. Allowable activities shall not cause stormwater flow to concentrate except as properly controlled and managed subject to a plan designed by a professional engineer and as approved by the city’s engineer. Further, any construction within a riparian buffer area must provide equivalent, or greater, area of riparian area offset. This may include additional native species planting or invasive species eradication.

I. Any vegetation removed for an allowable activity shall be replaced immediately upon completion of the activity. Where mature trees are removed, such trees shall be replaced with the largest practical tree of acceptable native species.

J. Erosion and sediment pollution control shall be installed and maintained during construction. Evidence of an approved erosion and sediment control plan, NPDES permit or other PADEP permit, where required, shall be submitted prior to issuance of local permits.

K. Riparian buffers shall be maintained in a manner consistent with sound forest management practices. In the absence of a site-specific management plan, the following maintenance guidelines apply:

1. Buffers shall be inspected periodically for evidence of excessive sediment deposition, erosion or concentrated flow channels. Prompt action shall be taken to correct these problems and prevent future occurrence.

2. Trees presenting an unusual hazard of creating downstream obstructions shall be removed. Such material shall be removed from the floodplain or the riparian buffer (whichever is widest); or cut into sections small enough so as to prevent the possibility of creating obstructions downstream. Wherever possible, large stable debris should be conserved.

3. Vegetation should be inspected periodically to ensure diverse vegetative cover and vigorous plant growth consistent with buffering objectives.

a. Remove invasive plant species that may threaten the integrity of the buffer.

b. Periodic cutting of trees may be necessary to promote vigorous growth and encourage regeneration. 

4. Excessive use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and other chemicals shall be avoided. These products should be used only when absolutely necessary to maintain buffer vegetation. (Ord. 3763 §§ 1–3, 2017; Ord. 3687, 2011)


947.02 Riparian buffer easement.

For all required riparian buffers, an easement shall be provided:

A. Easements shall be in favor of the City of Meadville and in accord with applicable sections of this title. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


Article 949 DESIGN CRITERIA

Sections:

949.01    Design criteria for stormwater management and drainage facilities.

949.02    Calculation methodology.


949.01 Design criteria for stormwater management and drainage facilities.

A. General Design Guidelines.

1. Stormwater shall not be transferred from one watershed to another, unless (a) the watersheds are subwatersheds of a common watershed which join together within the perimeter of the property; (b) the effect of the transfer does not alter the peak rate discharge onto adjacent lands; or (c) easements from the affected landowner(s) are provided.

2. Consideration shall be given to the relationship of the subject property to the drainage pattern of the watershed. A concentrated discharge of stormwater to an adjacent property shall be within an existing watercourse or confined in an easement or returned to a predevelopment flow type condition.

3. Stormwater BMPs and recharge facilities are encouraged (e.g., rooftop storage, drywells, cisterns, recreation area ponding, diversion structures, porous pavements, holding tanks, infiltration systems, in-line storage in storm sewers, and grading patterns). They shall be located, designed, and constructed in accordance with the latest technical guidance published by PADEP, provided they are accompanied by detailed engineering plans and performance capabilities and supporting site specific soils, geology, runoff and groundwater and infiltration rate data to verify proposed designs. Additional guidance from other sources may be accepted at the discretion of the municipal engineer (a preapplication meeting is suggested).

4. All existing and natural watercourses, channels, drainage systems and areas of surface water concentration shall be maintained in their existing condition unless an alteration is approved by the appropriate regulatory agency.

5. The design of all stormwater management facilities shall incorporate sound engineering principles and practices. The City of Meadville shall reserve the right to disapprove any design that would result in the continuation or exacerbation of a documented adverse hydrologic or hydraulic condition within the watershed, as identified in the plan.

6. The design and construction of multiple use stormwater detention facilities are strongly encouraged. In addition to stormwater management, facilities should, where appropriate, allow for recreational uses including ball fields, play areas, picnic grounds, etc. Consultation with the City of Meadville and prior approval are required before design. Provision for permanent wet ponds with stormwater management capabilities may also be appropriate.

a. Multiple use basins should be constructed so that potentially dangerous conditions are not created.

b. Water quality basins or recharge basins that are designed for a slow release of water or other extended detention ponds are not permitted for recreational uses, unless the ponded areas are clearly separated and secure.

7. Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety permit under PADEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105 concerning dam safety.

B. Stormwater Management Facility Design Considerations. All stormwater management facilities shall meet the requirements contained in the Crawford County stormwater management facility design criteria. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


949.02 Calculation methodology.

A. All calculations shall be consistent with the guidelines set forth in the BMP manual, as amended by standards established from time to time by the city engineer.

B. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using either the rational method or the NRCS rainfall-runoff methodology. Methods shall be selected by the design professional based on the individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular site. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


Article 951 SWM SITE PLAN AND REPORT REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

951.01    General requirements.

951.02    SWM site plan and report contents.

951.03    SWM site plan and report submission.

951.04    SWM site plan and report review.

951.05    Modification of plans.

951.06    Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plan and report.

951.07    Authorization to construct and term of validity.

951.08    Record drawings, completion certificate and final inspection.


951.01 General requirements.

For any of the activities regulated by this title and not eligible for the exemptions provided in MMC 945.02, the final approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of any building or occupancy permit, or the commencement of any land disturbance activity may not proceed until the applicant has received written approval of a SWM site plan from the City of Meadville. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


951.02 SWM site plan and report contents.

A. The SWM site plan and SWM site report shall consist of all applicable calculations, maps, and plans. All SWM site plan materials shall be submitted to the City of Meadville in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat and well organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall be rejected.

B. The SWM site plan and report shall meet the requirements set forth in the Crawford County stormwater management facility design handbook, and standards established from time to time by the city engineer as contained in the city’s stormwater procedures manual.

C. Appropriate sections from the city’s subdivision and land development ordinance, and other applicable local ordinances, shall be followed in preparing the SWM site plan. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


951.03 SWM site plan and report submission.

A. The applicant shall submit the SWM site plan and report for the regulated activity.

B. Three copies of the SWM site plan and report shall be submitted and be distributed as follows:

1. Two copies to the City of Meadville accompanied by the requisite executed review fee reimbursement agreement, as specified in this title.

2. One copy to the municipal engineer.

C. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the City of Meadville or PADEP. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


951.04 SWM site plan and report review.

A. The City of Meadville shall require receipt of a complete SWM site plan and report as specified in this title. The City of Meadville shall review the SWM site plan and report for consistency with the purposes, requirements, and intent of this title. 

B. The City of Meadville shall not approve any SWM site plan and report that is deficient in meeting the requirements of this title. At its sole discretion and in accordance with this article, when a SWM site plan and report is found to be deficient, the City of Meadville may disapprove the submission and require a resubmission, or in the case of minor deficiencies, the City of Meadville may accept submission of modifications.

C. The City of Meadville shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 calendar days whether the SWM site plan and report is approved or disapproved if the SWM site plan and report is not part of a subdivision or land development plan. If the SWM site plan and report involves a subdivision or land development plan, the timing shall follow the subdivision and land development process according to the Municipalities Planning Code.

D. The City of Meadville shall not issue a building permit for any regulated activity if the SWM site plan and report has been found to be inconsistent with this title, as determined by the City of Meadville. All required permits from PADEP must be obtained prior to issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


951.05 Modification of plans.

A. A modification to a submitted SWM site plan and report for a development site that involves a change in stormwater management facilities or techniques, or that involves the relocation or re-design of stormwater management facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the SWM site plan as determined by the City of Meadville, shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with this title. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


951.06 Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plan and report.

A. A disapproved SWM site plan and report may be resubmitted with the revisions addressing the City of Meadville’s concerns documented, in writing, to the City of Meadville in accordance with this title. The applicable municipal review fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan and report. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


951.07 Authorization to construct and term of validity.

A. The City of Meadville’s approval of a SWM site plan and report authorizes the regulated activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity of two years following the date of approval. The City of Meadville may specify a term of validity greater than two years in the approval for any specific SWM site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the City of Meadville signs the approval for a SWM site plan. If stormwater management facilities included in the approved SWM site plan have not been constructed, or if a record drawing of these facilities has not been approved within this time, then the City of Meadville may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits or approvals. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


951.08 Record drawings, completion certificate and final inspection.

A. The applicant shall be responsible for providing record drawings, in both paper and digital format, of all stormwater BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The record drawing and an explanation of any discrepancies with the approved SWM site plan shall be submitted to the City of Meadville as a prerequisite for the release of the guarantee or issuance of an occupancy permit.

B. The record drawing shall include a certification of completion signed by a professional engineer verifying that all permanent stormwater BMPs have been constructed according to the approved SWM site plan and report. 

1. Drawings shall show all approved revisions and elevations and inverts to all manholes, inlets, pipes, and stormwater control facilities.

2. Submission shall include a comparison of the constructed stage-storage (volume vs. elevation) of all above ground and below ground stormwater storage facilities to the approved design.

C. After receipt of the record drawing and certification of completion by the City of Meadville, the City of Meadville may conduct a final inspection. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


Article 953 EASEMENTS

Sections:

953.01    Easements.


953.01 Easements.

A. Easements provided shall be in favor of the City of Meadville, granting access and maintenance rights to the City of Meadville. 

B. Easements shall be established to accommodate the existence of drainageways.

C. Where a tract is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided an easement paralleling the line of such watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream with a width adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage in the 100-year floodplain. 

D. Easements shall be established for all on-site stormwater management or drainage facilities, including but not limited to: detention facilities (above or below ground), infiltration facilities, all stormwater BMPs, drainage swales, and drainage facilities (inlets, manholes, pipes, etc.).

E. Easements are required for all areas used for off-site stormwater control.

F. All easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide and shall encompass the 100-year surface elevation of the proposed stormwater facility. 

G. Easements shall provide ingress to, and egress from, a public right-of-way. In lieu of providing an easement to the public right-of-way, a note may be added to the plan granting the City of Meadville or their designees access to all easements via the nearest public right-of-way able for vehicle ingress and egress on grades of less than 10 percent for carrying out inspection or maintenance activities.

H. Where possible, easements shall be centered on side and/or rear lot lines.

I. Nothing shall be planted or placed within the easement which would adversely affect the function of the easement, or conflict with any conditions associated with such easement. 

J. All easement agreements shall be recorded with a reference to the recorded easement indicated on the site plan. The format and content of the easement agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the municipal engineer and solicitor. (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005. Formerly 947.06)


Article 955 MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES

Sections:

955.01    Financial guarantee.

955.02    Maintenance responsibilities.

955.03    Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater facilities.


955.01 Financial guarantee.

A. When an approved SWM site plan requires the timely installation and proper construction of stormwater management controls, the applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the City of Meadville equal to 110 percent of the full construction cost of the required controls in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code, and other applicable ordinances.

B. At the completion of the project and as a prerequisite for the release of the financial guarantee, the applicant shall:

1. Provide a certification of completion from a qualified professional verifying that all permanent facilities have been constructed according to the SWM site plan and report and approved revisions thereto.

2. Provide a set of record drawings in both paper and a digital format acceptable to the city engineer.

3. Request a final inspection from the City of Meadville to certify compliance with this title, after receipt of the certification of completion and record drawings by the City of Meadville. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


955.02 Maintenance responsibilities.

A. The SWM site plan and report for the project site shall describe the future operation and maintenance responsibilities. The operation and maintenance description shall outline required routine maintenance actions and schedules necessary to ensure proper operation of the stormwater control facilities.

B. The SWM site plan and report for the project site shall establish responsibilities for the continuing operating and maintenance of all proposed stormwater control facilities, consistent with the following principles:

1. If a development consists of structures or lots that are to be separately owned and in which streets, sewers, and other public improvements are to be dedicated to the City of Meadville, stormwater control facilities/BMPs may also be dedicated to and maintained by the City of Meadville.

2. If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of stormwater control facilities/BMPs shall be the responsibility of the owner or private management entity.

3. Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater BMPs shall be enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed restrictions or easements that run with the land.

4. The SWM site plan and report shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.

5. The City of Meadville may take enforcement actions against an applicant for failure to satisfy any provision of this title.

C. The City of Meadville shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site plan and report. The City of Meadville may require a dedication of such facilities as part of the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a requirement is not an indication that the City of Meadville will accept the facilities. The City of Meadville reserves the right to accept or reject the ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the stormwater management controls.

D. If the City of Meadville accepts ownership of stormwater BMPs, the City of Meadville may, at its discretion, require a fee from the applicant to the City of Meadville to offset the future cost of inspections, operations, and maintenance. 

E. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP required by an approved SWM site plan, or to allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to an approved SWM site plan, unless the City of Meadville grants an exception in writing. (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005. Formerly 947.02)


955.03 Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater facilities.

A. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan and report, the applicant shall sign the operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement covering all stormwater control facilities that are to be privately owned. The operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement shall be recorded with the SWM site plan and made a part hereto.

B. Other items may be included in the operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement where determined necessary to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of all BMP facilities. The operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of the City of Meadville and the municipal solicitor.

C. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement, the City of Meadville may perform the services required and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property. (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005. Formerly 947.05)


Article 957 INSPECTIONS

Sections:

957.01    Schedule of inspections.

957.02    Right of entry.


957.01 Schedule of inspections.

A. PADEP or its designees normally ensure compliance with any permits issued, including those for stormwater management. In addition to PADEP compliance programs, the City of Meadville or their municipal assignee may inspect all phases of the installation of temporary or permanent stormwater management facilities.

B. During any stage of earth disturbance activities, if the City of Meadville determines that the stormwater management facilities are not being installed in accordance with the approved SWM site plan, the City of Meadville shall revoke any existing permits or approvals until a revised SWM site plan is submitted and approved as specified in this title.

C. Stormwater BMPs shall be inspected by the landowner, or the landowner’s designee, according to the inspection schedule described on the SWM site plan for each BMP.

1. The City of Meadville may require copies of the inspection reports, in a form as stipulated by the City of Meadville.

2. If such inspections are not conducted or inspection reports not submitted as scheduled, the City of Meadville, or their designee, may conduct such inspections and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property.

a. Prior to conducting such inspections, the City of Meadville shall inform the owner of its intent to conduct such inspections. The owner shall be given 30 days to conduct required inspections and submit the required inspection reports to the City of Meadville. (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005. Formerly 949.01)


957.02 Right of entry.

A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of the City of Meadville may enter at reasonable times, upon any property within the City of Meadville, to inspect the implementation, condition, or operations and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs in regard to any aspect governed by this title.

B. Stormwater BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on behalf of the City of Meadville ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of determining compliance with this title.

C. Persons working on behalf of the City of Meadville shall have the right to temporarily locate on any stormwater BMP in the City of Meadville such devices, as are necessary, to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges from such stormwater BMP.

D. Unreasonable delay in allowing the City of Meadville access to a stormwater BMP is a violation of this title. (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005. Formerly 949.02)


Article 959 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES

Sections:

959.01    Notification.

959.02    Enforcement.

959.03    Public nuisance.

959.04    Suspension and revocation.

959.05    Penalties.

959.06    Appeals.


959.01 Notification.

A. In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this title, an approved SWM site plan, or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit or approval issued hereunder, the City of Meadville shall provide written notification of the violation. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s). 

B. Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject such person to the penalties provisions of this title. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the City of Meadville from pursuing any and all other remedies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the real property on which any regulated activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred, to comply with the terms and conditions of this title. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


959.02 Enforcement.

A. The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this title. The approved SWM site plan shall be on file at the project site throughout the duration of the construction activity. The City of Meadville or their designee may make periodic inspections during construction.

B. Adherence to Approved SWM Site Plan.

1. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to undertake any regulated activity on any property except as provided for by an approved SWM site plan and pursuant to the requirements of this title. 

2. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control structure required by the SWM site plan pursuant to this title.

3. It shall be unlawful to allow a property to remain in a condition that does not conform to an approved SWM site plan. (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005. Formerly 955.02)


959.03 Public nuisance.

A. A violation of any provision of this title is hereby deemed a public nuisance.

B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005. Formerly 955.01)


959.04 Suspension and revocation.

A. Any approval or permit issued by the City of Meadville may be suspended or revoked for:

1. Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the approved SWM site plan or operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement.

2. A violation of any provision of this title or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the regulated activity.

3. The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution, or which endangers the life or property of others.

B. A suspended approval or permit may be reinstated by the City of Meadville when:

1. The City of Meadville or their designee has inspected and approved the corrections to the violation(s) that caused the suspension.

2. The City of Meadville is satisfied that the violation(s) has been corrected.

C. An approval that has been revoked by the City of Meadville cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the provisions of this title. (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005. Formerly 955.03)


959.05 Penalties.

A. Anyone violating the provisions of this title, including but not limited to Article 961 MMC, Prohibitions, shall be guilty of a summary offense and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 for each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense and penalties shall be cumulative.

B. In addition, the City of Meadville, through its solicitor, may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this title. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief. (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005. Formerly 955.06)


959.06 Appeals.

A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the City of Meadville or its designee, relevant to the provisions of this title, may appeal to the City of Meadville code of appeals board within 30 days of that action.

B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the City of Meadville code of appeals board, relevant to the provisions of this title, may appeal to the Crawford County court of common pleas within 30 days of the City of Meadville’s decision. (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005. Formerly 955.05)


Article 961 PROHIBITIONS

Sections:

961.01    Prohibited discharges and connections.

961.02    Roof drains.

961.03    Alteration of BMPs.


961.01 Prohibited discharges and connections.

A. Any drain (including indoor drains and sinks) or conveyance, whether on the surface or underground, that allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the City of Meadville’s separate storm sewer system or waters of the commonwealth is prohibited.

B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the City of Meadville’s separate storm sewer system, which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records, and approved by the City of Meadville, is prohibited.

C. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into the City of Meadville’s separate storm sewer system or into surface waters of the commonwealth, which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except: (1) as provided in subsection (D) of this section, and (2) discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.

D. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of the commonwealth:

– Discharges from fire fighting activities;

– Potable water sources including dechlorinated water and fire hydrant flushing;

– Air conditioning condensate;

– Springs;

– Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been removed) and where detergents are not used;

– Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

– Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains;

– Irrigation or lawn watering;

– Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;

– Water from individual residential car washing;

– Routine external building washdown (which does not use detergents or other compounds).

E. In the event that the City of Meadville or PADEP determines that any of the discharges identified in subsection (D) of this section is a significant contributor to pollution to the waters of the commonwealth, the responsible person(s) shall be notified to cease the discharge. Upon notice provided by the City of Meadville or PADEP, the discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the City of Meadville or PADEP, to cease the discharge, consistent with the degree of pollution caused by the discharge.

F. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger’s responsibilities under commonwealth law. (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005. Formerly 953.01, 953.02)


961.02 Roof drains.

A. Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration areas, vegetative BMPs, or pervious areas to the maximum extent practicable. (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005. Formerly 953.03)


961.03 Alteration of BMPs.

A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any existing stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, or structures unless it is part of an approved maintenance program, without the written approval of the City of Meadville.

B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, or vegetation into a stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, structures, or within a drainage easement which would limit or alter the functioning of the BMP without the written approval of the City of Meadville. (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005. Formerly 953.04)


Article 963 FEES AND EXPENSES

Sections:

963.01    General.

963.02    Expenses covered by fees.

963.03    Recording of approved SWM site plan and related agreements.


963.01 General.

A. The fee required by this title is the municipal review fee. The municipal review fee shall be established by the City of Meadville to defray review costs incurred by the City of Meadville and the municipal engineer. The applicant shall pay all fees. (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005. Formerly 951.01)


963.02 Expenses covered by fees.

A. The fees required by this title shall, at a minimum, cover:

1. Administrative and clerical costs.

2. Review of the SWM site plan and report by the City of Meadville.

3. Pre-construction meetings.

4. Inspection of stormwater management facilities/BMPs and drainage improvements during construction.

5. Final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management facilities/BMPs and drainage improvements presented in the SWM site plan.

6. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions regulated by this title, correct violations, and assure proper completion of stipulated remedial actions. (Ord. 3687, 2011; Ord. 3628 § 1, 2005. Formerly 951.02)


963.03 Recording of approved SWM site plan and related agreements.

A. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed, constructed, or implemented, as described in the SWM site plan, shall record the following documents in the office of the recorder of deeds of Crawford County within 14 days of approval of the SWM site plan by the City of Meadville:

1. The SWM site plan. 

a. Refer to the requirements of 1.A. of the Crawford County Stormwater Management Facility Design Criteria. At a minimum, the items 1.A.1-7, 8-11, 13, 14, 16, 18, and 10 must be included on the recorded SWM site plan. 

2. Operations and maintenance (O&M) agreement.

3. Easements under Section 901.

4. Riparian buffers under Section 602.

B. The City of Meadville may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with this section. (Ord. 3687, 2011)


Article 965 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM AND USER FEE

Sections:

965.01    Title.

965.02    Statement of findings.

965.03    Definitions.

965.04    Statutory authority.

965.05    Imposition of user fees.

965.06    Uniform application of user fees.

965.07    “User” and “owner” distinguished.

965.08    Billing and collection of user fees.

965.09    Late payment penalty.

965.10    Interest on unpaid user fees.

965.11    User fees constitute lien on property.

965.12    Credits applicable to stormwater charges.

965.13    Appeal procedures.

965.14    Policies and procedures authorized.

965.15    Stormwater management system fund.

965.16    No warranty or action.


965.01 Title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Meadville stormwater management system user fee ordinance.” (Ord. 3707 § 1, 2012)


965.02 Statement of findings.

A. The City of Meadville incurs costs to maintain an extensive public stormwater system. The city’s stormwater system includes underground pipes, conduits, inlets, outfalls, culverts, catch basins, dams, flood control structures, gutters, ditches, channels, detention ponds, public best management practices, public streets, curbs, conveyances, appurtenances and drains (collectively, the “stormwater management system”).

B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare and the protection of the residents of the City of Meadville, their property, resources and the environment in order to control items such as flooding, erosion and pollution.

C. Federal and state regulations (including those found at 40 CFR Part CFR) require the City of Meadville to implement and properly maintain a program of stormwater controls. The City of Meadville is required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer system under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. In compliance with such federal and state regulations, the city enacted its stormwater management ordinance, Ordinance No. 3687, on April 6, 2011.

D. In a urban environment such as the City of Meadville, each property uses or is in some fashion connected with, serviced by or benefited by the public stormwater management system.

E. Impervious surface is a primary characteristic of a property’s generation of stormwater and usage of the stormwater management system.

F. The City of Meadville desires to establish fair and equitable user charges to assure that each lot, developed parcel, building, and recipient of services within the City of Meadville will pay its proportionate share of the costs of operation, maintenance, repair, regulatory compliance, administration, replacement and improvement related to the stormwater management system and stormwater services provided or paid for by the City of Meadville.

G. The charges as determined herein are fair and equitable and are based upon the following facts: a minimum fee per residential unit is reasonable; the basis for the equivalent single-family detached residential unit of 2,660 square feet of impervious surface was based on a statistical sampling of properties in the City of Meadville; the requirement that a property have a minimum 200 square feet of impervious surface to be assessed a fee is reasonable based on the use of aerial photography to determine impervious surface; the use of aerial photography and geographic information systems (GIS) analysis provides an accurate measurement for impervious surface; the standard charge for single-family detached dwellings is based on the fact that there is not a great deal of variation in size and that on larger commercial and institutional properties (non-single-family detached properties), the opportunity to control runoff in a meaningful way does exist and should be encouraged and acknowledged. (Ord. 3707 § 2, 2012)


965.03 Definitions.

A. Words and terms used in this article and not given specific definition shall be defined as set forth in applicable statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or ordinances of the City of Meadville, if any, and shall otherwise be given their ordinary and common meaning.

B. For purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall be defined as set forth below:

a. “Developed parcel” means a parcel altered from a natural state that contains impervious surface equal to or greater than 200 square feet.

b. “Equivalent residential unit (ERU)” means the measure of impervious ground cover for a typical single-family detached residential property used in assessing the fees for each parcel of developed property, and which has been determined to be 2,660 square feet.

c. “Impervious surface” means a surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surface (or area) includes, but is not limited to: roofs, additional outdoor living spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures, parking or driveway areas, and any private streets and sidewalks. Any travel areas proposed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious surfaces.

d. “Non-single-family detached (NSFD)” means any developed parcel not fitting the definition of single-family detached. NSFD shall include, but not be limited to, attached single-family houses, multifamily houses, townhouses and condominiums, apartments, boarding houses, hotels and motels, churches, industrial properties, commercial properties, manufactured home or mobile home parks, commercial and office buildings, storage areas, parking lots and other impervious areas, parks, recreation properties, public and private schools and universities, hospitals and convalescent centers, office buildings, government properties, and mixed-use properties.

e. “Operation and maintenance” means the associated costs of equipment and facilities, energy, manpower, materials, transportation and services required to collect, convey, detain, pump and transport stormwater, keep equipment, infrastructure, and facilities functioning satisfactorily and economically, and administer the stormwater management system and shall include sums paid to defray costs of the City of Meadville’s improvements to the stormwater management system.

f. “Owner” means any person, firm, corporation, individual, partnership, trust, company, association, government agency, society or group owning real property in the City of Meadville.

g. “User fee” means sums assessed, imposed and to be collected from each developed lot, parcel, building or portion thereof which uses, benefits from or is serviced by the stormwater management system or which discharges stormwater, directly or indirectly, into the public stormwater management system, for the use of and the service rendered and improvement of such system.

h. “Replacement” means the associated costs of obtaining and installing equipment, infrastructure, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the stormwater management system so as to maintain the capacity and performance for which said system was designed and constructed and shall include costs associated with improvements to the stormwater management system.

i. “Single-family detached (SFD)” means a developed parcel containing one structure which contains one or more rooms with a bathroom and kitchen facilities designed for occupancy by one family and shall include single-family houses, single-family units, manufactured homes, and mobile homes located on individual lots or parcels of lands. Developed parcels may be classified as “single-family detached” despite the presence of incidental structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports or small storage buildings. “Single-family detached” shall not include developed land containing: structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes; manufactured homes and mobile homes located within manufactured home or mobile home parks; or other multiple-unit residential properties such as apartments, condominiums and town homes.

j. “Stormwater management system” means the system of collection and conveyance, including underground pipes, conduits, mains, inlets, culverts, catch basins, gutters, ditches, manholes, outfalls, dams, flood control structures, stormwater best management practices, channels, detention ponds, public streets, curbs, drains and all devices, appliances, appurtenances and facilities appurtenant thereto used for collecting, conducting, pumping, conveying, detaining, discharging and/or treating stormwater.

k. “Stormwater” means water from a rain or snowfall event that flows across the land and eventually into rivers, creeks, lakes, ditches and canals resulting in debris, sediment, pollutants, bacteria and nutrients from sidewalks, streets, parking lots, and other impervious surfaces washing into gutters, through storm drains, and eventually flowing into creeks and rivers.

l. “Undeveloped parcel” means a parcel that does not meet the definition of developed parcel.

m. “User” means any person, firm, corporation, individual, partnership, company, association, government agency, society or group using, benefiting from or being served by the public stormwater management system. (Ord. 3707 § 3, 2012)


965.04 Statutory authority.

A. Primary Authority. The City of Meadville is empowered to regulate these activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, 32 P.S., P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. Section 680.1 et seq., as amended, the “Storm Water Management Act,” and the Third Class City Code, 53 P.S. Section 35101 et seq.

B. Secondary Authority. The City of Meadville is also empowered to regulate land use activities that affect stormwater runoff and stormwater management systems by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. See also Environmental Protection Agency, Region III, Funding Storm Water Programs, January 2008, EPA 833-F-07-012. (Ord. 3707 § 4, 2012)


965.05 Imposition of user fees.

For the use of, benefit by and the services rendered by the stormwater management system, including its operation, maintenance, repair, replacement and improvement of said system and all other expenses, user fees are hereby imposed upon each and every developed lot, parcel of land, building or portion thereof that is connected with, uses, is serviced by or is benefited by the City of Meadville’s stormwater management system, either directly or indirectly, and upon the owner(s) of such developed lots, parcels of land or buildings. Such user fees shall be payable to the City of Meadville by and collected from the owners of such developed lots, parcels of land or buildings as hereinafter provided, and shall be determined as set forth below.

A. Single-family detached residential dwellings shall be charged for one ERU for each individual dwelling unit. The charge per ERU shall be set at $90.00 per program year from November 1, 2012, through December 31, 2015. Beginning January 1, 2016, and each January 1st thereafter, the charge per ERU will be adjusted annually as determined by city council.

B. The charge for all other developed non-single-family detached parcels within the City of Meadville shall be based upon the number of square feet of measured impervious surface, as determined through aerial photography and surface feature evaluation processes, expressed in whole or partial ERUs by rounding to the next highest tenth of one percent ERU. For example: If the ERU calculation totaled 3.06 ERUs, the total would be rounded to 3.1 ERUs. The charge for said properties shall be computed by multiplying the number of ERUs for a given parcel by the unit rate established by the City of Meadville as set forth in subsection (A) of this section. In no event shall any such parcel be charged less than one ERU.

C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, public streets shall be exempt from user fees under this article. (Ord. 3722 § A, 2013; Ord. 3707 § 5, 2012)


965.06 Uniform application of user fees.

User fees shall be assessed, imposed, liened and collected as to all owners, lots, parcels, buildings, units and users. (Ord. 3707 § 6, 2012)


965.07 “User” and “owner” distinguished.

References in this article to “use,” “user,” “unit” or portion of a lot, parcel or building with respect to the calculation and assessment of user fees shall not be construed to modify or alter the fact that the fees imposed by this article are assessed to the owner of each developed lot, parcel, and building and such owner shall be and remain liable for payment of the same, whether or not such owner occupies the property or directly uses the stormwater management system. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit or limit an owner’s ability to collect by lease or contract sums due by a tenant or other occupier of the owner’s property, but such lease or contract shall not bind the City of Meadville or limit in any way the City of Meadville’s authority to impose, assess, lien and collect stormwater user fees. (Ord. 3707 § 7, 2012)


965.08 Billing and collection of user fees.

The user fees fixed and established by this article shall be effective as to all lots, parcels, buildings or portions thereof that use, are served or are benefited by the stormwater management system existing as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article, and shall be effective to all other lots, parcels, buildings or portions thereof that use or are so served or benefit subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article. For calendar years 2012 and 2013, the first assessment effective date shall be November 1, 2012. The first billing pursuant to this article shall be on or about January 1, 2013, for the 14 months beginning November 1, 2012, and ending December 31, 2013. Thereafter, for all subsequent calendar years, user fees imposed by this article shall be assessed and billed by the City of Meadville (or its designee) effective as of January 1st each calendar year. Property owners shall have the option to pay the fee in full within 30 days following the date on which said assessment bill was mailed and receive a discount of two percent of the fee. Alternatively, owners may pay on a quarterly basis at face amount of the bill based upon a schedule designated by city council. (Ord. 3707 § 8, 2012)


965.09 Late payment penalty.

A penalty of five percent of the user fees assessed and not paid within the applicable time period shall be added for nonpayment within the time allowed. (Ord. 3707 § 9, 2012)


965.10 Interest on unpaid user fees.

Interest at the rate of 10 percent per year shall accrue and be added to all original amounts of user fees remaining unpaid at the end of the quarter in which the same were first imposed and assessed, and shall continue to accrue until the full amount of such user fees is paid in full. (Ord. 3707 § 10, 2012)


965.11 User fees constitute lien on property.

In accordance with the Municipal Claims Act, 53 P.S. Section 7101 et seq. (as amended), all rates, charges, penalties, interest, collection fees, lien filing and satisfaction fees and other charges imposed for failure to pay promptly shall constitute a lien upon and against the subject property and its owner from the date of their imposition and assessment. (Ord. 3707 § 11, 2012)


965.12 Credits applicable to stormwater charges.

The city shall establish a credit policy and develop a manual documenting the credit process. Credits against user fees are an appropriate means of adjusting user fees and, under some circumstances, to account for applicable mitigation measures. Upon adoption by council, credit mechanisms shall be incorporated herein as the City of Meadville stormwater user fee credit manual, which may be updated or revised as needed in council’s discretion. No exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in user fees shall be granted based on age, race, tax status, economic status or religion of the customer, or other condition unrelated to the demand for and cost of services provided by the City of Meadville. (Ord. 3707 § 12, 2012)


965.13 Appeal procedures.

A. Any owner who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner and sequence:

a. An appeal of the rate and charge must be filed in writing with the city manager or his/her designee on or before September 30th of the calendar year the charge is mailed or delivered to the property owner. Any appeal must state the reasons for the appeal.

b. Using information provided by the appellant, the city manager (or his/her designee) shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within 30 days. In response to an appeal, the city manager may adjust the user fees applicable to the property in accordance with the provisions of this article and related policies and procedures.

c. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city manager, relevant to the provisions of this article, may appeal to the Crawford County court of common pleas within 30 days of receipt of such written decision. (Ord. 3722 § A, 2013; Ord. 3707 § 13, 2012)


965.14 Policies and procedures authorized.

A. The City of Meadville may by resolution adopt such policies and procedures as it deems appropriate to ensure collection of rates and charges assessed and imposed pursuant to this article. Without limitation, collection procedures may include referral of delinquent accounts to a collection agency; filing of liens; scire facias sur municipal lien proceedings to collect filed liens; and any and all other measures or combination thereof which the city may deem appropriate.

B. All costs of such collection procedures, including but not limited to fees for filing, perpetuation and satisfaction of liens, collection fees, attorney’s fees, court costs, litigation expense, and charges for service of documents, shall upon being incurred by the City of Meadville be imposed as a charge for nonpayment and added to the balance due on said owner’s account.

C. No lien shall be satisfied, nor shall any collection proceeding be discontinued, until all amounts due on an account, including user fees, penalties, interest, collection fees, attorney’s fees, court costs and other charges are first paid in full to the City of Meadville in the discretion of the city.

D. Council is authorized to adopt any policies or procedures that the city manager recommends and deems necessary or convenient to interpret or implement this article. This may include the creation of an advisory rate review and/or stormwater advisory review committee. (Ord. 3707 § 14, 2012)


965.15 Stormwater management system fund.

The funds received from the collection of the user fees authorized by this article shall be deposited into the City of Meadville stormwater management system fund, a fund and account dedicated to the operation, administration, maintenance, repair and improvement of the stormwater management system. (Ord. 3707 § 15, 2012)


965.16 No warranty or action.

Nothing in this article or in the design, operation or maintenance of the stormwater management system shall be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action seeking the imposition of money damages against the City of Meadville, its officers, employees, or agents. The City of Meadville expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the City of Meadville, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. (Ord. 3707 § 16, 2012)


Article 991 MUNICIPAL ENERGY AGGREGATION PROGRAM

Sections:

991.01    Municipal energy aggregation program established.

991.02    Definitions.

991.03    Municipal energy aggregation program hereby authorized.

991.04    Municipal energy aggregation program requirements.

991.05    Opt-out program.


991.01 Municipal energy aggregation program established.

There is hereby created and existing in the City of Meadville a municipal energy aggregation program which is established in accordance with applicable provisions of law to provide the opportunity for eligible end-use electric customers in the City of Meadville to receive electrical service at rates more favorable than those provided to individual customers who do not participate in the energy aggregation program. (Ord. 3677 § 1, 2010)


991.02 Definitions.

a. “Contracted electrical generation supplier” means the entity with which the City of Meadville has contracted through the municipal energy aggregation program to provide a supply of electricity.

b. “Excluded customers” means electricity consumers within the City of Meadville (1) that have opted out of the City of Meadville municipal aggregation program pursuant to the provisions of MMC 991.05; (2) that have a special contract or agreement with an electric distribution company; (3) other than residential consumers who are classified as retail electric consumers or small commercial consumers which are under a small commercial, small industrial or small business rate classification, and whose maximum registered peak load was less than 25 kW within the last 12 months; (4) that are enrolled in an electric distribution company’s customer assistance program that does not include any electric generation supplier charges in the calculation of the customer assistance program benefit; or (5) that are end-use consumers served or authorized to be served by an electric cooperative.



c. “Municipal energy aggregation” means the aggregation of residential consumers who are classified as retail electric consumers within the City of Meadville and small commercial consumers within the City of Meadville which are under a small commercial, small industrial or small business rate classification, and whose maximum registered peak load was less than 25 kW within the last 12 months.

d. “Municipal energy aggregation program” means the program hereby adopted as implemented by a contract with a contracted electrical generation supplier which provides a supply of electricity to certain residential and small commercial electricity consumers within the City of Meadville on an opt-out basis.

e. “Nonexcluded consumer” means an end-use electric customer within the City of Meadville which or who is not an excluded consumer.

f. Other terms defined in this article or as adopted in applicable legislation are incorporated by reference. (Ord. 3677 § 1, 2010)


991.03 Municipal energy aggregation program hereby authorized.

Under the municipal energy program hereby authorized, the City of Meadville is authorized to grant by contract an exclusive right to a contracted electrical generation supplier to provide electrical service to end-use electric customers within the City of Meadville who are not excluded customers and who do not opt out of the program.

Consistent with the broad powers granted the city under the Optional Third Class City Charter Law, and by reason of the uniqueness of the program and the fact that city funds are not expended for the service or the administration of the service to its residents, it is hereby determined that competitive procurement for the contract for implementation of the program is not required.

Upon the effective date of a contract entered into by the City of Meadville with an electrical generation supplier for the supply of electricity to eligible nonexcluded consumers in accordance with the City of Meadville’s municipal energy aggregation program, all nonexcluded consumers shall be supplied with and shall be obligated to receive electric generation supply pursuant to and in accordance with the municipal energy aggregation program hereby established. (Ord. 3677 § 1, 2010)


991.04 Municipal energy aggregation program requirements.

a. The proper officials of the City of Meadville are hereby authorized to enter into a contract without competitive bidding with an electric generation supplier for the provision of electric generation supply to nonexcluded consumers within the City of Meadville on an opt-out basis.

b. The contract shall, at a minimum, clearly indicate the price that the contracted electrical generation supplier will charge nonexcluded consumers for electric generation supply as well as the term of the contract. If the price is a fixed rate, the price shall be expressed in cents per kilowatt hour. If the contract provides for a percentage off of the default service rate, or any other type of pricing arrangement, an understandable description of the amount of the percentage discount, or other pricing arrangement, and how the rate may change shall be provided. If the contracted electrical generation supplier will charge different rates to different rate classes within the City of Meadville, the applicable rate(s) to nonexcluded consumers within each rate class shall be described.

c. No nonexcluded consumer shall be bound by a contract until at least 30 days following the mailing of the opt-out notices required by MMC 991.05, and the expiration of any waiting period for a consumer to cancel the pending change to the electric generation supplier following written confirmation by contracted electrical generation supplier. 

d. The contracted electrical generation supplier may not impose any terms, conditions, fees, or charges on any consumer served by a municipal aggregation program that are materially different from the particular term, condition, fee, or charge which was included within the contract between the City of Meadville and the contracted electrical generation supplier or the notices provided pursuant to this section.

e. The contracted electrical generation supplier shall provide appropriate consumer education materials to inform consumers about the existence of the municipal aggregation program and the highlights of the program at no cost to the City of Meadville.

f. In the event a final determination shall be made by a court of competent jurisdiction or the Public Utility Commission that cities organized under the Pennsylvania Optional Third Class City Charter Law do not have authority to implement a municipal energy aggregation program for any reason, the contract shall be terminable upon notice by the City of Meadville and shall provide for such termination without liability of the City of Meadville or participating electric consumers. (Ord. 3677 § 1, 2010)


991.05 Opt-out program.

a. The municipal energy aggregation program shall be offered on an opt-out basis.

b. After the City of Meadville executes a contract for electric generation services with the contracted electrical generation supplier, but prior to including a consumer’s electric account or accounts in the municipal aggregation program, the contracted electrical generation supplier shall provide each consumer with written notice that the consumer’s account(s) will be automatically included in the municipal aggregation program unless the consumer affirmatively opts out of the municipal aggregation program. The notice, written in plain language, shall, at a minimum, include:

i. Disclosure of the price that the contracted electrical generation supplier will charge nonexcluded consumers for electric generation service.

ii. An itemized list and explanation of all fees and charges that are not incorporated into the rates charged for electric generation services that the contracted electrical generation supplier will charge to the nonexcluded consumer for participating in the municipal aggregation program, including any early termination penalties and any surcharges, or portions thereof, that may be assessed.

iii. Disclosure of the estimated service commencement date and notice that the nonexcluded consumer may opt out of the municipal aggregation program at the end of the term of the contract with the contracted electrical generation supplier and prior to the commencement of any subsequent municipal aggregation contract.

iv. A statement informing consumers that if they choose to opt out of the municipal aggregation program they will be served by the default service provider until the consumer chooses an alternative electrical generation supplier.

v. A statement informing nonexcluded consumers that, if they switch back to the default service provider, they may not be served under the same rates, terms, and conditions that apply to other nonexcluded consumers within the municipal aggregation program.

vi. Disclosure of any credit, collection and/or deposit policies and requirements.

vii. Disclosure of any limitations or conditions on consumer acceptance into the municipal aggregation program, including the date by which the consumer must affirmatively opt out of the program. The date shall not be less than 30 days following the mailing of the opt-out notice.

viii. A description of the process and associated time period for consumers to opt out of the municipal aggregation program.

ix. A local or toll-free telephone number, with the available calling hours, that consumers may call with questions regarding the formation or operation of the contracted electrical generation supplier. (Ord. 3677 § 1, 2010)


PART 11 HEALTH CODE

Articles:

1103    Board of Health

1111    Repealed

1115    Repealed

1119    Meadville Retail Food Facility Safety Code


Article 1103 BOARD OF HEALTH

Sections:

1103.01    City council to act as board of health.


1103.01 City council to act as board of health.

Consistent with the authority of Section 2301 of the Third Class City Code, 53 P.S. Section 37301, the city council shall act as, and have all powers and duties granted to, the board of health as provided in Sections 2301 through 2324 of the Third Class City Code, 53 P.S. Section 37301 through 37324, other acts of the Pennsylvania legislature, and rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Health, as same may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 3666 § 2, 2009)


Article 1111       GENERAL SANITARY REGULATIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 3608)


Article 1115       VACANT LOTS

(Repealed by Ord. 3608)


Article 1119 MEADVILLE RETAIL FOOD FACILITY SAFETY CODE

Sections:

1119.01    General.

1119.02    License required.

1119.03    Compliance.

Prior legislation: Ord. 3615.


1119.01 General.

(A) This code shall be known as and may be referred to as the Meadville retail food facility safety code, and shall amend and supersede existing Article 1119 MMC in its entirety. (Ord. 3723 § 1, 2014; Ord. 3690 § 1, 2011)


1119.02 License required.

(A) It shall be unlawful for any proprietor to conduct or operate a retail food facility within the City of Meadville without first obtaining a license for each facility as required by and issued pursuant to the provisions of all applicable commonwealth of Pennsylvania statutes, including the Retail Food Facility Safety Act of 2010 (codified at Title 3 PA C.S.A. Section 5701 et seq.), the Food Safety Act of 2010 (codified at Title 3 PA C.S.A. Section 5721 et seq.), and the Food Employee Certification Act of 2010 (codified at Title 3 PA C.S.A. Section 6501 et seq.), and the Food Code, Chapter 46, and all related rules and regulations. (Ord. 3723 § 1, 2014; Ord. 3690 § 1, 2011; Ord. 3287, 1991. Formerly 1119.01)


1119.03 Compliance.

(A) Every person who shall conduct or operate a retail food facility within the city shall comply with the requirements of the Retail Food Facility Safety Act of 2010; the Food Employee Certification Act of 2010; and the Food Safety Act of 2010.

(B) The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Agriculture, through its health authorities, shall license and inspect all retail food facilities pursuant to the authority granted by the Retail Food Facility Safety Act of 2010, and other applicable commonwealth statutes. 

(C) The laws and regulations of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including the Retail Food Facility Safety Act of 2010, shall govern applicable licensing and inspection fees, as well as enforcement and penalties for noncompliance. (Ord. 3723 § 1, 2014; Ord. 3690 § 1, 2011; Ord. 3287, 1991. Formerly 1119.04)


PART 13 ZONING CODE

Articles:

Title 1. Zoning

1301    General Provisions

1302    Definitions

1303    Residential and Transitional Districts

1304    Institutional Districts

1305    Business and Economic Development Districts

1306    Supplementary Regulations

1307    Nonconforming Uses and Structures

1308    Off-Street Loading and Parking

1309    Sign Regulations

1310    Administration, Enforcement and Appeals

1311    Zoning Hearing Board

1312    Amendments

1313    Reserved

1314    Reserved

1315    Streetscape Advisory Committee

Title 3. Subdivisions

1351    Title, Purpose, Application and Interpretation

1353    Definitions

1355    Design Standards

1357    Plan Requirements

1359    Plan Processing Requirements

1361    Improvement Construction Requirements

1363    Conditions of Acceptance

1365    Variances, Amendment and Penalty

Title 5. Floodplain Management Regulations

1370    General Provisions

1371    Administration

1372    Identification of Floodplain Areas

1373    Technical Provisions

1374    Prohibited Development and Activities

1375    Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas

1376    Variances

1377    Definitions


Article 1301       GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

1301.01  Title.

1301.02  Purpose and authority.

1301.03  Community development objectives.

1301.04  Compliance.

1301.05  Interpretation of regulations.

1301.06  Establishment of zoning districts.

1301.07  Establishment of zoning map.

1301.08  Application of district regulations.

1301.09  Prohibited activities.


1301.01       Title. 

This title of Part 13 of the Meadville Municipal Code, consisting of Articles 1301 through 1315, shall be the zoning code of the City of Meadville. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1301.02       Purpose and authority.

This code is adopted by virtue of the authority granted to the city under Article VI of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988, and as further amended. The provisions of this zoning code are designed to:

(A) Promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following: the public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and practical community development and proper density of population, emergency preparedness and operations, airports, and national defense facilities, the provisions of adequate light and air, access to incident solar energy, police protection, vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water, sewage, schools, recreational facilities, public grounds, the provision of a safe, reliable and adequate water supply for domestic, commercial, agricultural or industrial use, and other public requirements, as well as preservation of the natural, scenic and historic values in the environment and preservation of forests, wetlands, aquifers and floodplains.

(B) Prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.

(C) Provide for the use of land within the municipality for residential housing of various dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of housing, including single-family and two-family dwellings, and a reasonable range of multiple-family dwellings in various arrangements, mobile homes and mobile home parks.

(D) Accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including population and employment growth, and opportunities for development of a variety of residential dwelling types and nonresidential uses. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1301.03       Community development objectives. 

The zoning regulations and districts set forth in this code are made in accordance with a comprehensive plan adopted for the general welfare of the city and are intended for the following purposes: 

(A) Growth Goals.

(1) That the city reduce its trend of long-term population decline.

(2) That growth contributes to further diversification of Meadville.

(3) That the industrial and commercial growth be expanded and continued.

(B) Character of Growth.

(1) That growth not be to such an extent that it alters Meadville’s pleasant, small-town character.

(2) While growth is welcomed, it should be sensitive to previous developments and conditions in the city.

(3) That growth be allowed in a variety of economic sectors and residential forms, ensuring prosperity through diversity.

(C) Overall Objectives.

(1) Continue developing the diversity which will keep the city competitive and flexible to changing economic conditions.

(2) Bring all parts of Meadville to a uniform level of soundness and attractive appearance.

(3) Encourage the occupation and maximum utilization of the city’s many existing residential structures.

These are made with reasonable consideration of, among other things, the existing character of the various areas within the city and their respective suitability for particular uses. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1301.04       Compliance.

No structure shall be located, erected, demolished, constructed, moved, altered externally, converted, or enlarged, nor shall any structure or land be used or be designed to be used, except in full compliance with all the provisions of this code, and after the lawful issuance of all permits and certifications required by this code. In cases of mixed occupancy or use, the regulations for each permitted use shall apply to that portion of the building or land so used. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1301.05       Interpretation of regulations.

Whenever the provisions of this code are at variance with any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the more restrictive requirements shall govern. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1301.06       Establishment of zoning districts.

(A) Establishment of Zoning Districts. For the purpose of this code, the City of Meadville is hereby divided into 12 districts to be designated as follows:

R-1	Single-Family Residential

R-2	Multiple-Family Residential

R-3	Special Purpose Residential

T-1	Transitional

I-1	Institutional Core

I-2	Institutional Medical

I-3	Special Institutional

I-4	Educational Institutional

B-1	Central Business

B-2	General Business

B-3	Flexible Business

EDC	Economic Development Corridor

(Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1301.07       Establishment of zoning map.

(A) Establishment of Zoning Map. The zoning map of the City of Meadville, dated November 22, 1994, amended March 10, 1998, together with all future notations, references, designations or amendments, is hereby made a part of this code. The areas within the city limits as assigned to each district and the location of boundaries of these districts established by this code are shown on the said zoning map. If, and whenever, changes are made in the boundaries or other matter included in this zoning map, such changes in the map shall be made within five days after the amendment has been approved by the city council.

(B) Interpretation of District Boundaries. The boundaries of the use districts are hereby established as shown on the zoning map of the City of Meadville. It is the intent of this code to align district boundary lines, whenever possible, with clearly defined existing lines of demarcation. Where confusion exists with respect to these boundaries, the zoning hearing board shall interpret such in accordance with the following rules:

(1) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines;

(2) Boundaries indicated as approximately following plotted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines;

(3) Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed as following the center of the rail tracks;

(4) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers, canals or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines;

(5) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the city limits shall be construed as following such city limits;

(6) Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (B)(1) through (5) of this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the zoning map of the City of Meadville, November 22, 1994, amended March 10, 1998, shall be determined by the scale of the map; and

(7) Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this code, the zoning hearing board may permit, as a special exception, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1301.08       Application of district regulations.

(A) Application of District Regulations. The regulations set by this code within each district shall be the minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land.

(B) Governmental Agencies. Property owned, leased or operated by the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or the United States, or the City of Meadville, or any other public or governmental body or agency, shall be subject to the requirements of this code as follows:

(1) Where such public or governmental uses are specifically listed, they shall be governed as indicated.

(2) Where such public or governmental uses are not specifically listed, they shall be permitted only in districts permitting private uses of a similar or substantially similar nature.

(3) Governmental entities and agencies shall be exempt from the provisions of this code only to the extent that it has been determined that the city has no power to apply its zoning regulations to the particular use of land. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1301.09       Prohibited activities.

(A) No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.

(B) No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered to:

(1) Exceed the height or bulk;

(2) Accommodate or house a greater number of families;

(3) Occupy a greater percentage of lot area;

(4) Have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces; than herein required or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this code.

(C) No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this code shall be included as a part of a yard, open space or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building.

(D) No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this code shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this code.

(E) In every case where a lot or territory has become a part of the city by annexation or other legal procedure, the same shall automatically be classified as lying and being in the R-1 single-family residential district until such classification shall have been changed by an amendment to the zoning code as provided by law.

(F) Any public or semi-public uses shall be subject to the provisions of the district in which they are located, except as noted by MMC 1301.08. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


Article 1302 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

1302.01    Interpretation.

1302.02    Specific terms.


1302.01 Interpretation.

For the purpose of this code, words used in the present tense shall include the future. The singular number shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular. The masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter. The word “shall” is always mandatory. The phrase “used for” includes “arranged for;” “person” includes an individual, corporation, partnership, incorporated association, or any other legal entity. The word “includes” or “including” shall not limit the term to the specified example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character. Except as defined within this code, all words and phrases shall have their normal meaning and usage. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1302.02 Specific terms.

The following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section:

“Accessory building or structure” means a subordinate building or structure, incidental to and located on the same lot as the principal building to which it relates. By special exception, an accessory building or structure may be located on a lot that is within 35 feet and separated from the lot occupied by the principal use to which it relates by a right-of-way, subject to provisions in MMC 1306.01.

“Accessory use” means a use incidental to, and subordinate to, and located on the same lot occupied by the principal use to which it relates. By special exception, an accessory use may be located on a lot that is within 35 feet and separated from the lot occupied by the principal use to which it relates by a right-of-way, subject to provisions in MMC 1306.01.

“Adaptive reuse” means the development of a new use for a historic structure.

“Agricultural services” means businesses selling goods or services to a substantially agricultural clientele, including feed mills, seed sales, feed grinding services, and agricultural implement dealers.

“Alley” means a minor way, regardless of its public or private status, and is used primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.

“Applicant” means any entity or person that applies for a wireless communications facility building permit, zoning approval and/or permission to use the public right-of-way, city-owned land, or other property.

“Automotive sales lot” means an open lot, used for the display or sale of new or used automobiles or trucks.

“Basement” means a floor level completely below grade or floor level in which more than two-thirds of the perimeter walls are below grade. A wall shall be considered below grade where the dimension from the first floor line to the finished grade is five feet or less, and the slope of the finished grade extending 10 feet from the building walls does not exceed 30 degrees.

“Bed and breakfast” means an owner-occupied residence offering, for pay, overnight or short-term lodging and breakfast for transient guests.

“Board” means, as referred to in this text, the City of Meadville zoning hearing board.

Boarding House. See the definition of “Rooming house.”

“Buildable area” means that portion of a lot remaining after the required yards have been provided.

“Building” means a roofed structure, whether or not enclosed by walls, to be used for the shelter, enclosure or protection of persons, goods, materials or animals.

“Building setback line” means the line within a property defining the required minimum distance between any structure (building) and the adjacent right-of-way, or neighboring lot lines, and beyond which a building may not exceed so as to provide the required yard.

“Car wash” means an area of land and/or a structure with machine- or hand-operated facilities used principally for the cleaning, washing, polishing or waxing of motor vehicles.

“Carport” means a covered space which is not fully enclosed by walls and is used for the storage of one or more vehicles.

“Cemetery” means land used, or intended to be used, for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery.

“Church” means a place of assembly used for congregate religious services and worship. Although accessory uses such as educational and recreational facilities for use of church members are permitted, other facilities and uses will be regarded as separate principal uses.

“Civic/cultural building” means any nonresidential building, structure, facility or complex used by the general public, whether occupied by any federal, state, county, or municipal agency, or private nonprofit association. Examples include municipal buildings, court facilities, museums, armories, social service agency offices, libraries and government offices.

“Clubs, lodges, and fraternal organizations” means any establishment operated for social, recreation or educational purposes but open only to members and their guests and not to the general public.

“Co-location” means the mounting of one or more communications antennas, on an existing communications tower, or on any structure that has been approved by the city to support at least one communications antenna.

“Commercial bakery” means a nonretail bakery where food is baked for businesses, institutions, or sold through similar wholesale means.

“Commercial laundry” means a laundry in which clothing is cleaned for business clientele or as a wholesale service, excluding retail cleaners and self-service laundries.

“Commercial recreation” means a facility which offers various indoor or outdoor recreational opportunities for the public, including such games as pool, billiards, bowling, video games, miniature golf and similar pursuits.

“Commission” means, as referred to in this text, the City of Meadville planning and zoning commission.

“Communications antenna” means any antenna and related equipment attached to a wireless support structure. Communications antennas shall not include support structures for antennas or any related equipment that is mounted to the ground or at ground level.

“Communications tower” means any structure that is constructed for the primary purpose of supporting one or more communications antennas, including, but not limited to, self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers and monopoles. Distributed antenna system hub facilities are considered to be communications towers. A communications tower shall not include towers and supportive structures for amateur purposes, including but not limited to ham and citizens’ band radios maintained and/or utilized by federally licensed amateur radio operators.

“Conditional use” means a use to be allowed or denied by the city council pursuant to public notice and hearing and recommendations by the City of Meadville planning and zoning commission and pursuant to the express standards and criteria set forth in this code.

“Construction” means the construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or structure.

“Continuing life care community” means an age-restricted residential development that provides a continuum of accommodations and care, from independent living to skilled nursing care.

“Convenience store” means a retail establishment of limited size (less than 5,000 square feet for the building), designed for the sale of sundries, groceries and gasoline (and sometimes diesel fuel, propane or kerosene). Convenience stores do not include repair services, tire sales or similar activities.

“Conversion apartment” means the conversion of an existing residential structure (built before 1994) to an apartment building when allowable under this code and other applicable city regulations.

Day Care Centers. See “Day care services (day care).”

“Day care services (day care)” provides out-of-home care for part of a 24-hour day to persons, excluding care provided by relatives and excluding day care furnished in places of worship during religious services. This code identifies three levels of day care services:

(A) “Family day care homes” means facilities in which day care is provided at any one time to four, five, or six persons who are not relatives of the caregiver, and where the care areas are used as a family residence.

(B) “Group day care homes” means facilities in which care is provided for more than six but less than 12 persons at any one time, where the care areas are being used as a family residence. (Care of more than six to 12 persons where the care areas are not used as a family residence will be considered a day care center.)

(C) “Day care centers” means facilities in which care is provided for seven or more persons at any one time, where the care areas are not used as a family residence.

Care for less than four persons will not be considered as day care services.

“Detention home/halfway house” means a facility for the housing, rehabilitation, and training of persons on probation, parole, or early release from correctional institutions, or other persons found guilty of criminal offenses.

“Developmentally disabled” means persons having mobility limitations, physical or mental handicap, mental retardation, disabilities as a consequence of abuse by another person, or similar conditions. Developmental disability does not include persons under supervision of the criminal justice system or persons recovering from substance abuse.

“District” means a portion of the territory of the City of Meadville within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof are applicable under this code.

“Dog kennel” means an outdoor enclosure, accessory structure (including portable structures) or any combination thereof for the purpose of the keeping and housing of four or more dogs that are more than six months old, owned or unowned, for any period of time, or any facilities identified as a kennel by the laws or regulations of Pennsylvania.

“Dormitory” means a building which is accessory to an educational or public institution intended or used principally for housing of persons attending and residing at the institution.

“Drug store” means a store where the primary business is the filling of medical prescriptions and the sale of drugs, medical devices and supplies, and nonprescription medicines but where nonmedical products may be sold as well.

“Dwelling” means any building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as the residence or sleeping place of one or more persons. The term “dwelling” shall not be deemed to include rooming house, tourist home, hotel, motel, hospital, convalescent home or dormitory.

(A) “Dwelling, single-family detached” means a building accommodating one family, and having no party wall or walls in common with an adjacent house or houses, but not a trailer, mobile home, or other transient or vehicular dwelling.

(B) “Dwelling, two-family” means a building accommodating two families living independently of each other and of a one- or two-story design.

(C) “Dwelling, multiple-family” means a building or portion thereof containing, or designed to contain, three or more separate dwelling units with or without common access facilities. Multiple-family dwellings shall include group homes. (See also “Conversion apartment”.)

(D) “Dwelling, mobile home” means a transportable single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, built upon or having a frame or chassis to which wheels may be attached, by which it may be moved upon a highway, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations and constructed so that it may be used without permanent foundation.

(E) “Dwelling, townhouse” means a single-family dwelling in a row of at least three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located above another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more vertical common, fire-resistant walls. 

“Dwelling unit” means a building or portion thereof containing one or more rooms for living purposes together with separate and exclusive cooking and sanitary facilities, accessible from the outdoors either directly or through an entrance hall shared with other dwelling units intended for the separate and exclusive use of the persons occupying the unit.

“Dwelling unit, student” means any dwelling unit occupied exclusively or primarily by persons unrelated by blood or marriage who are attending undergraduate or graduate programs offered by colleges or universities or who are on semester break or summer break from studies at colleges or universities, or any combination of such persons. Student dwelling units shall not include dormitories or fraternity/sorority houses as defined by this title. The occupants of student dwelling units differ from other households in that they may or may not act as a single housekeeping unit, and are generally transient. No student dwelling unit shall be occupied by more than four unrelated persons.

“Emergency” means a condition that (1) constitutes a clear and immediate danger to the health, welfare, or safety of the public, or (2) has caused or is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be unusable and result in loss of the services provided.

“Essential services” means services and utilities needed for the health, safety and general welfare of the community, such as underground, surface or overhead electrical, gas, telephone, steam, water, sewerage and other utilities and the equipment and appurtenances necessary for such systems to furnish an adequate level of service for the area in which it is located.

“Family” means:

(A) A single person occupying a dwelling unit and maintaining a household; or

(B) Any number of persons related by blood, marriage or adoption (including minor foster children) occupying a dwelling unit, living together and maintaining a common household; or

(C) A supervised family-like community living arrangement, of a permanent/nontransient character, for a group of disabled or handicapped persons, as defined by the Fair Housing Act, where the number of supervisors, administrators, caregivers or other staff on the premises at one time sufficient for the proper and safe care of the residents is no more than three; or

(D) Four or fewer persons, not related by blood, marriage or adoption, residing together in a dwelling unit and functioning as a single housekeeping unit.

Family Day Care Homes. See “Day care services (day care).”

“FCC” means Federal Communications Commission.

“Fence” means an artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose, screen or separate areas. It shall not include a retaining wall constructed to stabilize an earthen embankment.

“Floor area” means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building or structure from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings, but excluding any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet. Also known as “gross floor area” or “habitable floor area.”

“Fraternity/sorority” means, for the purpose of this code, men’s or women’s social organizations comprised of the students of a university or college and officially recognized as a fraternity or a sorority by such university or college.

“Fraternity/sorority house” means a building used for social or residential purposes by a fraternity or sorority.

“Funeral parlor” means a building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased in conjunction with services before burial or cremation.

“Garage, residential” means a fully enclosed building, accessory to a dwelling used for the housing of motor vehicles. This does not include garages offering commercial automotive services to the public.

“Gasoline service station” means an area of land, together with any structure thereon, used for the retail sale of motor fuel and lubricants and incidental services, such as lubrication and washing of motor vehicles, and the sale, installation or minor repairs of tires, batteries or other automobile accessories.

Group Day Care Homes. See “Day care services (day care).”

“Group home” means a supervised community living arrangement for disabled or handicapped persons as defined by the Fair Housing Act, together with supervisors and caregivers.

“Gymnasium” means a health club, gym or exercise facility which provides facilities for aerobic exercises, running and jogging, exercise equipment, game courts, swimming facilities, saunas, showers and lockers.

“Health services” means health care establishments providing support to the medical profession and patients, such as medical and dental laboratories, blood banks, oxygen, ambulance services and related services. Health services do not include retail pharmacies and similar retail businesses.

“Height of a communications tower” means the vertical distance measured from the ground level, including any base pad, to the highest point on a communications tower, including communications antennas mounted on the tower and any other appurtenances.

“Height of building” means the vertical distance measured from the average level of finished grade along all the exterior walls of the building to the highest point of the roof and to the highest point on any structure which rises wholly or partly above the roof.

“Historic structure” means any building or structure that is recognized as historical or architecturally significant through formal listing as a National Historic Landmark, formal listing on the National Register of Historic Places, or eligibility for listing, as determined by the State Historic Preservation Office, or a building or structure identified on any official city register of historic places.

“Home-based business” or “no-impact home-based business” means a business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery, or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated with residential use. The business or commercial activity must satisfy the following requirements:

(A) The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the property and surrounding residential uses.

(B) The business shall employ no employees other than family members residing in the dwelling.

(C) There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or inventory of a substantial nature.

(D) There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but not limited to, parking signs or lights.

(E) The business activity may not use any equipment or process which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference, including interference with radio or television reception which is detectable in the neighborhood.

(F) The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood.

(G) The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and may not occupy more than 25 percent of the habitable floor area.

(H) The business may not involve any illegal activity.

“Home business” means a use carried on entirely within a single-family dwelling unit, but which has a greater impact than a home-based business. Home businesses are typically professional offices or personal services characterized by outside employees, an on-site sign and on-site sales or rendering of services directly to visiting customers. Examples of home businesses include, but are not limited to, barber or beauty shops, art studios, legal offices, accountants or engineering firms.

“Horticulture” means the act of cultivating gardens for pleasure, visual screening, home use or similar avocational or aesthetic reasons.

“Hospital” means a place for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of human ailments and having facilities for in-patient care.

“Hospital, veterinary” means a structure designed or converted for the care of sick or wounded domestic animals.

“Hotel” means a building providing rooming units for the temporary lodging of persons for a fee, with or without meals, in which there are 10 or more sleeping rooms and an outside entrance in common.

“Inn” means a commercial facility for the lodging and feeding of transients. An inn is distinguished from most motels or hotels by its smaller size and resident owner/proprietor. It is distinguished from a bed and breakfast by its full-service restaurant.

“Junk” means any discarded material or article, and shall include, but not be limited to, scrap metal, scrapped or abandoned motor vehicles, machinery, equipment, paper, glass, containers and structures. It shall not include, however, refuse or garbage kept in a proper container for the purpose of prompt disposal. For the purpose of this code, a proper container shall mean a solid plastic or metal container, with a sealable lid, specifically designed for the storage of waste matter.

“Junk yard” means any place where any junk is stored, disposed of, or accumulated. This definition shall include recycling centers, recycling yards, and salvage businesses. Junk yards shall also include a collection of more than one unlicensed motor vehicle. However, it does not include municipal recycling centers where no materials are stored in an exterior environment.

“Lawful service driveway” or “driveway” means a vehicular access lane built for access to a residential or nonresidential use or to provide access to off-street parking.

“Limited retail business” means small-scale retail enterprises intended to benefit neighborhood residents or tourists. Limited retail businesses are distinguished from other retail businesses by their smaller size (less than 2,000-square-foot building), confining all commercial activities to indoors, and pedestrian orientation of signage.

“Lot” means a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.

“Lot area” means the area of a horizontal plane measured at grade and bounded by the front, side and rear lot lines.

Lot Frontage. The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to street shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under “Yard” in this section.

“Lot line” means a line, generally established by metes and bounds, which, when combined with other lot lines, delineates a lot or parcel of land.

(A) “Lot line, front” means any lot line separating the lot from a right-of way boundary of a street.

(B) “Lot line, rear” means the lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line.

(C) “Lot line, side” means any lot line other than a front or rear lot line; a side lot line separating a lot from a street is called a side street lot line. For the purposes of this code, corner lots shall be required to maintain front yard setbacks on all streets which they front.

Lot Measurements.

(A) Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the midpoint of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.

(B) Width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines of each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard.

Lot Types.

(A) “Corner lot” means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at the intersection of those streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.

(B) “Interior lot” means a lot other than a corner lot, the sides of which do not abut a street.

(C) “Through lot” means an interior lot having frontage on two streets.

“Lots of record” means any lot which, individually or as a part of subdivision, has been separately designated by plat or deed, by recorded instrument and recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds, Crawford County, before the date of adoption of this code.

“Manufacturing, heavy” means those manufacturing processes which do not meet the standards outlined for light manufacturing.

“Manufacturing, light” means the assembly, fabrication, manufacture, production, processing, storage and/or wholesale distribution of goods or products where no process involved will produce noise, light, vibration, air pollution, fire hazard, or emissions, noxious or dangerous to neighboring properties within 400 feet, including production of the following goods: home appliances; electrical instruments; office machines; precision instruments; electronic devices; time pieces; jewelry; optical goods; musical instruments; novelties; wood products; printed material; lithographic plates; type composition, machine tools; dies and gauges; ceramics; apparel; light weight nonferrous metal castings; light sheet metal products; plastic goods; pharmaceutical goods; food products (but not including animal slaughtering, curing nor rendering of fats).

“Medical or dental clinic” means any professional medical building or establishment where people are examined or treated by doctors, dentists, chiropractors, psychiatrists, opticians, ophthalmologists, optometrists and psychologists, but are not hospitalized overnight.

“Mixed occupancy” means occupancy of a building or of a lot for more than one use.

“Mobile home” means a transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one or more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation.

“Mobile home lot” means a parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.

“Mobile home park” means a parcel of land under single ownership, which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for nontransient use, consisting of two or more mobile home lots.

“Motel” means a building or group of detached or connected buildings designed or used primarily for providing sleeping accommodations for automobile travelers and having a parking space adjacent to a sleeping room. An automobile court or a tourist court with more than one unit or a motor lodge shall be deemed a motel.

“New construction” means the construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, extension, expansion, alteration, or relocation of a building, structure, and/or other improvements. Also, for the purposes of this code, all proposed subdivision and/or land development shall be considered to be new construction.

“Nonconforming lot” means a lot the area or dimension of which was lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this zoning code, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.

“Nonconforming structure” means a structure or part of a structure manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of use provisions of this code or an amendment hereafter enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this code or amendment or prior to the application of this code or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.

“Nonconforming use” means a use, whether of land or structure, which does not comply with the applicable use provisions of this code or amendment hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of this code or amendment or prior to the application of this code or amendment to its location by reason of annexation.

“Nursing home” means a building with sleeping rooms where persons are housed or lodged and furnished with meals, nursing care for hire and which is approved for such operations and licensed as a nursing home by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare.

“Overlay zone” means a zoning district that encompasses one or more underlying zones and that imposes additional requirements different from that required by the underlying zones.

“Parking garage” means an enclosed facility, deck or ramp, other than a private customer and employee garage, or private residential garage, used primarily for the parking and storage of vehicles and available to the general public.

“Parking lot” means an open space other than a public or private street or way exclusively for the parking of automobiles.

“Parking space” means an open space with a dustless all-weather surface, or space in a private garage or other structure with an effective length of at least 18 feet and a uniform width of at least nine feet for the storage of one automobile and accessible from a public way.

“Personal care home” means a facility in which food, shelter and personal assistance is provided to four or more persons who are not relatives of the operator for a period of more than 24 consecutive hours. These residents do not require hospitalization or long-term nursing care. Personal care homes are also defined by their licensing as such by the Department of Public Welfare.

“Personal services” means establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the nonmedical care of a person or his or her personal goods or apparel. Examples include barber and beauty shops, shoe repair, and tailoring or clothing alteration.

“Planning Code” means the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as reenacted and amended by Act 170 of 1988, and as further reenacted and amended from time to time.

Porch.

(A) “Porch, open” means a roofed-over structure open on a least three sides projecting from the front, side or rear wall of a building. This shall include porches that are unheated and that have screens or combination screens and storm windows.

(B) “Porch, closed” means any porch that is closed in by any means, manner or material above a point four feet from floor level.

“Principal frontage” means the side of a building which faces a street, road, footway or off-street parking area more than 40 feet wide.

“Professional office” means the office or studio of a lawyer, architect, artist, engineer, certified public accountant, real estate broker or salesman, appraiser, insurance broker or agent, teacher, or similar occupation. Professional office does not include the veterinary, dental, chiropractic, or medical professions. Professional offices may also include corporate offices, or similar offices where clerical, sales, or related administrative functions are performed for a business in which the primary service or goods production is located elsewhere.

“Public or accredited private school” means any place offering instruction in any branch of knowledge under the supervision of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania or a lawfully constituted ecclesiastical governing body, person, partnership or corporation meeting the requirements of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

“Public parks and playgrounds” means parks and playgrounds which are owned and operated by the City of Meadville or by an authority created for such purposes by the City of Meadville.

“Public utility building” means buildings, structures, and facilities relating to the furnishing of utility services to the public.

“Related equipment” means any piece of equipment related to, incidental to, or necessary for, the operation of a communications tower or communications antenna. By way of illustration, not limitation, related equipment includes generators and base stations.

“Repair garage” means a building used for mechanical and/or body repairs, storage, rental, servicing or supplying of gasoline or oil to automobiles, trucks, or similar motor vehicles, but not including automotive wrecking. It may include similar heavy repair businesses, such as welding services.

“Repair services, light” means businesses engaged in non-automotive repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction in which the item repaired is conducted wholly within an enclosed structure or the repair service is rendered off-site. Examples may include heating or air conditioning contractors, business machine services, or electrical supply/contractors. This definition does not include shoe repair or garment alteration, which is considered a personal service by this code.

“Room” means any enclosed area within a dwelling unit, meeting this code for sleeping, living, cooking, or dining purposes, excluding such enclosed spaces as closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, hallways, laundries, storage spaces, utility rooms, and similar spaces.

“Rooming house” means any place which provides rooms for transient or transitional sleeping or lodging, with or without a place for common dining, to persons on a commercial or institutional basis, subject to the direct control of the landowner or his agent. This shall not include dormitories or apartments. Rooming houses shall include a boarding house.

“Screen planting” means, for this code, an evergreen hedge at least six feet high, planted in such a way that it will block a line of sight. The screening may consist of either one or multiple rows of bushes or trees and shall be at least four feet wide.

“Screening” means a fence, screen planting or wall, provided in such a way that it will block a line of sight between two or more uses or structures. Screening shall be at least six feet in height unless the position of the screening would block a line of sight for a public street intersection or intersection of a lawful service drive and public street intersection. Fences or walls used as screening are subject to all fence height restrictions.

“Sexually oriented business or establishment” means any business, activity, club, establishment or premises operated for profit, whether direct or indirect, where the exhibition, showing, rental, or sale of materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing, or exhibiting specified anatomical areas or relating to specified sexual activities is regularly permitted and is a principal part of the activity of the business or establishment. Said specified anatomical areas and specified sexual activities shall be those as defined in the sexually oriented business regulations of the Meadville Municipal Code. Sexually oriented businesses shall include but are not limited to the following:

1. Sexually oriented or adult bookstores, arcades, novelty stores or video stores.

2. Sexually oriented or adult motion picture or mini-motion picture theaters.

3. Any premises to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing sexually oriented motion pictures or where an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member.

“Shopping center” means a group of commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a total entity. Shopping center includes, but is not limited to, shopping malls, shopping plazas and similar facilities which include off-street parking, uniform appearance and unified maintenance. Shopping centers may include retail uses, personal services, eating establishments and related uses.

“Sign” means any structure, building, wall, or other outdoor surface, or any device or part thereof, which displays or includes any letter, word, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device, or other representations used for announcement, direction, advertisement or identification. The word “sign” does not include the flag, pennant, or insignia of any nation, state, city or other political unit, nor public traffic or directional signs, nor religious symbols.

“Sign area” shall be construed to include all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background which is incidental to the display itself. Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to or painted on a surface, the area shall be considered the smallest rectangle which can be drawn to encompass all of the letters and symbols.

“Sign, electronic” is any sign or portion of a sign that is capable of displaying text, graphics, video, symbols or images wherein the sequence of messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes.

“Sign, freestanding” means any nonmovable sign not affixed to a building, including pole and ground signs.

“Sign, identification” is a permanent sign advertising the occupant’s name, typically but not limited to a business.

“Sign, other temporary” is a sign which is temporarily affixed, installed or placed for any purpose other than those for a temporary business sign, including but not limited to political signs, holiday and special event signs, and contractor identification signs placed on or near properties where work is being performed.

“Sign, permanent” is a sign which is affixed to the ground or a building by enduring means, and is not readily removable.

“Sign, portable business” is a sign which is intended to be displayed on a regular basis but placed in storage or otherwise removed from view, typically during non-business hours. It is not a temporary sign. It shall not be affixed in any way to the ground or to any building or structure. Examples include sandwich boards and other signs typically capable of being moved by one person.

“Sign, projecting” means a sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support and that projects more than 12 inches from such a building.

“Sign, projection” shall be considered the distance of the sign from the most distant point of its base. For freestanding signs, this shall be considered the distance from the top of the sign to the ground surface. For projecting or roof signs, this shall be considered the distance from the portion of the sign which attaches to the supporting surface to its most distant point.

“Sign, roof” means a sign which is mounted on the roof of a building or that is wholly dependent upon a building for support, and that projects above the top, walk or edge of a building with a flat roof or the crest of a gable roof or mansard building.

“Sign, temporary business” is a sign temporarily affixed, installed or placed for the purpose of announcing a special business event or promotion. Such signs shall include banners. No temporary sign may be used as the primary means to identify the name or nature of a business. 

“Sign, wall” means a sign fastened to or painted on a wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for or forms the background surface of the sign, and does not project more than 12 inches from the building.

“Special exception” means a use permitted with special permission granted by the zoning hearing board, to occupy or use land and/or a building for specific purposes in accordance with the criteria set forth in this code when such use is not permitted by right.

“Stadium” means a large open or enclosed place used for games, concerts, major events and surrounded by tiers of seats for spectators.

“Stealth technology” means camouflaging methods applied to wireless communications facilities which render them more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the existing structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but are not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted antennas painted to match the existing structure and facilities constructed to resemble trees, shrubs, flagpoles, and light poles.

“Story” means that portion of a building located between the surface of any floor and the next floor above; if there is not more than one floor the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it shall be considered a story.

“Street” means a public or private right-of-way, excluding driveways, intended for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation which provides a means of access to abutting property. The word “street” includes thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, court, drive, expressway, highway, lane, alley and road or similar terms.

“Structure” means any manmade object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land. This includes sheds, swimming pools, refuse and compost facilities, and parking lots, but excluding sidewalks and access drives.

“Substantially change” or “substantial change” means a modification to an existing wireless communications facility that changes the physical dimensions of a communications tower or base station if it meets any of the following criteria:

(a) For a communications tower outside the public rights-of-way:

(1) It increases the height of the facility by more than 10 percent, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna, not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater;

(2) It protrudes from the edge of the wireless communications facility by more than 20 feet or more than the width of the tower structures at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater.

(b) For a communications tower in the public rights-of-way:

(1) It increases the height of the facility by more than 10 percent or 10 feet, whichever is greater;

(2) It protrudes from the edge of the structure by more than six feet;

(3) It involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four cabinets;

(4) It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site of the communications tower; or

(5) It does not comply with conditions associated with prior approval of construction or modification of the communications tower unless the noncompliance is due to an increase in height, increase in width, or addition of cabinets.

“Theater” means a building or part of a building devoted to the showing of moving pictures or theatrical productions on a paid-admission basis.

“Traditional neighborhood development” means an area of land developed for a compatible mixture of residential units for various income levels and nonresidential commercial and workplace uses, including some structures that provide for a mix of uses within the same building. Residences, shops, offices, workplaces, public buildings and parks are interwoven within the neighborhood so that all are within relatively close proximity to each other. Traditional neighborhood development is relatively compact, limited in size and oriented toward pedestrian activity. It has an identifiable center and a discernible edge. The center of the neighborhood is in the form of a public park, commons, plaza, square or prominent intersection of two or more major streets. Generally, there is a hierarchy of streets laid out in a rectilinear or grid pattern of interconnecting streets and blocks that provides multiple routes from origins to destinations and are appropriately designed to serve the needs of pedestrians and vehicles equally.

“Truck terminal” means an area or building where trucks load and unload cargo and freight and where the cargo and freight may be broken down or aggregated into smaller or larger loads for transfer to other vehicles or modes of transportation.

“Upper floor residential use” means a mixed use of a building where the ground floor is used for a permitted nonresidential use in the zoning district in which the building is located and a floor or floors above the ground floor are used for dwelling unit or residential use.

“Use” means the purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged or intended, or for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained.

“Warehousing” means a building used by a commercial group or the general public for storage of goods and materials. For the purposes of this code, warehousing also includes self-service or “mini” storage facilities.

“WBCA” means the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S. §11702.1 et seq.)

“Wireless” means transmissions through the airwaves including, but not limited to, infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or radio signals.

“Wireless communications facility (WCF)” means the antennas, nodes, control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics and other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving, distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless communications services.

“Wireless support structure” means a freestanding structure, such as a communications tower or any other support structure that could support the placement or installation of a wireless communications facility, if approved by the city.

“Yard” means that portion of a lot which is unoccupied and open to the sky and extends from the lot line to the yard line.

“Yard, front” means a yard between an adjacent street right-of-way and the building line and extending for the full width of the lot.

“Yard line” means a line within a lot defining the minimum distance between any building or structure, or portion thereof, and an adjacent lot line. Such line shall be measured at right angles from and parallel to the corresponding lot line.

“Yard, rear” means a yard between the rear lot line and a line drawn parallel thereto at such distance therefrom as may be specified herein for any zoning district, and extending for the full width of the lot.

“Yard sale” means the sale or offering for sale of items or goods on property or premises used principally for residential uses, including all sales commonly referred to as “garage sales”, “yard sales”, “tag sales”, “porch sales”, “lawn sales”, “attic sales”, “basement sales”, “rummage sales”, “flea market sales”, “moving sales”, or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property. Yard sale shall also include placement and advertisement of any vehicle, trailer, boat or similar article for sale.

“Yard, side” means an open yard space between the side lot line and parallel thereto extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line.

“Zoning administrator” means the zoning officer of the City of Meadville, or his/her authorized representative. (Ord. 3764 § 1, 2017; Ord. 3752 §§ 2, 3, 2016; Ord. 3706 § 1, 2012; Ord. 3618 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3578 § 1, 2001; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


Article 1303 RESIDENTIAL AND TRANSITIONAL DISTRICTS

Sections:

1303.01    R-1 single-family residential district – Established.

1303.02    R-1 single-family residential district – Lot provisions.

1303.03    R-1 single-family residential district – Special exception provisions.

1303.04    R-1 single-family residential district – Conditional use provisions.

1303.05    R-2 multiple-family residential district – Established.

1303.06    R-2 multiple-family residential district – Lot provisions.

1303.07    R-2 multiple-family residential district – Special exception provisions.

1303.08    R-3 special purpose residential district – Established.

1303.09    R-3 special purpose residential district – Lot provisions.

1303.10    T-1 transitional district – Established.

1303.11    T-1 transitional district – Lot provisions.

1303.12    T-1 transitional district – Special exception provisions.


1303.01 R-1 single-family residential district – Established.

This district is established to foster single-family residences on individual lots. Other uses will be permitted where they do not adversely affect the integrity of single-family houses. Lawful uses are shown in the Table of R-1 Uses. Dimensions shown in MMC 1303.02, R-1 single-family residential district – Lot provisions, are applicable to all uses within the district, unless otherwise specified.

	TABLE OF R-1 USES 

	Permitted Uses

	Single-family detached dwellings

	Public parks and playgrounds

	Essential services

	Accessory uses

	Accessory buildings

	Family day care homes

	Home-based businesses

	 

	Special Exceptions

	Home businesses (1303.03(A))

	Public utility buildings (1303.03(C))

	Churches (1303.03(B))

	Bed and breakfast (1303.03(D))

	Public or accredited private schools

	 

	Conditional Uses

	Golf courses (1303.04)

(Ord. 3618 § 2, 2005; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1303.02 R-1 single-family residential district – Lot provisions.

Table of Lot Provisions  

	 	Min. Lot Size 	Min. Front Yard	 Min. Side Yard	Min. Rear Yard	Min. Lot Width

	Single-family dwellings*	7,500 sf	25 ft	10 ft	30 ft	75 ft

	All other uses	15,000 sf	25 ft	15 ft	40 ft	100 ft

	*In the R-1, includes home occupations, home businesses, bed and breakfast, and family day care homes.

(A) Total building height shall not exceed 35 feet, or two and one-half stories. (Ord. 3706 § 8, 2012; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1303.03 R-1 single-family residential district – Special exception provisions.

(A) Home Businesses. Home businesses represent a potential intrusion to residential neighborhoods. They will be permitted by special exception, provided:

(1) The home business shall be carried on entirely within the dwelling unit.

(2) Not more than two persons other than the occupants of the dwelling unit shall be employed.

(3) Not more than 20 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling shall be devoted to the home business.

(4) Articles sold or offered for sale on site shall be limited to mail-order articles or articles for sale elsewhere.

(5) No offensive noise, vibration, smoke (or other particulate matter), heat, humidity, glare or other objectionable effects shall be produced.

(6) Satisfactory provision is made for the accommodation of parking as provided in Article 1308 MMC. Any off-street parking area shall be located behind the building line or within the lawful service drive.

(7) No equipment or processes shall be used which create interference in radio or television receivers off the premises or which cause fluctuation in utility line transmissions. Applicant will also show that electric or electronic equipment will not create an electrical fire hazard.

(8) Not more than one commercial vehicle having a maximum capacity of one ton may be stored and parked on any lot.

(B) Churches and Schools.

(1) Shall provide all parking and loading/unloading requirements as required by this code.

(2) Shall be located on a paved public street with a minimum cartway width of 20 feet.

(3) The design and landscaping shall be compatible with and preserve the character of adjoining residential uses.

(4) All parking and recreation/play areas which abut residential uses shall provide screen planting.

(5) Any outdoor lighting shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties.

(6) Such uses shall have, and present, all needed local, county, state or federal permits, or applications for needed permits. If needed permits are in the application stages, the final approval for same shall be a condition prior to issuing a certificate of occupancy.

(C) Public Utilities. Lots containing structures or buildings for public utilities shall:

(1) Be landscaped to present a minimum intrusion upon the neighborhood.

(2) Be enclosed by a security fence. Notwithstanding any other section of this code, the height of this fence shall be adequate to provide proper security for the installation (eight feet).

(3) No outdoor storage shall be permitted.

(4) Lighting shall be designed to prevent glare to neighboring properties.

(D) Bed and Breakfast.

(1) The person operating the bed and breakfast residence must also be a permanent resident.

(2) No more than 40 percent of the floor area of the principal dwelling may be used for guest sleeping accommodations.

(3) No guest rooms shall be located in accessory buildings.

(4) One off-street parking space must be provided for each guest room on lot. If on-lot parking is unavailable, the applicant shall arrange through purchase, lease or similar covenant suitable spaces within a 200-foot radius of the lot.

(5) The applicant may display one sign identifying the name of the business and its use. This sign will not exceed six square feet, and shall be lit through indirect means.

(6) The basic residential character of the structure shall not be altered.

(7) No more than 10 guest rooms will be permitted at a bed and breakfast.

(8) A bed and breakfast may prepare or serve foods for consumption on site for breakfast, lunch and dinner offered to its transient guests only.

(9) A bed and breakfast may cater occasional on-site events or activities for no more than 40 persons at a time, including, without limitation, wedding rehearsal parties, business meetings, small office parties, and similar events or activities. A bed and breakfast shall not cater or prepare foods for consumption for any off-site event or activity.

(10) A bed and breakfast that serves meals other than breakfast, or caters on-site events or activities as described in this article, shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the Meadville board of health. All necessary licenses or permits issued by county, state or federal agencies shall be presented to the board and required licenses, certificates, or permits shall be a condition for approval. (Ord. 3706 § 2, 2012; Ord. 3618 § 3, 2005; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1303.04 R-1 single-family residential district – Conditional use provisions.

Land within R-1 single-family residential districts may be employed in the conduct of public or private golf courses as conditional uses upon application, after review by the city planning and zoning commission and upon approval by the city council of the City of Meadville. All such uses shall meet the following minimum qualifications for consideration under the provisions of this section:

(A) Minimum lot size: 100 acres.

(B) Density of Use. The golf course use conducted upon any premises, permitted as a conditional use hereunder, shall employ a minimum of nine holes which shall be reasonably spaced over the lot.

(C) Minimum Setback. All structures upon land devoted to golf course use shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from all lot lines.

(D) Minimum Parking. All golf courses conducted as conditional uses hereunder shall have a minimum of 30 off-street parking spaces for the golf course use and such additional spaces as may be required by the terms of Article 1308 MMC for each accessory use conducted upon such land. Parking requirements in addition to the minimums set forth in this section may be required by the city council at the time of the grant of permission to conduct such conditional use.

(E) Accessory Uses. Only the following shall be deemed to be permitted accessory uses to any golf course use permitted as a conditional use hereunder:

(1) Pro shop;

(2) Snack bar, including facilities for the sale of beverages from time to time regulated under the liquor control laws of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania; provided, that such facilities shall be duly licensed under all applicable laws, rules and regulations;

(3) Storage facilities;

(4) Shelters;

(5) Tennis courts;

(6) Swimming pool;

(7) Club house, including locker rooms and showers.

Any such use permitted as an accessory use in an R-1 district to a conditional use golf course shall only be continued for so long as subject lot continues to be operated as a golf course.

(F) Sign. Golf course uses permitted as conditional uses hereunder shall exhibit no more than one identification sign which shall be a ground-mounted sign not in excess of 12 square feet in total surface area (including mounting structures). Such sign shall comply with the provisions of Article 1309 MMC.

(G) Maintenance. Golf course uses permitted as conditional uses hereunder shall be maintained at all times in a manner which promotes and preserves the residential quality of the neighborhoods in which such uses are permitted. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1303.05 R-2 multiple-family residential district – Established.

This district is established to facilitate flexibility in housing types. A wide variety of housing types will be accommodated here. Lawful uses are shown in the Table of R-2 Uses. Dimensions shown in MMC 1303.06, R-2 multiple-family residential district – Lot provisions, are applicable to all uses within the district, unless otherwise specified.

	TABLE OF R-2 USES 

	Permitted Uses

	Single-family detached dwellings

	Two-family dwellings

	Multiple-family dwellings

	Public or accredited private schools

	Public parks and playgrounds

	Essential services

	Accessory uses

	Accessory buildings

	Family day care homes

	Churches

	Student dwelling units

	Home-based businesses

	Public and accredited private schools

	 

	Special Exceptions

	Home businesses (1303.03(A))

	Public utility buildings (1303.03(C))

	Group day care homes (1303.07(A))

	Conversion apartments (1303.07(B))

	Bed and breakfast (1303.03(D))

	Personal care homes (1303.07(C)) 

(Ord. 3618 § 4, 2005; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1303.06  R-2 multiple-family residential district – Lot provisions.

Table of Lot Provisions  

	 	Min. Lot Size	Min. Front Yard	Min. Side Yard	Min. Rear Yard	Min. Lot Width

	Single-family dwellings	6,000 sf	20 ft	6 ft	25 ft	60 ft

	Two-family dwellings	6,000 sf	20 ft	6 ft	25 ft	60 ft

	Multiple-family dwellings:*

	 3 – 12 units	1,500 sf/unit	20 ft	15 ft	25 ft	100 ft

	 12 – 25 units	1,500 sf/unit	20 ft	15 ft	35 ft	200 ft

	 25 – 50 units	1,500 sf/unit	20 ft 	20 ft	40 ft	350 ft

	 50+ units	1,500 sf/unit	20 ft 	30 ft 	1 ft/unit 	11 ft/unit

	All other uses	6,000 sf	20 ft	6 ft	25 ft	60 ft

	*No multiple-family unit may be developed on a lot of less than 6,000 square feet.

(A) Building height for all uses, except multiple-family dwellings, shall not exceed 35 feet, or two and one-half stories (exclusive of church steeples, antennas or similar protuberances). Building height for multiple-family dwellings shall not exceed four stories unless yard sizes are increased five feet for every story to a maximum of seven stories. No dwelling may exceed seven stories under any circumstances. (Ord. 3706 § 8, 2012; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1303.07 R-2 multiple-family residential district – Special exception provisions.

(A) Group Day Care Homes. To ensure the safety of all occupants, all group day care homes shall comply with the following standards:

(1) Any outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence of at least four feet in height if they abut a public street right-of-way.

(2) There shall be an off-street area for loading/unloading persons. If feasible, this shall include a circular drive or vehicle turning area.

(3) The operator shall secure and submit for inspection to city officials all applicable licenses. Such licenses shall remain current.

(B) Conversion Apartments. The purpose of conversion apartments is to allow for the conversion of older, larger single-family homes into multiple-family units. To be allowed to convert from a single-family into a multiple-family unit, the following criteria must be met:

(1) All units must have separate kitchen and bathroom facilities as well as living/sleeping spaces.

(2) Each unit shall have a minimum size of 600 square feet exclusive of common spaces.

(3) All required parking shall be accommodated on-lot. No parking in the front yard area shall be permitted.1

(4) Conversion shall be limited to four dwelling units or less.

(5) All other city codes must be met.

(6) All area and yard requirements for multiple-family dwellings within the district must be met.

(C) Personal Care Homes. The purpose of such homes is to provide residence for individuals in a home-like setting. Consequently, it is essential to maintain an exterior appearance that is in harmony with surrounding residences. Thus, such uses shall meet the following conditions:

(1) The basic residential qualities of the lot and/or structure shall be maintained.

(2) There shall be no sign or exterior display beyond a four-foot square sign noting the name of the home and its use. Such signs shall only be lit by indirect means.

(3) If a conversion of a single-family dwelling, no home shall admit more than eight residents at one time. If a conversion of a multiple-family dwelling, the home shall not admit more than eight residents per former dwelling unit.

(4) Required local, county, and/or state certifications shall be presented to the board. Specifically, the applicant shall present and keep current applicable Pennsylvania Department of Welfare and Labor and Industry permits.

(5) The home shall have a minimum of three parking spaces available on-lot. If spaces are not available on-lot, the developer shall buy, lease or reserve sufficient spaces through private covenant. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1303.08 R-3 special purpose residential district – Established.

This district is established to further the goal of flexibility in neighborhood types within the city. Nothing in this code is intended to supersede the requirements of the City of Meadville subdivision and land development regulations, as amended. Lawful uses are shown in the Table of R-3 Uses. Dimensions shown in MMC 1303.09, R-3 special purpose residential district – Lot provisions, are applicable to all uses within the district, unless otherwise specified.

	TABLE OF R-3 USES 

	Permitted Uses

	Single-family detached dwellings

	Parks and playgrounds

	Accessory uses

	Family day care homes

	Accessory buildings

	Churches

	Public and accredited private schools

	Home-based businesses

	 

	Special Exceptions

	Public utility buildings (MMC 1303.03(C)) 

(Ord. 3706 § 3, 2012; Ord. 3618 § 5, 2005; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1303.09 R-3 special purpose residential district – Lot provisions.

All lot provisions of MMC 1303.02 shall apply in the R-3 district. (Ord. 3706 § 3, 2012; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1303.10 T-1 transitional district – Established.

Many of these areas have historically been residential neighborhoods. This district is established to allow for flexibility among specified business and residential uses. The T-1 designation will ideally allow neighborhoods with pressure for change to evolve with the lowest impact possible to all uses. Lawful uses are shown in the Table of T-1 Uses. Dimensions shown in MMC 1303.11, T-1 transitional district – Lot provisions, are applicable to all uses within the district, unless otherwise specified.

	TABLE OF T-1 USES 

	Permitted Uses

	Single-family dwellings

	Public or accredited private schools

	Public parks and playgrounds

	Essential services

	Accessory uses

	Accessory buildings

	Family day care homes

	Group day care homes

	Bed and breakfast

	Rooming houses

	Professional offices

	Home businesses

	Two-family dwellings

	Churches

	Multiple-family dwellings

	Civic/cultural buildings

	Parking garages

	Parking lots

	Personal care homes

	Medical and dental clinics

	Home-based businesses

	Student dwelling units

	 

	Special Exceptions

	Inn (MMC 1303.12(A))

	Limited retail businesses (MMC 1303.12(B))

	Conversion apartments (MMC 1303.07(B))

	Day care centers (MMC 1303.12(C))

	Public utility buildings (MMC 1303.03(C))

	Personal services (MMC 1303.12(D))

	Funeral parlors (MMC 1303.12(E))

	Detention homes/halfway houses (MMC 1303.12(F))

	 

	Conditional Uses

	Traditional neighborhood development (MMC 1306.14) 

(Ord. 3762 § 1, 2017; Ord. 3706 § 4, 2012; Ord. 3618 § 6, 2005; Ord. 3578 § 11, 2001; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1303.11 T-1 transitional district – Lot provisions.

Table of Lot Provisions  

	 	Min. Lot Size 	Min. Front Yard	 Min. Side Yard	Min. Rear Yard	Min. Lot Width

	All uses (except multiple-family dwellings)	6,000 sf	20 ft	6 ft	25 ft	60 ft

(A) Building height shall not exceed two and one-half stories, or 35 feet (exclusive of church steeples, antennas or similar protuberances).

(B) Lot provisions for multiple-family dwellings shall follow MMC 1303.06, R-2 multiple-family residential district – Lot provisions. (Ord. 3706 § 8, 2012; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1303.12 T-1 transitional district – Special exception provisions.

(A) Inns. It is the intent of this code to permit only those facilities which can be compatible in a mixed use setting. Therefore, all such uses shall:

(1) Meet the parking requirements of this code with an appropriate number of off-street spaces. Yard areas of this lot which abut other uses shall be appropriately screened and landscaped. No front yard areas may be utilized for parking.

(2) Signage shall be limited to one sign of no larger than 16 square feet for each yard abutting a public right-of-way. All such signs shall be illuminated by indirect means.

(3) There shall be a resident proprietor or manager.

(4) All refuse areas shall be screened from public view. All refuse shall be contained in approved containers.

(5) All outdoor central air conditioning devices or compressors shall be confined to rear yard areas.

(6) No drive-in service areas shall be permitted.

(7) No live entertainment shall be permitted.

(8) No more than five rooms for overnight guests shall be provided.

(9) Space for no more than 40 dining guests shall be available, pursuant to Pennsylvania Labor and Industry standards.

(10) If a conversion, the residential character of the building shall not be substantially altered.

(11) Diners who are not overnight guests shall not be admitted after 10:00 p.m. (prevailing time).

(12) There shall be no outdoor sound transmission systems.

(13) Outdoor dining shall be confined to porches and screened rear yard areas.

(14) There shall be no alcoholic beverages sold.

(B) Limited Retail Businesses. The intent of this provision is to accommodate small-scale retail enterprises benefiting nearby residents and attracting outside visitors.

(1) Total commercial use size shall not exceed 2,000 square feet.

(2) Signage shall be limited to one sign of no larger than 16 square feet. This sign shall be lit by indirect means.

(3) A use shall meet parking provisions for its business type. Such spaces shall not intrude into front yard areas.

(4) There shall be no exterior display of merchandise.

(5) If a conversion, the residential character of the building shall not be substantially altered.

(6) There shall be no outdoor sound transmission systems or displays of any sort beyond that provided in subsection (B)(2) of this section.

(C) Day Care Centers.

(1) Any outdoor play areas shall be fenced by a fence of at least four feet in height.

(2) There shall be an off-street loading/unloading area for children. Under no circumstances shall vehicles be required to back onto public streets.

(3) One parking space per each employee shall be required.

(4) The operator shall secure and keep current all applicable commonwealth or local licenses.

(D) Personal Services.

(1) The use shall meet parking provisions detailed in Article 1308 MMC.

(2) Signage shall be limited to one sign of four square feet or less for each yard fronting on a public street. All signs shall be lit by indirect means.

(3) There shall be no outdoor display of goods or materials associated with the service.

(E) Funeral Parlors.

(1) There shall be no receiving vault, preparations room or display of merchandise visible from outside buildings in any zoning districts used in conjunction with the funeral parlor use or related activity.

(2) There shall be a minimum of 5,000 square feet of off-street parking located on the same lot as the funeral parlor, and not less than that required by Article 1308 MMC.

(3) Loading and unloading facilities shall be located entirely on the same lot as the funeral parlor.

(F) Detention Homes/Halfway Houses. It is the intent of this code to permit detention homes/halfway houses in a neighborhood of the city that is both close to social services and amenities but shifted away from strictly residential areas so as to lessen any impact on existing residential uses. Therefore, all such uses shall meet the following requirements:

(1) There is always a staff member on site at any time a person assigned there is present.

(2) There is provided one off-street parking space for each two beds, plus one for each staff member on shift.

(3) Any applicable license or certification from the commonwealth of Pennsylvania or other agency is obtained and maintained.

(4) The applicant demonstrates to the zoning hearing board that the proposal will satisfy a demonstrative need and shall be conducted in a responsible manner without detriment to surrounding properties. (Ord. 3706 § 4, 2012; Ord. 3578 § 12, 2001; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)1

If such parking spaces cannot be met in the lot areas, the developer shall show that sufficient, nonmetered off-street space is available within a 200-foot radius of the lot. The developer may do this by buying, leasing or reserving the spaces through private covenants. 


Article 1304 INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICTS

Sections:

1304.01    I-1 institutional core district – Established.

1304.02    I-1 institutional core district – Lot provisions.

1304.03    Limited retail and restaurants in the  I-1 district.

1304.04    I-2 institutional medical district – Established.

1304.05    I-2 institutional medical district – Lot provisions.

1304.06    I-3 special institutional district – Established.

1304.07    I-3 special institutional district – Lot and screening provisions.

1304.08    I-3 special institutional district – Special exception provisions.

1304.09    I-4 educational institutional district – Established.

1304.10    I-4 educational institutional district – Lot provisions.

1304.11    I-4 educational institutional district – Special exception provisions.

1304.12    I-4 educational institutional district – Conditional use provisions.


1304.01 I-1 institutional core district – Established.

This district is established to safeguard the public spaces which form the historical heart of Meadville. The intent is to provide sound stewardship for those places which belong to all citizens. Lawful uses are shown in the Table of I-1 Uses. Dimensions shown in MMC 1304.02, I-1 institutional core district – Lot provisions, are applicable to all uses within the district, unless otherwise specified.

	TABLE OF I-1 USES 

	Permitted Uses

	Public parks and playgrounds

	Public or accredited private schools

	Churches

	Single-family dwellings

	Two-family dwellings

	Professional offices

	Civic/cultural buildings

	Essential services

	Accessory buildings

	Accessory uses

	Home-based businesses

	 

	Special Exceptions

	Bed and breakfast (1303.03(D))

	Home businesses (1303.03(A))

	Upper floor residential use (1305.03(C))

(Ord. 3618 § 7, 2005; Ord. 3578 § 7, 2001; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1304.02 I-1 institutional core district – Lot provisions.

Table of Lot Provisions  

	 	Min. Lot Size	 Min. Front Yard	Min. Side Yard	Min. Rear Yard	Min. Lot Width 

	Single-family dwellings	6,000 sf	20 ft	6 ft	25 ft	60 ft

	Other uses	7,500 sf	20 ft	10 ft	30 ft	50 ft

(A) Total building height shall not exceed 42 feet or three stories, exclusive of steeples, antennas, and similar protuberances. (Ord. 3706 § 8, 2012; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1304.03 Limited retail and restaurants in the I-1 district.

(A) Limited Retail or Restaurants.

(1) Total retail or restaurant use area shall not exceed 3,000 square feet per parcel. This shall include all interior space and any exterior space dedicated to such use, including seating areas, patios, etc., but not parking and other access elements.

(2) Signage shall be limited to one sign no larger than 12 square feet, which may be illuminated only by indirect means. No other signage, including window signs, is permitted.

(3) This use shall be exempt from providing any parking. However, if parking is provided, it shall conform in all respects to the parking requirements of this article.

(4) There shall be no exterior display of merchandise.

(5) If a conversion, the character of the building shall not be substantively altered. If a new building, it shall conform in character and scale to the existing buildings on the Diamond. Applicant shall obtain comments regarding the impact on the historic elements of an existing building or design of a new building from the Crawford County Historical Society, the Pennsylvania Historic and Museum Commission or other recognized historic preservation agency, and submit with the application for special exception.

(6) There shall be no outdoor sound transmission systems or displays of any sort beyond that provided in subsection (A)(2) of this section.

(7) Business hours for retail use shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. and business hours for restaurants shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.

(8) All outdoor lighting, except illumination for general safety, shall be prohibited except during business hours.

(9) No drive-through or drive-up service is permitted.

(10) Deliveries shall not interfere with traffic patterns around Diamond Park. (Ord. 3762 § 2, 2017)


1304.04 I-2 institutional medical district – Established.

This district is intended to foster and facilitate the medical and health care facilities which contribute to the local economy and well-being of the city’s residents. Lawful uses are shown in the Table of I-2 Uses. Dimensions shown in MMC 1304.05, I-2 institutional medical district – Lot provisions, are applicable to all uses within the district, unless otherwise specified.

	TABLE OF I-2 USES 

	Permitted Uses

	Public parks and playgrounds

	Bed and breakfast

	Home businesses

	Hospitals

	Health services

	Medical and dental clinics

	Health care facility

	Single-family dwellings

	Two-family dwellings

	Accessory buildings

	Accessory uses

	Essential services

	Group day care homes

	Family day care homes

	Parking lots/parking garages

	Personal care homes

	Professional offices

	Nursing homes

	Churches

	Home-based businesses

	Public and accredited private schools

	Civic/cultural buildings

	 

	Special Exceptions

	Conversion apartments (1303.07(B))

	Public utility buildings (1303.03(C))

	Day care centers (1303.12(C))

(Ord. 3762 § 2, 2017; Ord. 3744 § 1, 2015; Ord. 3618 § 8, 2005; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994. Formerly 1304.03)


1304.05 I-2 institutional medical district – Lot provisions.

Table of Lot Provisions  

	 	Min. Lot Size	Min. Front Yard	 Min. Side Yard	Min. Rear Yard	 Min. Lot Width

	Single-family dwellings	6,000 sf	20 ft	6 ft	25 ft	60 ft

	Other uses	7,500 sf	20 ft	10 ft	30 ft	50 ft

(A) No building may exceed seven stories under any circumstances. (Ord. 3762 § 2, 2017; Ord. 3706 § 8, 2012; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994. Formerly 1304.04)


1304.06 I-3 special institutional district – Established. 

The I-3 special institutional zoning district is established to provide a combination of housing and care needs to elderly persons in an institutional and retirement setting and to provide for convenient services for persons residing in a retirement community and the general public. Uses are permitted to meet the needs of the region’s elderly persons, especially those residents of the district living in a continuing life care or retirement community setting along with those in the general public. Lawful uses are shown in the Table of I-3 Uses.

	TABLE OF I-3 USES 

	Permitted Uses

	Single-family dwellings

	Two-family dwellings

	Personal care homes

	Nursing homes

	Churches

	Essential services

	Accessory uses

	Accessory buildings

	Family day care homes

	Group day care homes

	Multiple-family dwellings

	Public and accredited private schools

	Limited retail

	Drug stores

	Medical/dental clinics

	Gymnasiums

	 

	Special Exceptions

	Public utility buildings (1303.03(C))

	Day care centers (1303.12(C)) 

	Other uses (1304.08(A))

	Restaurants (1304.08(B))

	Financial institutions (1304.08(C))

(Ord. 3762 § 2, 2017; Ord. 3679 § 1, 2010; Ord. 3618 § 9, 2005; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994. Formerly 1304.05)


1304.07 I-3 special institutional district – Lot and screening provisions.

The following dimensional requirements for lot size, yard setbacks, lot width, building height, other setbacks, and other screening and use requirements and limitations shall apply to all uses in the I-3 zoning district:

Table of I-3 Lot Area and Width and Setback Requirements 

	 	Min. Lot Size	Min. Front Yard	Min. Side Yard	Min. Rear Yard	Min. Lot Width

	Single-family dwellings	7,500 sf	25 ft	10 ft	30 ft	75 ft

	Multiple-family dwellings:

	3 – 12 units	1,500 sf/unit	20 ft	15 ft	25 ft	100 ft

	12 – 25 units	1,500 sf/unit	20 ft	15 ft	35 ft	200 ft

	25 – 30 units	1,500 sf/unit	20 ft	15 ft	40 ft	350 ft

	50+ units	1,500 sf/unit	20 ft	15 ft	1 ft/unit	 11 ft/unit

	All other uses	15,000 sf	25 ft	15 ft	40 ft	100 ft

(A) Total building height shall not exceed three stories (exclusive of antennas, steeples and similar items).

(B) Due to the proximity of this district to R-1 single-family residential zoning districts, any use, except single-family dwellings, must be at least 125 feet from the property line of a parcel containing a single-family residence held in separate ownership within the I-3 district zone, and 125 feet from the I-3 district boundary in any direction. Additionally, any use, except single-family dwellings, must be screened from any property containing a single-family residence held in separate ownership within the I-3 zone, and screened from the I-3 district boundary in any direction. The setback requirement in this subsection shall not apply to existing structures converted to a use other than a single-family residence. Screening shall be placed between the use (including its associated parking, accessory structures and accessory uses) and any property containing a single-family residence held in separate ownership within the I-3 zone as well as the I-3 district boundary in any direction. Screening and buffering as required in this section shall meet one or more of the standards contained in MMC 1306 and 1308, as amended from time to time and as applicable.

(C) Subject to the requirements of subsection (B) of this section, in the I-3 zoning district, the yard setback requirements shall not apply if adjoining lots owned by the same landowner are being developed as part of a land development plan covering multiple lots. A single building may contain multiple permitted uses and a single lot may contain more than one building housing multiple uses so long as the uses are compatible, subject to the condition that all setbacks, parking landscaping, and other applicable regulatory standards are met. (Ord. 3762 § 2, 2017; Ord. 3679 § 1, 2010; Ord. 3578 § 15, 2001; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994. Formerly 1304.06)


1304.08 I-3 special institutional district – Special exception provisions.

(A) Other Uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use in the I-3 district may be permitted by special exception if the proposed use meets the following requirements:

(1) The proposed use is:

(a) Consistent with the city comprehensive plan;

(b) Consistent with the adjoining and surrounding zoning and uses;

(c) Consistent with the scale and density of neighboring uses and structures;

(d) Compliant with all applicable yard, setback, and signage regulations for the districts;

(e) Compliant with parking and loading/unloading standards for related uses specified in this code.

(2) The proposed use does not:

(a) Substantially increase traffic congestion, create traffic safety hazards or endanger the safety of persons or property by improper location or design of facilities for ingress or egress;

(b) Change the basic functional characteristics of the streets and lands on which it is located, as identified by the city comprehensive plan;

(c) Increase the danger of fire or otherwise involve activities or processes which would tend to endanger the public health or safety;

(d) Overcrowd the land or create an undue concentration of population or structures;

(e) Impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property;

(f) Create storm water hazards or drainage problems; 

(g) Create vibrations, glare, heat, electrical disturbance, smoke, odor or noise which would jeopardize the integrity of preexisting uses in the immediate vicinity;

(h) Unduly burden water, sewer, school, park, or other facilities;

(i) Be detrimental to or adversely affect the reasonable use of adjacent property;

(j) Otherwise adversely affect the public health, safety, morals or general welfare;

(k) Unreasonably interfere with pre-existing or planned residential, historic or economic development.

(B) Restaurants.

(1) Business hours shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. and all outdoor lighting, except illumination for general safety, shall be prohibited except during business hours.

(2) No signs may be illuminated by direct means.

(3) No drive-through or drive-up service shall be permitted.

(4) Shall provide for parking in accordance with MMC 1308.

(C) Financial Institutions.

(1) Business hours shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and all outdoor lighting, except illumination for general safety, shall be prohibited except during business hours.

(2) No signs may be illuminated by direct means.

(3) No drive-through or drive-up service shall be permitted.

(4) Shall be permitted only within a multi-use structure, not a stand-alone building.

(5) Shall provide for parking in accordance with MMC 1308. (Ord. 3762 § 2, 2017; Ord. 3679 § 1, 2010. Formerly 1304.07)


1304.09 I-4 educational institutional district – Established.

This district is structured to further the goals of varied and exemplary education for local citizens at all ages and levels. Uses will be permitted here which contribute to such an atmosphere. Lawful uses are shown in the Table of I-4 Uses. Dimensions shown in MMC 1304.10, I-4 educational institutional district – Lot provisions, are applicable to all uses within the district, unless otherwise specified.

	TABLE OF I-4 USES 

	Permitted Uses

	Day care (all types)

	Public and accredited private schools

	Dormitories

	Parks and playgrounds

	Civic/cultural buildings

	Single-family dwellings

	Accessory uses

	Accessory buildings

	Churches

	Essential services

	Parking lots

	Medical/dental clinics

	Professional offices

	Gymnasium

	Student dwelling units

	 

	Special Exceptions

	Public utilities (1303.03(C))

	Fraternity/sorority house (1304.11(A))

	Conversion apartments (1303.07(B))

	Bed and breakfast (1303.03(D))

	Two-family dwellings (1304.11(B))

	Multiple-family dwellings (1304.11(B))

	 

	Conditional Uses

	Stadiums (1304.12(A)) 

(Ord. 3762 § 2, 2017; Ord. 3679 § 5, 2010; Ord. 3618 § 10, 2005; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994. Formerly 1304.08)


1304.10 I-4 educational institutional district – Lot provisions.

All lot provisions of MMC 1304.07 shall apply in the I-4 district, with the exception that building height may be increased to, but shall not exceed, five stories, and that the restrictions set forth in MMC 1304.07(C) shall not be applicable in the I-4 zoning district. (Ord. 3762 § 2, 2017; Ord. 3679 § 5, 2010; Ord. 3578 § 16, 2001; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994. Formerly 1304.09)


1304.11 I-4 educational institutional district – Special exception provisions.

(A) Fraternity/Sorority House. Often, these developments represent an intense use in a single-family neighborhood setting. Such houses shall:

(1) Meet all lot requirements of this district for multiple-family dwellings, substituting “rooms” for “units,” as both terms are defined by this code.

(2) Meet the parking requirements of fraternity/sorority houses and dormitories, as stated in Article 1308 MMC.

(3) Provide evidence that the sorority or fraternity is a duly chartered organization, recognized by an accredited school. Maintenance of such a charter will be a continual requirement of this special exception.

(4) Provide evidence that solid waste will be removed by an approved hauler, and temporary storage of solid waste will occur in a fully enclosed facility, located in the rear yard (if physically feasible). At a minimum, one cubic yard of space must be provided for each two rooms.

(5) Rear yards shall be effectively screened from abutting properties.

(B) Two-Family Dwellings and Multiple-Family Dwellings. Because such housing units in the I-4 district are likely to be occupied by students in a semi-transient setting, the following shall be required:

(1) Provide evidence that solid waste be removed by an approved hauler, and temporary storage of solid waste will occur in a fully enclosed container, located in the rear yard (if physically feasible). At a minimum, one cubic yard of space must be provided for each two dwelling units.

(2) No multiple-family dwelling under this exception shall exceed three stories in height.

(3) Rear yards shall be effectively screened from abutting properties. (Ord. 3762 § 2, 2017; Ord. 3679 § 5, 2010; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994. Formerly 1304.10)


1304.12 I-4 educational institutional district – Conditional use provisions.

(A) Stadiums. To ensure the safety and security of potential residents surrounding such a development, all stadiums shall:

(1) Present a means to ensure the normal flow of traffic to stadium events avoiding utilization of local streets as identified by the comprehensive plan of 1992, where possible. If local streets must be utilized, the developer will illustrate a flow pattern which avoids R-1 or R-2 residential neighborhoods to the maximum extent possible.

(2) Include a buffer yard at least 25 feet in width, appropriately planted to filter most light and noise throughout the year. At a minimum, this yard shall be planted with species which will attain at least six feet in height within two years of planting. The project landscape architect shall certify that, barring abnormal climate conditions, the plantings will reach the desired dimensions within the given time limits. The landscape architect shall also certify that the mixture of plantings will be adequate for the purposes of audio and visual filtration. (Ord. 3762 § 2, 2017; Ord. 3679 § 5, 2010; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994. Formerly 1304.11)


Article 1305 BUSINESS AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS

Sections:

1305.01    B-1 central business district – Established.

1305.02    B-1 central business district – Lot provisions.

1305.03    B-1 central business district – Special exception provisions.

1305.04    B-1 central business district – Conditional use provisions.

1305.05    B-2 general business district – Established.

1305.06    B-2 general business district – Lot provisions.

1305.07    B-2 general business district – Special exception provisions.

1305.08    B-3 flexible business district – Established.

1305.09    B-3 flexible business district – Lot provisions.

1305.10    EDC economic development corridor district – Established.

1305.11    EDC economic development corridor district – Lot provisions.

1305.12    EDC economic development corridor district – Special exception provisions.

1305.13    EDC economic development corridor district – Conditional use provisions.


1305.01 B-1 central business district – Established.

The purpose of this district is to foster a variety of retail and service business uses in a traditional downtown setting. Lawful uses are shown in the Table of B-1 Uses. Dimensions shown in MMC 1305.02, B-1 central business district – Lot provisions, are applicable to all uses within the district, unless otherwise specified.

	TABLE OF B-1 USES

	Permitted Uses

	Financial institutions

	Retail businesses (NEC)

	Personal services

	Restaurants

	Professional offices

	Civic/cultural buildings

	Medical and dental clinics

	Parking lots and parking garages

	Public parks and playgrounds

	Health services

	Churches

	Private clubs and social halls

	Taverns or bars

	Bed and breakfast

	Public and private schools

	Theaters

	Essential services

	Accessory buildings

	Accessory uses

	Inn

	Light repair services

	Gymnasium

	 

	Special Exceptions

	Gasoline service stations (1305.03(A))

	Multiple-family dwellings (1305.03(B))

	Day care centers (1303.12(C))

	Convenience food stores (1305.03(A))

	Upper floor residential use (1305.03(C))

	 

	Conditional Uses

	Shopping centers (1305.04(A))

	Traditional neighborhood development (1306.14) 

(Ord. 3578 §§ 8, 14, 2001; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1305.02 B-1 central business district – Lot provisions.

Table of Lot Provisions  

	Min. Lot Size	Min. Front Yard	Min. Side Yard	Min. Rear Yard	Min. Lot Width

	1,000 sf	0 ft	0 ft	0 ft	25 ft

(A) Total building height shall not exceed four stories unless all yard areas are increased five feet for each story, until seven stories. No building shall exceed seven stories. (Ord. 3706 § 8, 2012; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1305.03 B-1 central business district – Special exception provisions.

(A) Convenience Stores/Gasoline Service Stations.

(1) Any fuel pumps shall be at least 30 feet from the front lot line and 30 feet from each side lot line.

(2) No vehicle will be parked or stored along the front lot line except on a short-term basis (less than 12 hours).

(3) Any lot line abutting a residential use or district shall provide appropriate screening.

(4) There shall be no outdoor storage of new or used parts, scrap parts, unlicensed vehicles, tires, vehicles lacking current state inspector stickers, or parts of vehicles. The overnight parking of patron vehicles and the presence of DER/EPA-approved waste containers shall be permitted in side or rear lot areas.

(5) Canopy structures shielding gasoline pumps shall be no closer than 20 feet from the front lot line and 20 feet from each side lot line.

(B) Multiple-Family Dwellings.

(1) Shall maintain dedicated parking spaces adequate to conform to Article 1308 MMC. These spaces must lie within 200 feet of the dwelling lot line.

(2) Shall maintain a common indoor or outdoor area appropriate for the recreational and social needs of dwelling residents. If indoor, a minimum of 25 square feet per unit shall be available. If outdoor, a permanently landscaped area of 50 square feet per unit must be maintained.

(C) Upper Floor Residential Use.

(1) Shall only be permitted where the ground floor, or majority thereof, shall be used or dedicated for a use other than residential, and a use allowed in the zoning district in which the building is located.

(2) The dwelling units shall have no more than four bedrooms.

(3) Each dwelling unit shall provide the following minimum usable living space:

(a) Minimum of 540 square feet of usable space for one-bedroom units, for occupancy of no more than two persons.

(b) Minimum of 725 square feet of usable space for two-bedroom units, for occupancy by no more than four persons.

(c) Minimum of 910 square feet of usable space for three-bedroom units, for occupancy by no more than six persons.

(d) Minimum of 1,095 square feet of usable space for four-bedroom units, for occupancy by no more than eight persons.

(4) Any structure in which a residential use is permitted shall comply with all requirements of this code applicable to the permitted principal use of the ground floor conducted therein. All otherwise complying above ground floor residential uses shall be exempt from lot size, lot coverage, lot width and setback requirements. No structure in which mixed uses are permitted hereunder shall exceed seven stories or 100 feet in height.

(5) Subject to the provisions of MMC 1308.02(B) through (F), there shall be provided at least one off-street parking space for every one dwelling unit. (Ord. 3578 § 9, 2001; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1305.04 B-1 central business district – Conditional use provisions.

(A) Shopping Centers.

(1) Must comply with Article 1308 MMC by dedication of adequate parking spaces within 200 feet of the development’s lot line.

(2) With application for a permit, a plan shall be submitted to the zoning administrator showing the following:

(a) Extent and area of property.

(b) Entrance, exits, driveways, roads, parking areas, and lots.

(c) Location of existing and proposed structures.

(d) Storm water management techniques to be employed.

(e) Anticipated retail, service or eating and drinking places by use category with appropriate square feet of building devoted to each.

(f) Current and proposed pedestrian access, especially linkages to existing business areas.

(3) Repealed by Ord. 3618.

(4) Shall employ screening and buffering appropriate to filter light and noise if abutting a residential use or district. (Ord. 3618 § 11, 2005; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1305.05 B-2 general business district – Established.

The purpose of this district is to foster a variety of retail and service business uses in an auto-oriented setting. Lawful uses are shown in the Table of B-2 Uses. Dimensions shown in MMC 1305.06, B-2 general business district – Lot provisions, are applicable to all uses within the district, unless otherwise specified.

	TABLE OF B-2 USES 

	Permitted Uses

	Financial institutions

	Retail businesses (NEC)

	Personal services

	Restaurants

	Professional offices

	Civic/cultural buildings

	Medical and dental clinics

	Parking lots and parking garages

	Public parks and playgrounds

	Health services

	Churches

	Laundry and dry cleaning

	Private clubs and social halls

	Taverns or bars

	Bed and breakfast

	Public and private schools

	Theaters

	Essential services

	Accessory buildings

	Accessory uses

	Car washes

	Light repair services

	 

	Special Exceptions

	Gasoline service stations (1305.03(A))

	Funeral parlors (1303.12(E))

	Day care centers (1303.12(C))

	Motels and hotels (1305.07(C))

	Repair garages (1305.07(B))

	Convenience food stores (1305.03(A))

	Auto sales (1305.07(A))

	Indoor commercial recreation (1305.07(D))

	Upper floor residential use (1305.03(C))

	 

	Conditional Uses

	Shopping centers (1305.04(A))

	Traditional neighborhood development (1306.14) 

(Ord. 3578 §§ 8, 13, 2001; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1305.06 B-2 general business district – Lot provisions.

Table of Lot Provisions 

	Min. Lot Size	Min. Front Yard	Min. Side Yard	Min. Rear Yard	Min. Lot Width

	5,000 sf	25 ft	10 ft	10 ft	50 ft

(A) Building height shall not exceed four stories (exclusive of antennas, steeples, and similar protuberances). (Ord. 3706 § 8, 2012; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1305.07 B-2 general business district – Special exception provisions.

(A) Auto Sales. Such developments shall be permitted, subject to the following:

(1) In the interest of public traffic safety, no vehicles shall be parked along the front lot line. Cars may parallel the front lot line, but must be set back at least 15 feet.

(2) Any lot line abutting a residential use shall utilize appropriate screening.

(3) There shall be no outdoor storage of new or used parts, scrap parts, unlicensed vehicles, tires, vehicles lacking current state inspection stickers, or parts of vehicles. The overnight parking of patron vehicles and the presence of DER/EPA-approved waste containers shall be permitted in side or rear lot areas.

(B) Repair Garages.

(1) Repair garages shall meet the criteria established for service stations in MMC 1305.03(A), substituting “repair garage” for “service station.”

(C) Motels and Hotels.

(1) No motel shall have a lot area of less than 21,600 square feet.

(2) Motel buildings or accessory structures shall be placed no closer than 30 feet to any lot line.

(3) Swimming pools shall comply with the safety requirements of MMC 1306.03.

(4) Yard areas shall be permanently landscaped and maintained in good condition.

(5) Rooms shall not be rented for a period of less than 12 hours.

(D) Indoor Commercial Recreation. Because of this use’s periodic intensity, there is a genuine potential to adversely affect neighboring businesses. Therefore, all such uses shall:

(1) Meet all parking and loading requirements of this code.

(2) Indicate the anticipated number of mechanical amusement devices and agree to pay the city tax on such devices.

(3) There shall be no outdoor sound transmission or devices.

(4) Present evidence of compliance with all applicable Pennsylvania Bureau of Labor and Industry standards.

(5) With the exception of lawful parking, there shall be no outdoor areas for patron use. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1305.08 B-3 flexible business district – Established.

This district’s purpose is to provide a broad base of flexibility for small business corridors separated from the downtown or French Creek development corridor. Uses will be encouraged here which especially contribute to the reuse of vacant or under-utilized buildings and properties. Lawful uses are shown in the Table of B-3 Uses. Dimensions shown in MMC 1305.09, B-3 flexible business district – Lot provisions, are applicable to all uses within the district, unless otherwise specified.

	TABLE OF B-3 USES 

	Permitted Uses

	Light manufacturing

	Laboratory/research facilities

	Public parks and playgrounds

	Parking lots and parking garages

	Essential services

	Accessory buildings

	Accessory uses

	Professional offices

	Medical and dental clinics

	Public utility buildings

	Churches

	Public and accredited private schools

	 

	Special Exceptions

	Warehousing (1305.12(A)) 

(Ord. 3618 § 12, 2005; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1305.09 B-3 flexible business district – Lot provisions.

All lot standards shall comply with MMC 1305.06. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1305.10 EDC economic development corridor district – Established.

This district is established to encourage the location and expansion of large-scale highway-dependent businesses through the corridor of the French Creek Parkway. Lawful uses are shown in the Table of EDC Uses. Dimensions shown in MMC 1305.11, EDC economic development corridor district – Lot provisions, are applicable to all uses within the district, unless otherwise specified.

	TABLE OF EDC USES 

	Permitted Uses

	Light manufacturing

	Commercial bakeries

	Commercial laundries

	Laboratory/research facilities

	Rental service/equipment

	Agricultural services

	Shopping centers

	Retail businesses (NEC)

	Public parks and playgrounds

	Laundry and dry cleaning

	Parking lots and parking garages

	Essential services

	Accessory buildings

	Accessory uses

	Light repair services

	Car washes

	Gymnasium

	Commercial recreation

	Medical and dental clinics

	Civic/cultural buildings

	Professional offices

	Health services

	Personal services

	Financial institutions

	Restaurants

	Churches

	Public and accredited private schools

	 

	Special Exceptions

	Public utilities (MMC 1303.03(C))

	Building supply/contractor’s yards (MMC 1305.12(A))

	Truck terminals (MMC 1305.12(A))

	Warehousing (MMC 1305.12(A))

	Gasoline service stations (MMC 1305.03(A))

	Auto sales (MMC 1305.07(A))

	Repair garages (MMC 1305.07(B))

	Motels and hotels (MMC 1305.07(C))

	Convenience food stores (MMC 1305.03(A))

	Other uses (MMC 1305.12(B))

	Sexually oriented businesses (MMC 1305.12(C))

	 

	Conditional Uses

	Heavy manufacturing (MMC 1305.13(A)) 

(Ord. 3706 § 4, 2012; Ord. 3618 § 13, 2005; Ord. 3578 § 28, 2001; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1305.11 EDC economic development corridor district – Lot provisions.

Table of Lot Provisions 

	Min. Lot Size	Min. Front Yard	Min. Side Yard	Min. Rear Yard	Min. Lot Width

	43,560 sf	25 ft	25 ft	25 ft	150 ft

(A) Building height shall not exceed four stories (exclusive of antennas, steeples, and similar protuberances). (Ord. 3706 § 8, 2012; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1305.12 EDC economic development corridor district – Special exception provisions.

(A) Warehousing and Truck Terminals/Supply and Contractor’s Yards. Such uses are permitted subject to the following requirements:

(1) Side and rear yards shall be increased by 20 feet.

(2) All outdoor storage shall be in side yards (behind the front lot line) or in the rear yard. Any outdoor storage areas shall provide appropriate screening by an opaque fence.

(3) Access to roads and highways shall be clearly defined.

(4) All parking, loading and unloading facilities shall be clearly designed so motor vehicles will not be required to back into or from streets or roads when parking or leaving the premises.

(B) Other Uses. In the EDC economic development corridor (MMC 1305.10), any use not specifically listed as a permitted use in any other zoning district and not specifically excluded from this district may be permitted by special exception if the proposed use meets the following requirements:

(1) The proposed use, if granted a special exception, would:

(a) Be consistent with the comprehensive plan of the city;

(b) Be consistent with the adjoining and surrounding zoning and uses;

(c) Be consistent with the scale and density of neighboring uses and structures;

(d) Comply with all applicable yard, setback, and signage regulations for the districts;

(e) Comply with parking and loading/unloading standards for related uses specified in this code.

(2) The proposed use, if granted a special exception, would not:

(a) Substantially increase traffic congestion, create traffic safety hazards or endanger the safety of persons or property by improper location or design of facilities for ingress or egress;

(b) Change the basic functional characteristics of the streets and lands on which it is located, as identified by the city comprehensive plan;

(c) Increase the danger of fire or otherwise involve activities or processes which would tend to endanger the public health or safety;

(d) Overcrowd the land or create an undue concentration of population or structures;

(e) Impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property;

(f) Create storm water hazards or drainage problems;

(g) Create vibrations, glare, heat, electrical disturbance, smoke, odor or noise which would jeopardize the integrity of pre-existing uses in the immediate vicinity;

(h) Unduly burden water, sewer, school, park or other facilities;

(i) Be detrimental to or adversely affect the reasonable use of adjacent property;

(j) Otherwise adversely affect the public health, safety, morals or general welfare;

(k) Unreasonably interfere with pre-existing or planned residential, historic or economic development.

(C) Sexually Oriented Businesses.

(1) Shall comply with the business regulations of Article 325 MMC, as amended.

(2) Shall provide a minimum of one parking space for every three seats. (Ord. 3706 § 4, 2012; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1305.13 EDC economic development corridor district – Conditional use provisions.

(A) Heavy Manufacturing.

(1) Shall not involve the following uses:

(a) Abattoir;

(b) Animal fertilizer manufactures;

(c) Facilities for the incineration, reduction or storage of offal, garbage or dead animals;

(d) Manufacture of gun powder or explosives;

(e) Fat, lard or tallow rendering;

(f) Glue, size or gelatine manufacture;

(g) Paper and pulp manufacture;

(h) Tanneries or rawhide or skin storage;

(i) Auto wrecking and junk yards.

(2) No uses will involve noxious gas, dust, odor or smoke clearly discernible to neighboring uses or harmful to the public health, safety and welfare of area citizens.

(3) If abutting non-industrial uses, shall present a plan for screening and buffering which will minimize any impact and filter most light and noise. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


Article 1306 SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS

Sections:

1306.01    Accessory uses and structures.

1306.02    Satellite dish antennas.

1306.03    Swimming pools.

1306.04    Horticulture.

1306.05    Repealed.

1306.06    Drive-through for financial institutions, car washes, dry cleaners, drive-through or drive-in restaurants or drive-in retail businesses.

1306.07    Forestry and mineral excavation.

1306.08    Yard requirements for accessory uses and buildings.

1306.09    Application of yard regulations.

1306.10    Temporary structures.

1306.11    Repealed.

1306.12    Steep slope areas.

1306.13    Adaptive reuse.

1306.14    Traditional neighborhood development.

1306.15    Public rights-of-way.

1306.16    Landscaping requirements.

1306.17    Prohibited uses under land use sharing agreement.

1306.18    Airport district overlay.

1306.19    Wireless communications facilities.

1306.20    Creekside recreational development.


1306.01 Accessory uses and structures.

(A) It is the intent of this zoning code that accessory uses and structures be permitted in conjunction with any lawful use. To guide proper accessory uses and structures, the following table will supplement use tables in previous articles. When an accessory structure or use is not specifically mentioned, the zoning administrator shall determine if it is practically the same as a mentioned use.

(B) Except as may be permitted by home occupation or in conjunction with a principal use other than residential, in all residential zoning districts and on all lots outside of a residential zoning district, on which are located single-family and multiple-family dwellings for residential use, no commercial, sales or business activity of any kind, inside or outside of a building, shall be permitted as an accessory use, except that yard sales, as defined, may occur no more than seven days per calendar year.

Table 1306.01 

	Use	 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures

	Single-Family Dwellings	Garages, carports, garden sheds, storage buildings, home workshops, satellite dish antennas, swimming pools, avocational greenhouses, tennis courts

	Multiple-Family Dwellings	Garages, carports, laundry for tenants, swimming pools, recreation facilities for tenants, storage building for maintenance or tenants, garden sheds, satellite dish antennas

	Commercial or Industrial	Garages, carports, parking ramps, swimming pools, day care for employees, tenants or patrons, satellite dish antennas, enclosed storage areas, parking lots, maintenance buildings, recreation facilities, commissary for employees or tenants

	Institutional	Supply stores for tenants, employees or students, day care centers for tenants, employees or students, swimming pools, garages, carports, satellite dish antennas, enclosed storage areas, maintenance buildings, parking lots, cafeteria for employees or tenants or students, similar necessary scientific, recreational, spiritual, educational or residential facilities

(C) An accessory use, building or structure may be established or placed on a lot that is within 50 feet and separated from the lot occupied by the principal use to which the use, building or structure relates by a right-of-way, if approved by the board as a special exception subject to the following provisions:

(1) The applicant must document, by gross area and/or gross floor area, as applicable, the area the accessory use, building and/or structure is proposed to occupy; and

(2) If the principal use is nonconforming, the accessory use, building and/or structure shall be counted toward the maximum expansion limit prescribed in Article 1307 MMC for nonconforming uses; and

(3) A consolidation deed, deed restriction or alternate statement approved by the city shall be recorded with the deed(s) for the accessory parcel(s) detailing the relationship between the parcels so as to prevent sale or conveyance of the accessory parcel separate from the principal parcel, absent restrictive covenants acceptable to the city. (Ord. 3764 § 2, 2017; Ord. 3618 § 14, 2005; Ord. 3578 § 6, 2001; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1306.02 Satellite dish antennas.

While a permitted accessory structure in all districts, no satellite dish antenna shall be located in side or front yard areas. If located at ground level, the antenna shall be appropriately landscaped, and yard areas shall be screened. Satellite dish antennas may be located on rooftops. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1306.03 Swimming pools.

All in-ground swimming pools shall be enclosed by a fence at least four feet high, with a self-latching gate, for the purpose of public safety. Above-ground pools shall provide comparable safety measures. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1306.04 Horticulture.

Horticulture, as defined by this code, shall be a permitted accessory activity in all districts and for all uses. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1306.05 Home occupations.

Repealed by Ord. 3618. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1306.06 Drive-through for financial institutions, car washes, dry cleaners, drive-through or drive-in restaurants or drive-in retail businesses.

Drive-through for financial institutions, car washes, dry cleaners, drive-through or drive-in restaurants or drive-in retail businesses shall be permitted by the zoning administrator as an accessory to the operation if they meet the following criteria:

(A) Under no circumstances shall vehicular traffic be required to back onto public streets.

(B) For all drive-through lanes, a total stacking area suitable for six cars shall be available between the point of service and a public street.

(C) Under no circumstances shall public streets serve as a drive-through lane. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1306.07 Forestry and mineral excavation.

Natural resource uses shall be permitted, provided the following standards can be met to protect public health and safety in an urban environment:

(A) Forestry shall be permitted by right in all districts, provided:

(1) Roads used for access shall be kept in a mud-free condition at the end of each day.

(2) All harvesting practices must include measures to protect nearby structures and utility lines.

(3) To avoid traffic congestion and excess noise, all harvesting activities must be conducted between Monday and Friday between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.

(B) Repealed by Ord. 3706. (Ord. 3706 § 5, 2012; Ord. 3618 § 16, 2005; Ord. 3578 § 10, 2001; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1306.08 Yard requirements for accessory uses and buildings.

Unless otherwise noted in this code, accessory structures for a residential use may be located in side or rear yard areas to within three feet of a lot line, unless the side or rear yard abuts a street or alley in which case a 10-foot setback shall be maintained. Otherwise, all accessory uses and structures shall meet all yard lot and area requirements. (Ord. 3706 § 5, 2012; Ord. 3578 § 17, 2001; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1306.09 Application of yard regulations.

(A) Where a structure exists on an adjacent lot and is within 150 feet of the proposed structure, and the existing structure has a front yard less than the minimum depth required, or where structures exist on both adjacent lots, the minimum depth of the front yard shall be the average depth of the front yard(s) of the existing adjacent structure(s).

(B) With the exception of open decks, all structures, whether attached to the principal structure or not, and whether open or enclosed, including porches, carports, balconies or platforms above normal grade level, shall not project into any minimum front, side or rear yards, except as specifically noted in this code. Open decks may project four feet into front or side yards and up to three feet from the rear lot line.

(C) A fence no higher than eight feet is permitted in a side and rear yard. A fence or hedge is permitted in the front yard provided it is no higher than four feet and does not interfere with the line of sight for vehicular traffic on adjoining streets or alleys. These restrictions do not apply to other natural screening trees or buffers as may be required under this code. A retaining wall may be constructed in any yard as necessary to stabilize a natural earthen embankment and for that purpose only. Terraces without walls, roof and enclosures are permitted in any yard.

(D) Swimming pools and associated decks shall be permitted in rear yards only; provided, that the pool is located not less than 10 feet from any side yard line and 10 feet from the rear yard line. Pumps, filtration devices, and similar apparatus required by the pool shall lie within the side or rear yard area.

(E) The following structures are exempt from height regulations provided they do not constitute a hazard: communication towers, church spires, chimneys, elevator bulk heads, smoke stacks, conveyors, flag poles, agricultural silos, stand pipes, elevated water tanks, derricks and similar structures. 

(F) Essential services, handicapped access ramps and lawful service drives are exempt from all area and yard regulations.

(G) No structure of any kind shall be constructed or placed within and no commercial or business activity of any kind shall be conducted within the street right-of-way of any public street or highway except as may be specially permitted in the B-1 central business district as an essential service, or in conjunction with a special event, all in accord with applicable regulations adopted by city council.

(H) The following structures may be placed within three feet of property lines, in side and rear yard areas; provided, that they do not constitute a hazard: chimneys which are connected to a load-bearing structural wall and of sufficient height to carry away particulates, fire and emergency access stairs and platforms, air conditioning devices, and restaurant ventilation devices.

(I) In corner lots, side yards opposite the street to which the property is addressed or opposite the front of the house, as deemed appropriate by the zoning administrator, may, upon request, be treated as rear yards for the purposes of this code. In through lots, front yards opposite the street to which the property is addressed or opposite the front of the house, as deemed appropriate by the zoning administrator, may, upon request, be treated as rear yards for the purposes of this code. (Ord. 3706 § 5, 2012; Ord. 3618 § 17, 2005; Ord. 3578 §§ 18, 19, 2001; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1306.10 Temporary structures.

Temporary structures, in conjunction with construction work, shall be permitted only during the period that the construction work is in progress. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1306.11 Flood hazard areas.

Repealed by Ord. 3706. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994; Ord. 3347 § 1, 1993)


1306.12 Steep slope areas.

Any development of slopes of more than 15 percent must be submitted on a plan prepared by a reg-



istered engineer or architect showing how the development will treat the slope problem. The zoning administrator shall refer the plan to the city engineer or a consulting engineer for review and advice before issuing any permit. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1306.13 Adaptive reuse.

(A) Purpose and Authority. Authority for this section derives from Section 603(g)2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. This section is adopted for the express purpose of encouraging the adaptive reuse of historic buildings within the city.

(B) Applicability. This section shall apply to historic structures and former public buildings (including schools, churches, armories, and other civic structures of at least 50 years in age) which lie within any zoning district within the city, with the exception of the R-1 single-family residential district.

(C) Permitted Reuses. Historic structures and former public buildings which meet the criteria outlined in this code may be reused for the following purposes by conditional use:

(1) Single-family dwelling.

(2) Multiple-family dwelling.

(3) Financial institution.

(4) Private clubs or social halls; provided, that there are no sales of alcohol on the premises.

(5) Day care facilities of all types.

(6) Nursing or personal care homes.

(7) Hospitals and medical clinics for humans.

(8) Civic or cultural building.

(D) Standards for Exterior Alterations. It shall be a condition of this adaptive reuse that all exterior alterations shall meet the Secretary of Interior Standards for Historic Preservation. Signage shall be limited to the type normally permitted in the district.

(E) Parking. The following parking requirements shall be met:

(1) Medical/office uses: one space per first 1,000-foot GFA and one space per each additional 750 feet GFA.

(2) Dwellings: one space per bedroom to a maximum of two per dwelling unit.

(3) All other uses: one space per each 2,000 square feet.

Parking may be provided on-lot or within 500 feet of the building entrance if insufficient public or on-street spaces are available.

(F) Demolition and Reconstruction. If any structures meeting the criteria of this code are removed subsequent to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section, a new structure may be built to meet the use criteria of subsection (C) of this section provided:

(1) The use is one allowed under subsection (C)(1), (3), (4), (5), (6), or (7) of this section only.

(2) The developer shall describe why demolition is necessary. Prior to demolition, the building shall be documented by fully exterior photographic coverage and a narrative description consistent with Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission Historic Resource Survey Standards. Three copies of this documentation shall be furnished to the city.

(3) The original building footprint is adhered to for all front and side yard lines. The principal entrance shall be located on the same street frontage as the original building.

(4) All off-street parking is confined to the rear of the structure.

(5) The new construction shall meet the following standards:

(a) Buildings shall generally relate in scale and design features to the surrounding buildings and the previous building on site.

(b) Long monotonous uninterrupted walls or roof planes shall be avoided.

(c) Window arrangement shall be architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors, and details of the building. Windows shall be vertically proportioned whenever possible. Upper-story windows shall be vertically aligned with the location of windows and doors on the ground level.

(d) Blank, windowless walls are discouraged. Where the construction of a blank wall is necessitated by local building codes, the wall should be articulated by the provision of blank window openings trimmed with frames, sills, and lintels, or, if the building is occupied by a commercial use, by using recessed or projecting display window cases. Intensive landscaping may also be appropriate in certain cases.

(e) All entrances to a building shall be defined and articulated by architectural elements such as lintels, pediments, pilasters, columns, porticoes, porches, overhangs, railings, balustrades, and others, where appropriate. Any such element utilized shall be architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors, and details of the building as a whole, as shall the doors. (Ord. 3578 § 2, 2001)


1306.14 Traditional neighborhood development.

(A) Purpose and Authority. Authority for this section derives from Article VII-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, and its purposes are as follows:

(1) To ensure that the zoning regulations which are concerned in part with the uniform treatment of dwelling type, bulk, density, intensity and open space within each zoning district shall not be applied to the improvement of land by other than lot-by-lot development in a manner that would distort the objectives of the city’s community development goals and objectives.

(2) To encourage innovations in residential and nonresidential development and renewal which makes use of a mixed use form of development so that the growing demand for housing and other development may be met by greater variety in type, design and layout of dwellings and other buildings and structures and by the conservation and more efficient use of open space ancillary to said dwellings and uses.

(3) To extend greater opportunities for better housing, recreation and access to goods, services and employment opportunities to all citizens and residents of this commonwealth.

(4) To encourage a more efficient use of land and of public services to reflect changes in the technology of land development so that economies secured may benefit those who need homes and for other uses.

(5) To allow for the development of fully integrated, mixed use pedestrian-oriented neighborhoods.

(6) To minimize traffic congestion, infrastructure costs and environmental degradation.

(7) To promote the implementation of the objectives of the City of Meadville comprehensive plan for guiding the location of growth.

(8) To provide a procedure in aid of these purposes which can relate the type, design and layout of residential and nonresidential development to the particular site and the particular demand for housing existing at the time of development in a manner consistent with the preservation of the property values within existing residential and nonresidential areas.

(9) To ensure that the increased flexibility of regulations over land development authorized herein is carried out under such administrative standards and procedures as shall encourage the disposition of proposals for land development without undue delay.

(10) Where not specified in this article, standards from Article VII-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code or the City of Meadville zoning ordinance shall govern.

(B) Process. Traditional neighborhood developments shall be permitted in the B-1 central business district, B-2 general business district and T-1 transitional district. A traditional neighborhood development shall be permitted in the designated zones as a conditional use in accordance with the requirements of this code.

(C) Minimum Size of Overlay. To qualify for designation, the minimum size of a traditional neighborhood development must be such that it will be bounded on all sides by an existing or proposed public street or alley. Traditional neighborhood developments meeting this minimum may extend beyond this area and end in mid-block.

(D) Uses. Regardless of the underlying zoning designation, the following uses shall be permitted as a part of an approved traditional neighborhood development overlay district:

(1) Townhouse dwellings (minimum of five units).

(2) Multifamily dwellings.

(3) Private clubs and social halls.

(4) Day care facilities.

(5) Financial institutions.

(6) Professional offices.

(7) Civic and cultural buildings.

(8) Retail sales (NEC).

(9) Personal services.

(10) Restaurants.

(11) Public parks and playgrounds.

(12) Parking lot or structure.

In the case of an adaptive reuse, involving no new construction or demolition and adhering to the Secretary of Interiors standards for any rehabilitation, the adaptive reuses permitted by this code shall be permitted uses. In the case of new construction, adaptive reuses shall be by conditional use.

(E) Procedures for Approval of Traditional Neighborhood Development.

(1) The developer is encouraged to begin the process by submitting a sketch plan describing and illustrating the proposed project consistent with the requirements of Section 707A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.

(2) The application for conditional use approval of a traditional neighborhood development in a designated zone shall be submitted on forms provided by the city, together with plans providing the information required by this code and demonstrating compliance with the standards for traditional neighborhood development as set forth in this code, together with fees to be established by resolution of city council.

(3) The process for conditional use approval shall follow the requirements set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and this code.

(4) The city planning commission shall review the plans and make recommendations. If the recommendations are accepted by the developer, the planning commission’s approval of recommendations shall constitute preliminary approval.

(5) Following the review and approval of the planning commission, and a hearing and consideration by the city council in accordance with the applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, the city council shall determine whether the conditional use should be granted under applicable standards and may, if granted, impose reasonable additional conditions, which if accepted by developer shall constitute final approval.

(6) Upon final approval, the developer shall incorporate all required provisions into the final plan and file the final plan with the city.

(F) Conditional Use Plan Submission Requirements. All applications for traditional neighborhood development shall include the following:

(1) Amount, location of, proposed use of common open space. If proposed as private common space, a plan for maintenance shall be included.

(2) Location and physical characteristics of the site.

(3) Location, use, and description of existing buildings and whether they will be rehabilitated, adaptively reused, demolished or unchanged.

(4) Location, design, type and use of proposed new structures.

(5) Location, design, type and use of existing and proposed streets, alleys, sidewalks or pedestrian ways.

(6) A parking plan, including the use of on-street parking, parking structures, and private or public parking lots.

(7) A landscaping plan, including preservation of existing trees, street trees, street plantings, street furniture. This plan shall include a plan for future maintenance and be developed by a licensed landscape architect.

(8) A description of how the proposed traditional neighborhood development relates to the abutting development in the city, including private land uses, and city infrastructure (including public sidewalks, street trees, street systems, parks and parking) as well as any necessary buffering or screening.

(9) A description of how the proposed traditional neighborhood development relates to the City of Meadville comprehensive plan.

(10) A time schedule and any phasing of development.

(G) Design and Development Standards for Public or Private Improvements.

(1) Streets, sidewalks and footpaths shall be integrated into the existing city systems to the maximum extent possible. Proposed new streets, except alleys, shall have sidewalks.

(2) Any drive-through facilities shall be designed to enter and exit on the street or alley determined to have the least vehicular and pedestrian traffic.

(3) Parking. All parking lots, except where there is a compelling reason to the contrary, shall be located in the rear of buildings. Off-street parking may be located within 500 feet of the principal entrance of the building. In calculating total parking needs, if mixed use developments are shown to have different peak times, the city may grant a 30 percent reduction in parking. In the case of parking structures, the design of exterior surfaces shall be of a form and material which relates to abutting buildings. The entrance to all off-street parking lots or structures shall be designed to minimize pedestrian conflicts.

(4) Landscaping. All parking lots shall be landscaped consistent with MMC 1308.02(D). If not existing, street trees shall be provided consistent with city standards. All common areas, transition areas between various land uses, setback areas and other spaces shall be suitably landscaped.

(5) Design. All structures and improvements shall be designed in accordance with a Manual of Written and Graphic Design Guidelines as may be adopted by and in effect in the City of Meadville.

(H) Lot, Yard, Density and Design Standards.

(1) Structures shall be placed close to the street at generally one-quarter of the width of lot or less.

(2) Townhouse units shall have a minimum lot width of 15 feet. All townhouse units shall have a minimum lot size of 1,800 square feet. All townhouse dwelling units shall have a private rear yard patio or upper floor terrace.

(3) Spatial relationships between buildings and other structures shall be geometrically logical and/or architecturally formal. On a lot with multiple buildings, those located on the interior of the site shall front toward and relate to one another, both functionally and visually. A lot with multiple buildings may be organized around features such as courtyards, greens, or quadrangles which encourage pedestrian activity and incidental social interaction among users. Buildings shall be located to allow for adequate fire and emergency access.

(4) Buildings shall be considered in terms of their relationship to the height and massing of adjacent buildings, as well as in relation to the human scale.

(5) Buildings shall be located to front toward and relate to public streets, both functionally and visually, to the greatest extent possible. Buildings shall not be oriented to front toward a parking lot.

(6) Buildings shall define the streetscape through the use of uniform setbacks along the building line for each block. The building line shall be generally continued across side yard setback areas between buildings by using landscaping. The streetscape shall also be reinforced by lines of closely planted shade trees, and may be further reinforced by walls, hedges or fences which define front yards.

(I) Compliance with Finally Approved Plan Required. Developer shall construct and develop the traditional neighborhood development in accordance with the finally approved plan. (Ord. 3578 § 3, 2001)


1306.15 Public rights-of-way.

(A) Temporary uses and activities of no more than 48 hours’ duration shall be permitted in a right-of-way by owners of abutting properties so long as the use or activity does not create a public nuisance.

(B) Unless otherwise permitted under Article 1309 MMC or subsection (A) of this section, no structure or item of any kind shall be constructed or placed within and no commercial or business activity of any kind shall be conducted within the street right-of-way of any public street or highway except in the B-1 central business district, or in conjunction with a special event, all in accord with applicable regulations adopted by city council. (Ord. 3706 § 5, 2012)


1306.16 Landscaping requirements.

Purpose: To promote the natural retention and flow of storm water, and to create areas of buffer and transition between various forms of land use, the following landscaping standards shall be applicable to all land development in all zoning districts involving new buildings and structures of 5,000 square feet or greater area at ground level either individually or in combination:

(A) Land Development Landscaping Requirements. A land development in any zoning district with a building or structure, or buildings or structures in combination, with a total footprint (at ground level) of 5,000 square feet gross area, or more, shall comply with the screening and landscaping requirements for buffering as set forth in subsection (B) of this section in addition to the screening and landscaping regulations for off-street parking areas found in MMC 1308.02(D).

(B) Buffering. A land development in any zoning district with a building or structure, or buildings or structures in combination, with a total footprint (at ground level) of 5,000 square feet gross area, or more, shall provide a buffer yard, in compliance with one of the following options, between the lot being developed and any adjoining lot on which is located a single-family home, or which is located in a residential zoning district:

(1) Type I Buffer Yard. A Type I buffer yard shall consist of a triple row of Norway spruces or comparable native species planted at oblique lines to one another so that a continuous screen is provided. All trees shall be a minimum of six feet at the time of planting.

(2) Type II Buffer Yard. A Type II buffer yard shall consist of a 25-foot planting strip between adjoining lot lines and any building or parking area on the lot being developed. The planting strip shall be suitably landscaped and maintained so as to provide a visual screen to a height of at least six feet throughout the year in accordance with a written landscape plan filed with and approved by the zoning administrator. The screening may consist of natural vegetation sufficient for screening or combinations of conifers and deciduous trees and shrubbery and other landscaping features. At time of planting, trees shall be a minimum of six feet if coniferous and eight feet if deciduous.

(3) Type III Buffer Yard. A Type III buffer yard shall consist of an opaque fence at least four feet in height for the full length of the lot line on which the buffer is required. On the outside perimeter of the fence, a 10-foot planting strip shall be maintained. The planting strip shall be suitably landscaped and maintained so as to provide a visual screen to a height of at least six feet throughout the year in accordance with a written landscape plan filed with and approved by the zoning administrator. The screening may consist of natural vegetation sufficient for screening or combinations of conifers and deciduous trees and shrubbery and other landscaping features. At time of planting, trees shall be a minimum of six feet tall if coniferous and eight feet tall if deciduous.

(C) Landscaping Plan. A landscaping plan shall be submitted to the zoning administrator to show the delineation of required buffer yards and the type of planting, including proposed tree species and sizes and other landscaping meeting the requirements of this code. All landscaping shall be designed by a registered landscape architect or other person qualified by training and experience to provide landscaping plans, as determined by the zoning administrator. When approved by the zoning administrator, the landscaping plan shall be retained for purposes of measuring compliance in the future.

(D) In all landscape plans, existing healthy trees and shrubbery should be retained as feasible.

(E) All fences, trees, shrubs and other landscaping materials shall be maintained substantially in the manner set forth in the approved plans. Trees and shrubs which have died shall be replaced within six months. The buffers do not need to be retained if the adjoining residential building is demolished and the residential use of the premises is abandoned or if the adjoining zoning district is changed from residential to some nonresidential zoning district and no residential uses are maintained on adjacent lots. (Ord. 3621 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3578 § 5, 2001)


1306.17 Prohibited uses under land use sharing agreement.

Under the land use sharing agreement approved by resolution of city council August 18, 2010, pursuant to the 2007 Central Crawford Multi-Municipal Comprehensive Plan, the following uses are expressly prohibited in the City of Meadville as they are provided for in cooperating municipalities: mobile home parks, junkyards, mineral excavation, agricultural uses, recreational campgrounds, outdoor commercial recreation and sanitary landfills. (Ord. 3706 § 5, 2012)


1306.18 Airport district overlay.

(A) Purpose and Authority. Authority for this section derives from 1984 P.L. 164 codified at 74 PA C.S. Section 5912 et seq., and its purpose is to create an airport district overlay that:

(1) Considers safety issues around the Port Meadville Airport.

(2) Regulates and restricts the heights of constructed structures and objects of natural growth, creates appropriate zones, establishing the boundaries thereof and providing for changes in the restrictions and boundaries of such zones.

(3) Creates the permitting process for use within said zones.

(4) Provides for enforcement, assessment of violation penalties, an appeals process, and judicial review.

(B) The airport district overlay shall not modify the boundaries of any underlying zoning district. Where identified, the airport district overlay shall impose certain requirements on land use and construction in addition to those contained in the underlying zoning district.

(C) Establishment of Airport Zones. There are hereby created and established certain zones within the airport district overlay section, defined in this section and illustrated on the airport hazard area map, hereby adopted as part of this section, which include:

Approach surface zone.

Conical surface zone.

Horizontal surface zone.

Primary surface zone.

Transitional surface zone.

(D) Permit Applications. As regulated by Act 164 and defined by 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 77.13(a) (as amended or replaced), any person who plans to erect a new structure, to add to an existing structure, or to erect and maintain any object (natural or manmade) in the vicinity of the airport that would result in the structure or object to be higher than 190 feet from ground level shall first notify the Department’s Bureau of Aviation (BOA) by submitting PENNDOT Form AV-57 to obtain an obstruction review of the proposal at least 30 days prior to commencement thereof. The Department’s BOA response must be included with this permit application for it to be considered complete. If the Department’s BOA returns a determination of no penetration of airspace, the permit request should be considered in compliance with the intent of this overlay section. If the Department’s BOA returns a determination of a penetration of airspace, the permit shall be denied, and the project sponsor may seek a variance from such regulations. No permit is required to make maintenance repairs to or to replace parts of existing structures which do not enlarge or increase the height of an existing structure.

(E) Variance. Any request for a variance shall include documentation in compliance with 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 77 Subpart B (FAA Form 7460-1 as amended or replaced). Determinations of whether to grant a variance will depend on the determinations made by the FAA and the Department’s BOA as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. In particular, the request for a variance shall consider which of the following categories the FAA has placed the proposed construction in:

(1) No Objection. The subject construction is determined not to exceed obstruction standards and marking/lighting is not required to mitigate potential hazard. Under this determination, a variance shall be granted.

(2) Conditional Determination. The proposed construction/alteration is determined to create some level of encroachment into an airport hazard area which can be effectively mitigated. Under this determination, a variance shall be granted contingent upon implementation of mitigating measures as described in subsection (H) of this section, Obstruction Marking and Lighting.

(3) Objectionable. The proposed construction/alteration is determined to be a hazard and is thus objectionable. A variance shall be denied and the reasons for this determination shall be outlined to the applicant.

Such requests for variances shall be granted where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and that relief granted will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the intent of this section.

(F) Use Restrictions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no use shall be made of land or water within the airport district overlay in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communications between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards or otherwise endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft utilizing the airport.

(G) Pre-Existing Nonconforming Uses. The regulations prescribed by this section shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this section, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. No nonconforming use shall be structurally altered or permitted to grow higher, so as to increase the nonconformity, and a nonconforming use, once substantially abated, may only be reestablished consistent with the provisions herein.

(H) Obstruction Marking and Lighting. Any permit or variance granted pursuant to the provisions of this section may be conditioned according to the process described in subsection (E) of this section to require the owner of the structure or object of natural growth in question to permit the municipality, at its own expense, or require the person requesting the permit or variance, to install, operate, and maintain such marking or lighting as deemed necessary to assure both ground and air safety.

(I) Violations, penalties and appeals shall be subject to Section 1310.

(J) Conflicting Regulations. Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this section and any other regulation applicable to the same area, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.

(K) Severability. If any of the provisions of this section or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this section are declared to be severable.

(L) Definitions. The following definitions shall pertain to the terms as used in regard to airport hazard zoning:

“Airport elevation” means the highest point of an airport’s usable landing area measured in feet above sea level. The airport elevation of the Port Meadville Airport is 1,399.

“Airport hazard” means any structure or object, natural or manmade, or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for flight or aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous as defined in 14 CFR Part 77 and 74 PA C.S. Section 5102.

“Airport hazard area” means any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established if not prevented as provided for in this section and the Act 164 of 1984 (Pennsylvania Laws Relating to Aviation).

“Approach surface (zone)” means an imaginary surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extending outward and upward from each end of the primary surface. An approach surface is applied to each end of the runway based on the planned approach. The inner edge of the approach surface is the same width as the primary surface and expands uniformly depending on the planned approach. The approach surface zone, as shown on Figure 1, is derived from the approach surface.
[IMAGE]


“Conical surface (zone)” means an imaginary surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 feet horizontally to one foot vertically for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. The conical surface zone, as shown on Figure 1, is based on the conical surface.

“Department” means, for the purposes of airport hazard zoning, the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.

“FAA” means the Federal Aviation Administration of the United States Department of Transportation.

Height. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in the airport hazard zoning provisions of this code, and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.

“Horizontal surface (zone)” means an imaginary plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation that is constructed by swinging arcs of various radii from the center of the end of the primary surface and then connecting the adjacent arc by tangent lines. The radius of each arc is based on the planned approach. The horizontal surface zone, as shown on Figure 1, is derived from the horizontal surface.

“Larger than utility runway” means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of greater than 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and jet powered aircraft.

“Nonconforming use, airport hazard zoning” means, for airport hazard zoning purposes, any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this section or an amendment thereto.

“Non-precision instrument runway” means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in non-precision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. Port Meadville Airport is a non-precision instrument runway.

“Obstruction” means, for airport hazard zoning purposes, any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth by this section.

“Precision instrument runway” means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other planning document.

“Primary surface (zone)” means an imaginary surface longitudinally centered on the runway, extending 200 feet beyond the end of paved runways or ending at each end of turf runways. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. The primary surface zone, as shown on Figure 1, is derived from the primary surface.

“Runway” means a defined area of an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.

“Structure, airport hazard zoning” means, for the purposes of airport hazard zoning, an object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission lines.

“Transitional surface (zone)” means an imaginary surface that extends outward and upward from the edge of the primary surface to the horizontal surface at a slope of seven feet horizontally to one foot vertically (7:1). The transitional surface zone, as shown on Figure 1, is derived from the transitional surface.

“Tree” means any object of natural growth.

“Utility runway” means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight or less.

“Visual runway” means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures. (Ord. 3719 § 1, 2013) 


1306.19 Wireless communications facilities.

A. General and Specific Requirements for Communications Antennas.

(1) The following regulations shall apply to all communications antennas, except those operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator:

(a) Standard of Care. All communications antennas shall be designed, constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes, including but not limited to the most recent editions of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, and National Electrical Code. Any communications antennas shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order, and repair by qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life of any person or any property in the city.

(b) Permitted in All Zoning Districts Pursuant to Regulations. Communications antennas are permitted pursuant to this code in all zoning districts, so long as they comply with all of the terms and conditions of this code.

(c) Historic Areas. No communications antenna may be located upon any property, or on a building, structure, or historic structure, that is listed on either the National or Pennsylvania Registers of Historic Places (either inside or outside the public rights-of-way), or that is deemed by the city to be of specific historical significance. 

(d) Wind. All communications antennas structures shall be designed to withstand the effects of wind gusts of at least 100 miles per hour in addition to the standard designed by the American National Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association, and Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/TIA-222, as amended).

(e) Aviation Safety. Communications antennas shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.

(f) Public Safety Communications and Other Communications Services. Communications antennas shall not interfere with public safety communications or the reception of broadband, television, radio or other communication services enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.

(g) Radio Frequency Emissions. A communications antenna shall not, by itself or in conjunction with other communications antennas and/or communications towers, generate radio frequency emissions in excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC, including but not limited to the FCC Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled “Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields,” as amended. 

(h) Removal. In the event that use of a communications antenna is discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the city of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned communications antennas, or portions of communications antennas, shall be removed as follows: 

(1) All abandoned or unused communications antennas and related equipment shall be removed within two months of the cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city.

(2) If the communications antenna or related equipment is not removed within two months of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any longer period approved by the city, the communications antenna and/or related equipment may be removed by the city. As security, the city reserves the right to the salvage value of any removed communications antenna and/or related equipment, if such communications antenna and/or related equipment are not removed by the owner within the specific timeframe enumerated in this article.

(i) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a communications antenna shall provide the city with a certificate of insurance, naming the city as an additional insured, and evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering the communications antenna.

(j) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a communications antenna shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its elected and appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against any and all claims for personal injury, including death, and property damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or connected with any act or omission of the person, its officers, agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the communications antenna. Each person that owns or operates a communications antenna shall defend any actions or proceedings against the city in which it is claimed that personal injury, including death, or property damage was caused by the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of a communications antenna. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys’ fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs of indemnification. 

(k) Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the following maintenance requirements shall apply: 

(1) The communications antenna shall be fully automated and unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or emergency repair.

(2) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of the facility in order to promote the safety and security of the city’s residents.

(3) All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than the best available technology for preventing failures and accidents.

(l) Removal, Replacement and Modification.

(1) To the extent permitted by law, the removal and replacement of communications antennas and/or related equipment for the purpose of upgrading or repairing the communications antenna is permitted, so long as such repair or upgrade does not substantially change the overall size of the wireless support structure or the numbers of communications antennas.

(2) To the extent permitted by state law, any material modification to a communications antenna shall require notice to be provided to the city, and said modification must obtain special exception approval as detailed in this section prior to implementation.

(2) In addition to the regulations enumerated in subsection (A)(1) of this section, the following regulations shall apply only to communications antennas that fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act:

(a) Permit Required. Communications antenna applicants proposing changes to an existing communications tower, which do not substantially change the dimensions of the existing wireless support structure or otherwise fall under the WBCA, shall obtain a building permit from the city. In order to be considered for such a permit, the applicant must submit a permit application to the city in accordance with applicable permit policies and procedures.

(b) Timing of Approval for Applications that Fall under the WBCA. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an application for a communications antenna is filed with the city, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of any information that may be required to complete such application. Within 60 calendar days of receipt of a complete application, the city shall make its final decision on whether to approve the application and shall advise the applicant in writing of such decision.

(c) Related Equipment. New ground-mounted related equipment greater than three cubic feet shall be screened per the definition of screening in this section.

(d) Permit Fees. The city may assess appropriate and reasonable permit fees directly related to the city’s actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for approval of a communications antenna or $1,000, whichever is less.

(3) In addition to the regulations enumerated in subsection (A)(1) of this section, the following regulations shall apply to communications antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act:

(a) Prohibited on Certain Structures. No communications antenna shall be located on single-family residences, duplexes, or townhomes. In addition, at the city’s election, the city may require that any proposed communications antenna be located and erected on available city owned property (or alternatively, on property owned by a related city municipal authority) on terms acceptable to the city or such municipal authority, absent specific evidence by an applicant that such proposed city/municipal authority location does not satisfy the applicant’s technical requirements for such antenna.

(b) Retention of Experts. The city may hire any consultant(s) and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the city in reviewing and evaluating the application for approval of the communications antenna and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential violations of the terms and conditions of these communications antenna provisions. The applicant and/or owner of the communications antenna shall reimburse the city for all costs of the city’s consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and consultation in connection with these activities. 

(c) Permit Fees. The city may assess appropriate and reasonable permit fees directly related to the city’s actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for approval of a communications antenna, as well as related inspection, monitoring and all other related costs. 

(d) Development Regulations. Communications antennas shall be co-located on existing wireless support structures subject to the following conditions: 

(1) The total height of any wireless support structure and mounted communications antenna shall not exceed 20 feet above the maximum height permitted in the underlying zoning district. 

(2) In accordance with industry standards, all communications antenna applicants must submit documentation to the city justifying the total height of the communications antenna. Such documentation shall be analyzed in the context of such justification on an individual basis.

(3) If the applicant proposes to locate the related equipment in a separate building, the building shall comply with the minimum requirements for the applicable zoning district, and landscaping shall be required to screen as much of the equipment building as possible per the definition of screening in this code. 

(e) Vehicular access to the communications equipment building, or any structure housing related equipment, shall not interfere with the parking or vehicular circulations on the site for the principal use.

(f) Noncommercial Usage Exemption. City residents utilizing satellite dishes and antennas for the purpose of maintaining television, phone, radio and/or Internet connections at their respective residences shall be exempt from the regulations enumerated in this section. Amateur radio operators are exempt from the regulations enumerated in this section.

(g) Design Regulations. Communications antennas shall employ stealth technology and be treated to match the wireless support structure in order to minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the stealth technology chosen by the applicant shall be subject to the approval of the city. 

(h) Inspection. The city reserves the right to inspect any communications antenna to ensure compliance with the provisions of this code and any other provisions found within the city code or state or federal law. The city and/or its agents shall have the authority to enter the property upon which a communications antenna is located at any time, upon reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance. 

(4) Regulations Applicable to All Communications Antennas Located in the Public Rights-of-Way.

In addition to the regulations enumerated in subsection (A)(1) of this section, the following regulations shall apply to communications antennas located in the public rights-of-way: 

(a) Co-location. Communications antennas in the ROW shall be co-located on existing infrastructure, such as existing utility poles or light poles. If co-location is not technologically feasible, the applicant, with the city’s approval, shall locate its communications antennas on existing poles or freestanding structures that do not already act as wireless support structures. 

(b) Special Exception Approval Required. Any applicant proposing the construction of a new communications antenna, or modification of an existing communications antenna, shall first obtain special exception authorization from the city. New constructions, modifications, and replacements that fall under the WBCA or the applicable provisions of the FCC’s October 2014 Report and Order shall not be subject to the special exception process. The special exception application, and accompanying documentation, shall demonstrate that the proposed facility complies with all applicable provisions in this code.

(c) Design Requirements.

(1) Communications antenna installations located above the surface grade in the public ROW including, but not limited to, those on streetlights and utility poles, shall consist of equipment components that are no more than six feet in height and that are compatible in scale and proportion to the structures upon which they are mounted. All equipment shall be the smallest and least visibly intrusive equipment feasible.

(2) Communications antennas and related equipment shall be treated with stealth technology by the communications antenna owner or applicant to match the wireless support structure and may be required to be painted, or otherwise coated, to be visually compatible with the support structure upon which they are mounted. 

(d) Time, Place and Manner. The city shall determine the time, place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of all communications antennas in the ROW based on public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of the city and the requirements of the public utility code. 

(e) Equipment Location. Communications antennas and related equipment shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by the city. In addition:

(1) Ground-mounted related equipment shall be located between the sidewalk and the curb. For reasons of safety and aesthetics, such equipment shall neither protrude onto the curb, nor obstruct the sidewalk.

(2) Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be placed underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible, through the use of landscaping or other decorative features to the satisfaction of the city. 

(3) Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the city. 

(4) Any graffiti on any wireless support structures or any related equipment shall be removed at the sole expense of the owner. 

(5) Any proposed underground vault related to communications antennas shall be reviewed and is subject to approval by the city. 

(f) Relocation or Removal of Facilities. Within two months following written notice from the city, or such longer period as the city determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the case of an emergency, the owner of a communications antenna in the ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any communications antenna when the city, consistent with its police powers and applicable public utility commission regulations, shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:

(1) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any city or other public improvement in the right-of-way;

(2) The operations of the city or other governmental entity in the right-of-way;

(3) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement; or

(4) An emergency as determined by the city.

B. General and Specific Requirements for All Communications Towers.

(1) The following regulations shall apply to all communications towers, excluding any communications tower that is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator. 

(a) Standard of Care. Any communications towers shall be designed, constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes, including but not limited to the most recent editions of the Pennsylvania Uniform Commercial Code, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, Electrical Code, as well as the accepted and responsible workmanlike industry practices of the National Association of Tower Erectors. At all times, communications towers shall be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life of any person or any property in the city. 

(b) Notice. Upon submission of an application for a communications tower and the scheduling of the mandatory public hearing in front of the city zoning hearing board, the applicant shall mail notice to all owners of every property within 500 feet of the proposed facility. The applicant shall provide proof of the notification to the city. 

(c) Special Exception Authorization Required. Communications towers are permitted by special exception in certain zoning districts, at a height necessary to satisfy their function in the applicant’s wireless communications system. No applicant shall have the right under these regulations to erect a tower to the maximum height specified in this section unless it proves the necessity for such height. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed communications tower is the minimum height necessary for its service area.

(1) Prior to the city zoning hearing board’s consideration of a special exception application authorizing the construction and installation of a communications tower, it shall be incumbent upon the applicant for such special exception approval to prove to the reasonable satisfaction of the city zoning hearing board that the applicant cannot adequately extend or infill its communications system by the use of equipment such as radios, repeaters, communications antennas, and other similar equipment installed on existing structures, such as utility poles or their appurtenances and other available tall structures. The applicant shall further demonstrate that the proposed communications tower must be located where it is proposed in order to serve the applicant’s service area and that no other viable alternative location exists.

(2) The special exception application shall be accompanied by a propagation study evidencing the need for the proposed tower or other communication facilities and equipment, a description of the type and manufacturer of the proposed transmission/radio equipment, the frequency range (megahertz band) assigned to the applicant, the power in watts at which the applicant transmits, and any relevant related tests conducted by the applicant in determining the need for the proposed site and installation.

(3) The special exception application shall be accompanied by documentation demonstrating that the proposed communications tower complies with all state and federal laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.

(4) Where the communications tower is located on a property with another principal use, the applicant shall present documentation to the city zoning hearing board that the owner of the property has granted an easement for the proposed communications tower and that vehicular access will be provided to the facility.

(5) The special exception application shall be accompanied by documentation demonstrating that the proposed communications tower complies with all applicable provisions in this section.

(d) Engineer Inspection. Prior to the zoning hearing board’s issuance of a permit authorizing construction and erection of a communications tower, a structural or professional engineer registered in Pennsylvania shall issue to the city a written certification of the proposed communications tower’s ability to meet the structural standards offered by either the Electronic Industries Association or the Telecommunication Industry Association and certify the proper construction of the foundation and the erection of the structure. This certification shall be provided during the special exception proceedings before the city zoning hearing board, or at a minimum, be made as a condition attached to any approval given such that the certification be provided prior to issuance of any building permits.

(e) Visual Appearance. Communications towers shall employ stealth technology. All communications towers and related equipment shall be aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment and shall maximize the use of a like facade to blend with the existing surroundings and neighboring buildings to the greatest extent possible. The city zoning hearing board shall consider whether its decision upon the subject application will promote the harmonious and orderly development of the zoning district and/or surrounding area involved; encourage compatibility with the character and type of development existing in the area; benefit neighboring properties by preventing a negative impact on the aesthetic character of the community; preserve woodlands and trees existing at the site to the greatest possible extent; and encourage sound engineering and construction principles, practices and techniques. Any utilities extending to the communications tower shall be placed underground. 

(f) Co-location and Siting. At the city’s election, the city may require that any proposed communications tower be located and erected first on available city owned property on terms acceptable to the city, or secondarily, on property owned by a related city municipal authority, absent specific evidence by an applicant that such proposed city location (or in the second instance, the related city municipal authority) does not satisfy the applicant’s technical requirements for such communications tower, as outlined below. After due consideration of all appropriate city owned property in consultation with the city (or related city municipal authority), any application for a new communications tower shall also demonstrate that the proposed communications tower cannot be accommodated on any other existing or approved structure or building. The city zoning hearing board may deny an application to construct a new communications tower if the applicant has not made a good faith effort to mount the communications antenna on first, city owned property per agreement with the city, and second, property owned by a related city municipal authority; or third, an existing structure. The applicant shall demonstrate that it first contacted the city, related city municipal authorities, and then alternatively contacted the owners of tall structures, buildings, and towers within a one quarter of a mile radius of the site proposed, sought permission to install a communications antenna on those structures, buildings, and towers and was denied by the city and/or the other property owners for one of the following reasons:

(1) The proposed antenna and related equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing building, structure or tower, and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a reasonable cost.

(2) The proposed antenna and related equipment would cause radio frequency interference with other existing equipment for that existing building, structure, or tower and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.

(3) Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have adequate location, space, access, or height to accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended function.

(4) A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached with the owner of such building, structure, or tower.

(g) Permit Required for Modifications. To the extent permissible under applicable state and federal law, any applicant proposing the modification of an existing communications tower, which increases the overall height of such wireless support structure, shall first obtain a building permit from the city. Nonroutine modifications shall be prohibited without such permit.

(h) Gap in Coverage or Capacity. An applicant for a communications tower must demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage or capacity exists in the applicable area and that the type of communications tower being proposed is the least intrusive means by which to fill that gap. The existence or nonexistence of a gap in wireless coverage or capacity shall be a factor in the city zoning hearing board’s decision on an application for approval of communications tower. 

(i) Additional Communications Antennas. As a condition of approval for all communications towers, the WCF applicant shall provide the city with a written commitment that it will allow other service providers to co-locate communications antennas on communications towers where technologically and economically feasible. To the extent permissible under federal and state law, the owner of a communications tower shall not install any additional communications antennas without obtaining the prior written approval of the city. 

(j) Wind. Any communications tower structures shall be designed to withstand the effects of wind gusts of at least 100 miles per hour in addition to the standard designed by the American National Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association, and Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/EIA/TIA-222), as amended. 

(k) Height. Any communications tower shall be designed at the minimum functional height. The maximum height of any new communications tower outside the public rights-of-way shall be 175 feet. Communications towers in the ROW shall not exceed a height comparable to the average height of utility poles or electrical poles within a two block radius of the proposed facility. 

(l) Related Equipment. Either one single-story wireless communications equipment building not exceeding 250 square feet in area, or up to five metal boxes placed on a concrete pad not exceeding 10 feet by 20 feet in area housing the receiving and transmitting equipment, may be located on the site for each unrelated company sharing space on the communications tower. 

(m) Public Safety Communications and Other Communications Services. No communications tower shall interfere with public safety communications or the reception of broadband, television, radio or other communications services enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties. 

(n) Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall apply: 

(1) Any communications tower shall be fully automated and unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or emergency repair.

(2) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of the communications tower in order to promote the safety and security of the city’s residents, and utilize the best available technology for preventing failures and accidents.

(o) Radio Frequency Emissions. A communications tower shall not, by itself or in conjunction with other communications towers or communications antennas, generate radio frequency emissions in excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC, including, but not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled “Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields,” as amended. 

(p) Historic Buildings or Districts. No communications tower may be located upon any property, or on a building, structure, or historic structure, that is listed on either the National or Pennsylvania Registers of Historic Places (either inside or outside the public rights-of-way), or that is deemed by the city to be of local historic significance. 

(q) Signs. All communications towers shall post a sign in a readily visible location identifying the name and phone number of a party to contact in the event of an emergency. The only other signage permitted on the communications tower shall be those required by the FCC, or any other federal or state agency.

(r) Lighting. No communications tower shall be artificially lighted, except as required by law. If lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting, demonstrating as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under state and federal regulations. Automatic lighting is prohibited and all lighting must be controlled manually by an on-site switch. The applicant shall promptly report any outage or malfunction of FAA-mandated lighting to the appropriate governmental authorities and to the city manager. 

(s) Noise. Communications towers shall be operated and maintained so as not to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards under state law and the city code, except in emergency situations requiring the use of a backup generator, where such noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis only. 

(t) Aviation Safety. Communications towers shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety. 

(u) Retention of Experts. The city may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to assist the city in reviewing and evaluating the application for approval of the communications tower and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential violations of the terms and conditions of these provisions. The applicant and/or owner of the communications tower shall reimburse the city for all costs of the city’s consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and consultation in connection with these activities. 

(v) Timing of Approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an application for a communications tower is filed with the city, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of any information that may be required to complete such application. All applications for communications towers shall be acted upon within 150 days of the receipt of a fully completed application for the approval of such communications towers and the city shall advise the applicant in writing of its decision. If additional information was requested by the city to complete an application, the time required by the applicant to provide the information shall not be counted toward the 150-day review period. 

(w) Nonconforming Uses. Nonconforming communications towers which are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause may be repaired and restored at their former location, but must otherwise comply with the terms and conditions of this section. 

(x) Removal. In the event that use of a communications tower is planned to be discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the city of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned communications towers, or portions of communications towers, shall be removed as follows: 

(1) All unused or abandoned communications towers and related equipment shall be removed within two months of the cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. 

(2) If the communications tower and/or related equipment is not removed within two months of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any longer period approved by the city, the communications tower and related equipment may be removed by the city and the cost of removal assessed against the owner of the communications tower. As security, the city reserves the right to the salvage value of any removed communications tower and/or related equipment, if such communications tower and/or related equipment are not removed by the owner within the timeframes enumerated in this article.

(3) Any unused portions of communications towers, including antennas, shall be removed within two months of the time of cessation of operations. The city must approve all replacements of portions of a communications tower previously removed.

(y) Permit Fees. The city may assess appropriate and reasonable permit fees directly related to the city’s actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for approval of a communications tower, as well as related inspection, monitoring, and related costs. 

(z) FCC License. Each person that owns or operates a communications tower over 40 feet in height shall submit a copy of its current FCC license, including the name, address, and emergency telephone number for the operator of the facility. 

(aa) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a communications tower greater than 40 feet in height shall provide the city with a certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional insured, and evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence covering the communications tower. Each person that owns or operates a communications tower 40 feet or less in height shall provide the city with a certificate of insurance and endorsement naming the city as an additional insured, and evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering each communications tower.

(bb) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a communications tower shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its elected and appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against any and all claims for personal injury, including death, and property damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or connected with any act or omission of the person, its officers, agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the communications tower. Each person that owns or operates a communications tower shall defend any actions or proceedings against the city in which it is claimed that personal injury, including death, or property damage was caused by the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the communications tower. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys’ fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs of indemnification. 

(cc) Engineer Signature. All plans and drawings for a communications tower shall contain a seal and signature of a professional structural engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

(dd) Financial Security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit for the construction or placement of a communications tower, the applicant shall provide to the city financial security sufficient to guarantee the construction of the communications tower. Said financial security shall remain in place until the communications tower is fully constructed. Should the communications tower be abandoned by the owner and/or operator, and not removed within two months of such abandonment, the city shall have the authority to remove the communications tower and sell all of its pieces, as well as related equipment, used in the operation of the communications tower, in order to recover the cost of said removal.

(2) In addition to the regulations enumerated in subsection (B)(1) of this section, the following regulations shall apply to communications towers located outside the public rights-of-way:

(a) Development Regulations.

(1) Communications towers shall not be located in or within 75 feet of an area in which all utilities are located underground.

(2) Communications towers are permitted outside the public rights-of-way, subject to the prohibitions contained herein, in the following zoning districts:

(a) EDC Economic Development Corridor District;

(b) I-2 Institutional Medical District;

(c) I-3 Special Institutional District;

(d) I-4 Institutional Educational District.

(3) Sole Use on a Lot. A communications tower shall be permitted as a sole use on a lot; provided, that the underlying lot meets the minimum size specifications set forth in the city zoning code.

(4) Combined with Another Use. A communications tower may be permitted on a property with an existing use, or on a vacant parcel in combination with another use, except residential, subject to the following conditions:

(a) The existing use on the property may be any permitted use in the applicable district, and need not be affiliated with the communications tower. 

(b) Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot shall comply with the requirements for the applicable zoning district and shall be the area needed to accommodate the communications tower and guy wires, the equipment building, security fence, and buffer planting if the proposed communications tower is greater than 40 feet in height. 

(c) Minimum Setbacks. The minimum distance between the base of a communications tower and any adjoining property line or street right-of-way line shall be equal to 100 percent of the height of the communications tower. Further, the tower, fence, guy wires and other structures and appurtenances must meet all setback, bulk, and lot regulations. The underlying lot must be large enough to accommodate related equipment, storm water runoff mechanisms, and all other features typically found within the immediate area of a communications tower. 

(b) Design Regulations.

(1) The communications tower shall employ the most current stealth technology available in an effort to appropriately blend into the surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact. Application of the stealth technology chosen by the applicant shall be subject to the approval of the city zoning hearing board.

(2) To the extent permissible by law, any height extensions to an existing communications tower shall require prior approval of the city.

(3) Any proposed communications tower shall be designed structurally, electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the applicant’s communications antennas and comparable communications antennas, for the maximum amount of future users based on the size of the proposed communications tower. 

(4) Any communications tower over 40 feet in height shall be equipped with an anti-climbing device, as approved by the manufacturer.

(c) Surrounding Environs.

(1) The applicant shall ensure that the existing vegetation, trees and shrubs located within proximity to the communications tower shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.

(2) The applicant shall submit a soil report to the city complying with the standards of Appendix I: Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222, as amended, to document and verify the design specifications of the foundation of the communications tower, and anchors for guy wires, if used. 

(d) Fence/Screen.

(1) A security fence with a maximum height of eight feet shall completely surround any communications tower greater than 40 feet in height, as well as guy wires, or any building housing related equipment.

(2) The applicant shall comply with the requirements for buffer yards and screening as required by the city zoning code.

(e) Related Equipment.

(1) Ground-mounted related equipment associated to, or connected with, a communications tower shall be placed underground or screened from public view using stealth technologies, as described herein.

(2) All related equipment shall be architecturally designed to blend into the environment in which it is situated and shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning district. 

(f) Access Road. An access road, turnaround space and parking shall be provided to ensure adequate emergency and service access to communications towers. The access road shall be a dust-free all-weather surface for its entire length. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the extent practicable. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and minimize soil erosion. Where applicable, the communications tower owner shall present documentation to the city that the property owner has granted an easement for the proposed facility. 

(g) Parking. For each communications tower greater than 40 feet in height, there shall be two off-street parking spaces. 

(h) Inspection. The city reserves the right to inspect any communications tower to ensure compliance with this code and any other provisions found within the city code or state or federal law. The city and/or its agents shall have the authority to enter the property upon which a communications tower is located at any time, upon reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance. 

(3) In addition to the regulations enumerated in subsection (B)(1) of this section, the following regulations shall apply to communications towers located in the public rights-of-way.

(a) Location and Development Standards. 

(1) Communications towers in the ROW shall not exceed a height comparable to the average height of utility poles or electrical poles within a two block radius of the proposed facility. Communications towers are prohibited in areas in which all utilities are located underground.

(2) Communications towers shall not be located in the front facade area of any structure.

(b) Time, Place and Manner. The city shall determine the time, place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of all communications towers in the ROW based on public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of the city and the requirements of the public utility code. 

(c) Equipment Location. Communications towers and related equipment shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by the city. In addition:

(1) Ground-mounted related equipment shall be located between the sidewalk and the curb. For reasons of safety and aesthetics, such equipment shall neither protrude onto the curb, nor obstruct the sidewalk.

(2) Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be placed underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible, through the use of landscaping or other decorative features to the satisfaction of the city zoning hearing board.

(3) Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the city zoning hearing board. 

(4) Any graffiti on the tower or on any related equipment shall be removed at the sole expense of the owner. 

(5) Any underground vaults related to communications towers shall be reviewed and approved by the city zoning hearing board. 

(d) Design Regulations. 

(1) The communications tower shall employ the most current stealth technology available in an effort to appropriately blend into the surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the stealth technology chosen by the applicant shall be subject to the approval of the city zoning hearing board.

(2) Communications towers in the public ROW shall not exceed a height comparable to the average height of utility poles or electrical poles within a two block radius of the proposed facility.

(3) To the extent permissible under state and federal law, any height extensions to an existing communications tower shall require prior approval of the city, and shall not violate the provisions described herein.

(4) Any proposed communications towers shall be designed structurally, electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the applicant’s communications antennas and comparable communications antennas for the maximum amount of future users based on the size of the proposed communications tower. 

(e) Relocation or Removal of Facilities. Within 60 days following written notice from the city, or such longer period as the city determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the case of an emergency, an owner of a communications tower in the ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any communications tower when the city, consistent with its police powers and applicable public utility commission regulations, shall determine that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:

(1) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any city or other public improvement in the right-of-way;

(2) The operations of the city or other governmental entity in the right-of-way;

(3) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement; or

(4) An emergency as determined by the city.

(f) Reimbursement for ROW Use. In addition to permit fees as described in this section, every communications tower in the ROW is subject to the city’s right to fix annually a fair and reasonable fee to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such compensation for ROW use shall be directly related to the city’s actual ROW management costs including, but not limited to, the costs of the administration and performance of all reviewing, inspecting, permitting, supervising and other ROW management activities by the city. The owner of each communications tower shall pay an annual fee to the city to compensate the city for the city’s costs incurred in connection with the activities described in this section. (Ord. 3752 § 4, 2016)


1306.20 Creekside recreational development.

(A) Purpose. To recognize the unique character and natural resources of French Creek and to preserve and enhance the public’s access to the area. It is further the intent to allow limited recreational development with reasonable standards along with the provision of facilities to minimize traffic congestion, noise, glare and pollution so as to lessen the danger to the public safety and surrounding building values.

(B) Process. Creekside recreational development shall be deemed to be an overlay district in any zoning district that abuts French Creek, subject to special exception approval. The requirements of the CRD shall be additive to the requirements of the underlying zoning district(s) and in the event of a conflict, take precedence over the underlying zoning district(s).

(C) Area of Overlay. This overlay shall include the following: the area between French Creek and Wadsworth Avenue, Spring Street, the city line, Smock Bridge and the French Creek Parkway.

(D) Uses. Regardless of the underlying zoning designation, the following uses shall also be permitted in the creekside recreational development overlay district, subject to special exception approval:

(1) Boat launches, docks, nonmotorized vehicle and pedestrian trails and walks.

(2) Storage sheds no larger than 120 square feet that are accessory to a principal use.

(3) Parking areas and access drives that are accessory to a principal use.

(4) Public parks or playgrounds.

(5) Any use of the same general character as any of the uses above is permitted when authorized as a special exception; provided, that the applicant can demonstrate that traffic and other impacts are similar to those of permitted uses.

(E) Procedures for Approval of Creekside Recreational Development.

(1) The developer is encouraged to begin the process by submitting a sketch plan describing and illustrating the proposed project.

(2) The process for special exception approval shall follow the requirements set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and this code.

(3) The application for special exception approval shall be submitted on forms provided by the city, together with plans providing the information required by this code.

(4) All listed uses shall be permitted as a special exception, provided:

(a) No lighting shall be permitted.

(b) Parking shall be provided per Article 1308 MMC. This includes compliance with amount, surfacing, landscaping and other provisions. Further, parking areas consisting of 20 vehicles or more shall be screened from view by one of the buffer yards provided in this article.

(c) No fence or wall over four feet tall, except a retaining wall, may be erected.

(d) If provided, scenic overlook areas, trails, parking and other public gathering places shall be ADA accessible. They shall be made of durable, permanent materials.

(e) Signage shall be limited to one freestanding sign no larger than 24 square feet for each property entrance; and signs no larger than four square feet interior to the property controlling parking or traffic and directional signs to public trail or other public amenities.

(F) Application and Review of Development Proposals.

(1) The submission of a sketch plan is strongly encouraged but not required.

(2) All submissions, including sketch plans and formal submittals, shall include:

(a) A site plan to include buildings, pedestrian access, river access (both physical and visual) and open space areas.

(b) Architectural plans for any proposed buildings in adequate detail to indicate building setback, footprint dimensions, building heights, and building mass. Architectural elevations or sections in adequate detail to indicate how proposed buildings will affect views to the river and across the river to the hills and ridges.

(c) Drawings showing parking areas, signs, street furniture and sidewalk design.

(d) Landscape plan showing the general location of all landscaping and buffer areas and the mature height of all proposed vegetation, differentiating between trees and shrubs.

(e) Any other pertinent data as the city may require.

Creekside Recreational Development Overlay (for illustration purposes only)
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 3762 § 3, 2017)


Article 1307 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES

Sections:

1307.01    Nonconforming uses and structures.

1307.02    Existing lots of record.


1307.01 Nonconforming uses and structures.

The following provisions shall apply to all nonconforming uses and structures. It is the intention of the City of Meadville that all legal nonconforming uses and structures shall be able to continue; however, all changes in such uses shall only be as allowed in this article.

(A) Any nonconforming use may be continued, but may not be extended or expanded unless to a conforming use, except as permitted by the board in accordance with the provisions of this code.

(B) Any nonconforming building or use which has been damaged or destroyed by fire, casualty, deterioration resulting from age and wear, or any other means may be reconstructed and used as before, if such reconstruction is performed within 12 months of the date use of the building was discontinued, if discontinued; if the restored building or use covers no greater area and contains no greater cubic content; and if the restored building or use poses no health or safety threat or hazard.

(C) If a nonconforming structure is re-occupied by any lawful use within that district which involves no physical change to the structure’s dimensions, all yard, lot and area requirements shall be waived. Yard, lot and area requirements shall apply to nonconforming use or structure changes requiring a special exception.

(D) In the event that any nonconforming use, conducted in a structure ceases, for voluntary reasons, for a period of one year, such nonconforming use shall not be resumed and any further use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this code.

(E) The nonconforming use of a building may be extended throughout those parts thereof which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption of this code.

(F) A nonconforming use may be changed to a different nonconforming use with the approval of the board as a special exception; provided, that the board finds the new use less potentially injurious to the health, safety and welfare of its neighborhood, and more consistent with the permitted uses within the zoning district.

(G) A building or structure hosting a nonconforming use may, with the approval of the board as a special exception, be extended, enlarged or replaced if the floor area of the additional or expanded building space is less than 50 percent of the floor area of the building occupied by the nonconforming use before the expansion or enlargement.

(H) Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the overall layout, plans, construction, size or designated use of any development, building, structure or part thereof for which official approval and required permits have been granted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code and where construction is completed within six months from the date of issuance of the permit.

(I) Once changed to a conforming use, no structure or land shall be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use.

(J) Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer an area from one district to another of a different classification, this article shall also apply to any use which thereby becomes nonconforming. (Ord. 3618 § 18, 2005; Ord. 3578 § 20, 2001; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1307.02 Existing lots of record. 

The following provisions shall apply to all lots of record as defined. It is the intention of the City of Meadville that the side and rear yard requirements of this zoning code should not prevent the reasonable use of a lot of record.

(A) Any lot of record existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code, and held in separate ownership different from the ownership of adjoining lots, may be used for the erection of a structure conforming to the use regulations of the district in which it is located even though its lot area and width are less than the minimum required by this code. However, such lot must comply with the yard, height and coverage standards of the zoning district wherein it is located. However, to prevent the overcrowding of housing, any land or building to be developed as multiple-family dwellings must conform to all area, height and yard regulations for the district in which it is located.

(B) If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage of the ordinance codified in this code, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this code, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this code.

(C) No division of any parcel shall be made which creates a lot width or area below the requirements for its current or intended use and zoning district as stated in this code except as permitted in Article 1307.02(E).

(D) No provisions of this zoning code relating to side and rear yard requirements shall prevent the reasonable use of a lot of record. The zoning administrator, upon request, may grant a reduction in requirement for side yards and rear yards for lots of record which lack required lot width and/or required lot area. However, in no event may such yards be reduced by more than 50 percent required by the lot regulations for its district without approval of the zoning hearing board.

(E) An action, whether purchase, subdivision, consolidation deed or otherwise, that creates from lots of record one or more larger lots, whether or not the resulting lots conform with the lot provisions of this code in effect at the time of the action, shall be permitted. All other lot provisions shall apply to the resulting lots. (Ord. 3716 § 6, 2012; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


Article 1308       OFF-STREET LOADING AND PARKING

Sections:

1308.01  Off-street loading.

1308.02  Off-street parking.


1308.01       Off-street loading.

(A) Off-Street Loading. Off-street loading shall be provided in accordance with the specifications in this section in all districts, whenever any new use is established or an existing one is enlarged, except that unless required by special exception or conditional use, all uses in the B-1 central business district are exempt from these off-street loading provisions.TABLE 1308.01(A) – OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS

	

	Use	First Berth	 Second Berth

	Industrial:

	Manufacturing	5,000	50,000

	Warehouse	10,000	50,000

	Storage	10,000	50,000

	Commercial:

	Wholesale	10,000	50,000

	Retail	10,000	40,000

	Service establishment	30,000	60,000

	Restaurants	40,000	80,000

	Office building	10,000	100,000

	Hotel	10,000	100,000

	Institutional:

	Schools	10,000	100,000

	Hospitals	50,000	100,000

	Nursing homes	50,000	100,000

	Civic/Cultural Buildings:

	Auditoriums	30,000	100,000

	Stadiums	30,000	100,000

Note: All figures are given in gross square feet of floor area for each listed use.

(B) Size and Access. Each off-street loading space shall be not less than 12 feet in uniform width and 65 feet in length, including 15-foot height clearance. It shall be so designed so the vehicles using loading spaces are not required to back onto a public street or alley. Such spaces shall abut a public street or alley or have an easement of access thereto. (Ord. 3578 § 21, 2001; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1308.02       Off-street parking.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this section in all zoning districts.

(A) Size and Access. Off-street parking spaces shall have an area determined by their use. In the case of dwellings, industrial and manufacturing establishments, warehouses, wholesale and truck terminals, and institutional uses, each space shall be not less than 162 square feet, being at least nine feet wide and 18 feet long. For all other uses, each space shall have an area of 180 square feet, being at least 10 feet wide and 18 feet long. No portion of a parking space shall include a portion of an access drive, sidewalk, lawful service drive, or public right-of-way of a street or alley. All parking areas and spaces shall include a turnaround area so that vehicles are not required to back onto public streets. Where an existing lot does not abut on a public or private street, alley or easement of access, there shall be provided a lawful service drive leading to the parking or storage areas or loading spaces. Such lawful service drive shall not be less than 10 feet wide. Access to off-street parking areas shall be limited to well-defined locations, and in no case shall there be unrestricted access along a street. Specifically, single-lane driveways shall be at least 10 feet wide but shall not exceed 12 feet. Double lane drives (for ingress and egress) may be up to 24 feet wide. All lawful service drives must comply with standards and specifications adopted from time to time by the city. With the exception of lawful service drives and approved parking spaces in parking lots, no motor vehicles shall be stored in front yard areas, or between a building and the public right-of-way.

(B) Number of Parking Spaces Required. The number of off-street parking spaces required is set forth in Table 1308.02 – Parking, with the following exceptions. First, unless required by special exception or conditional use, all uses in the B-1 central business district are exempt from the parking space requirements of this section. Second, lawful uses occupying a pre-existing structure with no substantive physical changes to the dimensions of the building shall be exempt from the parking space requirements of this section provided there are no conditional use or special exception requirements, provided there are no substantive projected increases in traffic as a result of a change in use, and provided there are adequate on-street or available off-street parking spaces to meet the requirements within 500 feet of the use as determined by the zoning administrator. Where the use of the premises is not specifically mentioned, requirements for similar uses shall apply. If no similar uses are mentioned, the parking requirements shall be one space for each two proposed patrons and/or occupants of that structure. Where more than one use exists on a lot, parking regulations for each use must be met.TABLE 1308.02 – PARKING

	

	Use Spaces	 Required Parking

	Automotive sales lots	1 for each 200 sq. ft. of lot area

	Gasoline service station/repair garages	1 for each 200 sq. ft. GFA

	Service stations	1 for each 200 sq. ft. GFA

	Single-family dwelling and duplex	1 per two bedrooms

	Multiple-family dwelling	2.0 per dwelling unit*

	Mobile home parks	2.0 per each mobile home lot

	Inns, hotels and motels, bed and breakfast	1 per guest room**

	Funeral home and mortuaries	25 for the first parlor

10 for each additional parlor

	Hospitals	1 per each bed**

	Nursing homes/personal care homes	1 per each 3 beds**

	Churches	1 per each 4 seats

	Schools	1 per each teacher and staff

1 for each 4 classrooms plus 1 for each 4 high school students

	Museums and libraries	1 per each 500 sq. ft. GFA**

	Sports arenas, stadiums, theaters, auditoriums, assembly halls	1 per each 3 seats**

	Community buildings, social halls, dance halls, clubs and lodges	1 space for each 60 sq. ft. of public floor area

	Roller rinks	1 space for each 200 sq. ft. GFA

	Bowling alleys	5 per alley

	Banks and offices (not elsewhere classified)	1 for each 250 sq. ft. GFA

	Medical or veterinary office and clinics	6 spaces per doctor

	Retail stores	1 per each 200 sq. ft. GFA

	Fast food/drive-through restaurants	1 per each 50 sq. ft. GFA**

	Furniture stores	1 per each 400 sq. ft. GFA

	Food supermarkets	1 per each 200 sq. ft. GFA

	Restaurants, taverns and nightclubs	1 for each 2.5 patron seats

	Industrial and manufacturing establishments, warehouses, wholesale and truck terminals	1 space per employee, on the largest shift, plus 1 space for each 10,000 sq. ft. for visitors

	Commercial recreation (not otherwise covered)	1 space for every 3 persons permitted in maximum occupancy

	Dormitories, fraternities/sororities	1 for each 2 rooms

	Student dwelling unit	1 space per occupant

	*Multiple-family units devoted to the elderly shall only be required to provide one and one-half parking spaces per unit. Such uses must supply adequate proof they will be dedicated to elderly tenants and shall be required to follow normal parking standards if they revert to non-elderly use.

	**Plus one space per employee and staff on major shift.

	Note: GFA means gross floor area.

(C) Location and Design. Required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot with the principal use unless the zoning administrator determines that it is impractical to provide parking on the same lot with the principal use, in which case the zoning administrator may permit off-lot parking spaces within 500 feet of the lot of the principal use to be counted toward the parking requirement under the following circumstances: there shall be presented evidence, satisfactory to the zoning administrator, that (1) the designated parking spaces are dedicated and available for the intended use, and that (2) the designated parking spaces shall be located so as not to pose a hazard to or interfere with existing and foreseeable parking and traffic so as not to detract from or interfere with the nature and appearance of the neighborhood or planned development of the neighborhood, and so as to be consistent with the city’s land use plans, comprehensive plan, development plans, and with the public health, safety and welfare.

Off-street parking areas for more than five vehicles shall be placed in such locations as may be permitted by the zoning administrator with due consideration of the proposed use and access to the public streets, with the objective of preventing a hazard to or interference with existing and foreseeable parking and traffic in the vicinity, with the objective of preserving the appearance and character of the neighborhood or planned development of the neighborhood in which the parking is being located, and with the objective of locating the parking in a manner consistent with the city’s land use plans, comprehensive plan, development plans and with the public, health, safety and welfare.

(D) Screening and Landscaping. Off-street parking areas for more than five vehicles, and off-street loading areas, shall be effectively screened on any side which adjoins a residential district (see definition of "Screening") or use. There shall be a planting strip of at least five feet in width between all lot lines and the parking lot. Such planting strip shall be suitably landscaped and maintained in accord with a written landscape and maintenance plan filed with and approved by the zoning administrator. At a minimum, the required planting shall consist of one deciduous or coniferous tree per each four parking spaces, and one shrub per each four spaces. The balance of the planting strip may be maintained in annual plants or perennial grasses. At the time of planting, all shrubbery shall be a minimum of 18 inches in height as measured from the ground after proper planting and all coniferous trees shall be a minimum of 72 inches in height and all deciduous trees shall be a minimum of 96 inches in height as measured from the ground after proper planting. Parking lots containing more than 20,000 square feet of impervious parking surface shall devote an additional eight percent of surface area (exclusive of required border planting strips) to interior planting strips at locations and in designs approved by the zoning administrator. In exercising the approval authority granted by this subsection, the zoning administrator shall consider the nature of the use serviced by the parking facility, the nature, character and appearance of the neighborhood surrounding the parking facility, the land use and development plans and ordinances of the city and the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 

(E) Minimum Distance and Setbacks. No off-street loading or parking area for more than five vehicles shall be closer than 10 feet to any adjoining lot line containing a dwelling, or to any adjoining lot line within a residential zoning district, school, hospital, or similar institution.

(F) Surfacing. With the exception of single-family and two-family dwellings or conversion apartments, all parking and loading areas and access drives shall have a paved surface, graded with positive drainage to dispose of surface water. Drainage shall be designed to contain all surface water within or under the parking area until reaching a catch basin or other approved outlet area in accordance with city specifications and standards. A plan for such parking areas shall be submitted, including drainage provisions, to the city engineer for approval. Paving may include permeable pavers, pavers interlocked to allow storm water to flow through, or grill surfacing through the use of geotextiles and other materials. However, gravel surfacing is not permitted as a surface coat as compaction negates permeability. Alternate paving materials are subject to the approval of the city engineer.

(G) Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking or loading areas shall be arranged so as to reflect the light away from the adjoining premises of any residential district or use and away from roads or highways. (Ord. 3618 § 19, 2005; Ord. 3578 §§ 22 – 25, 2001; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


Article 1309 SIGN REGULATIONS

Sections:

1309.01    Signs.

1309.02    R-1, R-2 and R-3 residential districts and the I-1 institutional core district.

1309.03    I-2, I-3 and I-4 institutional districts.

1309.04    T-1, B-1, B-2 and B-3 or EDC districts.

1309.05    Sign regulations and nonconforming uses.


1309.01 Signs.

The following sign regulations shall be observed in all districts:

(A) The following signs shall be permitted in all districts, and no permit shall be required to erect such signs:

(1) Temporary signs announcing a campaign, drive or event of a civic, philanthropic, political, educational or religious organization, provided such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and shall be removed immediately upon the completion of the campaign, drive or event.

(2) Temporary signs offering the sale or rental of the premises upon which the sign is erected; provided, that the area of any such sign shall not exceed six square feet in the case of a single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling or conversion apartment, or 32 square feet for all other uses.

(3) Temporary signs of contractors, developers, architects, engineers, builders and artisans, erected and maintained on the premises where the work is being performed; provided, that the area of such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet; and provided, that such sign shall be removed upon completion of the work.

(4) No trespassing signs, signs indicating the private nature of a road, driveway or premises, signs controlling fishing on the premises; provided, that the area of each such sign shall not exceed four square feet.

(5) Signs noting the historic nature of a house, site, building, or district. Such signs may be freestanding or attached to the significant edifice, provided they do not exceed four square feet in size.

(6) Temporary signs announcing a public auction, yard sale, garage sale, or similar event of less than 48 hours’ duration, provided such signs are removed upon cessation of the event.

(7) Temporary signs announcing the birth of a child, birthday commemoration, marriage, graduation, or similar event in the life of a householder shall be permitted provided such signs do not exceed 32 square feet.

(8) Directory signs which list all the occupants of a multi-tenant or multiple-family building, or buildings in a multi-building development; provided, that the area of such sign does not exceed one-half square foot per tenant or one square foot per individual building.

(9) Bulletin boards and similar spaces open to temporary signs emplaced for use by the general public without charge. If placed outside, such boards shall not exceed 32 square feet.

(10) Any signs not visible from outside a lot or building.

(11) Rest room, exit, public telephone, and similar directional or informational signs emplaced for the benefit of the public or building tenants.

(B) Signs in Public Rights-of-Way.

(1) No signs shall be permitted within public rights-of-way, except PennDOT-approved traffic signs and devices; signs and banners specially approved by the city for decoration or promotion of city and community events and activities; signs not exceeding nine square feet placed temporarily to advertise the sale of real estate or a yard sale; political signs not exceeding nine square feet placed temporarily; signs not exceeding nine square feet placed temporarily to provide notice of or direction to a civic, philanthropic, political, educational, or religious event or activity, historical markers as approved by the city or other signs specifically permitted under another section of this code.

(2) Portable business signs, six square feet or less, shall be permitted in the public right-of-way in the B-1 and B-2 districts. Such signs shall be subject to the following regulations:

(a) Signs are clearly accessory to, and placed on right-of-way abutting, a permitted business.

(b) Limited to one portable sign per business establishment.

(c) Signs contain a total area not exceeding six square feet per sign face and have no more than two faces.

(e) Signs are displayed only during business hours.

(f) Placement of such sign allows an unobstructed sidewalk for pedestrian use of a width of not less than five feet; and provided, further, that such sign does not block a line of sight for vehicles or pedestrians.

(g) Such signs shall not be illuminated by any means.

(C) Construction and Maintenance. All signs shall be constructed in a workmanlike fashion using durable materials. Signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind forces and in accordance with appropriate mechanical or electrical standards. The owners of signs shall keep them in safe and good repair. Signs which become deteriorated or otherwise present a public hazard shall be removed or repaired by the sign’s owner. If the owner of a sign cannot be found or identified, the owner of the property whereon the sign is located shall be responsible for its repair or removal.

(D) No sign shall be emplaced where it would block the line of sight for a public street or lawful service drive.

(E) Signs may be lighted with nonglaring lights, or may be illuminated by shielded floodlights. All direct light shall be screened from adjacent properties. All electrical connections shall be shielded by underground or overhead electrical wires which meet all city codes. No temporary signs, including any sign not permanently attached to the ground or a structure in a manner conforming to the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, shall be illuminated by direct means.

(F) No signs shall be permitted which are posted, stapled or otherwise attached to public utility poles or trees.

(G) Each commercial establishment that is otherwise permitted to have a business sign may mount to the building or other business structure one temporary sign to advertise special promotions, events and grand openings. Such signs shall be subject to all size and clearance limits for permanent signs and shall not be permitted in the public right-of-way except as permitted under the Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines or successor codes in effect at the time of application. Such signs may be displayed for no more than 180 days per calendar year per commercial establishment. No permit shall be required to post such a sign.

(H) Nonconforming signs, once removed, shall be replaced only with conforming signs. Nonconforming signs may be repainted or repaired, providing such repainting or repairing does not exceed the dimensions of the existing sign.

(I) When the business for which a sign is utilized is closed or vacated for whatever reason, all business signs shall be removed within 60 days of the closure. 

(J) This subsection shall govern electronic signs as defined in this article in all districts.

(1) No electronic signs shall be permitted in the historic district as described in the 2007 Business District Action Plan or any residential, transitional or institutional district or the B-3 district, except as permitted by special exception in the I-3 and I-4 districts.

(2) Electronic Signs in the B-1, B-2 and EDC Districts, Outside of the Historic District.

(a) Electronic signs shall be permitted only by special exception, provided:

(i) Signs shall meet all sign regulations relative to size and location provided for in this article.

(ii) Signs shall be turned off and shall emit no light outside of business hours.

(iii) No sound may be used in connection with an electronic sign.

(iv) Message display shall remain static for a minimum of five seconds. There shall be no strobe, flashing effect or other animation other than scrolling during the display. Any transitions or change of the display between messages shall not be more than one second. Transitions that involve fading or other animations other than scrolling shall not be permitted.

(v) The owner of the sign or his agent shall measure sign luminance with a luminance meter set to measure foot-candles accurate to at least two decimals. Luminance shall be measured with the sign off, and again with the sign displaying a white image for a full color-capable sign, or a solid message for a single-color sign. All measurements shall be taken perpendicular to the face of the sign at the distance determined by the total square footage of the sign. Electronic signs of 10 square feet or less shall be measured at a distance of 32 feet. Electronic signs of greater than 10 square feet shall be measured at a distance of 39 feet. The difference between the off- and solid-message measurements using the criteria shall not exceed 0.3 foot-candles at night. A letter certifying compliance shall be provided to the zoning officer.

(vi) All permitted electronic signs shall be equipped with a sensor or other device that automatically determines the ambient illumination and programmed to automatically dim according to ambient light conditions, or that can be adjusted to comply with the 0.3 foot-candle measurement.

(vii) Electronic signs which malfunction shall be turned off except for testing during any correction or repair.

(3) Electronic Signs in I-3 Special Institutional and I-4 Educational Institutional Districts.

(a) Electronic signs shall be permitted only by special exception, provided:

(i) Signs must be screened so that no illumination source from the sign is visible from any residence within 500 feet of the sign.

(ii) No sign may be illuminated or functioning between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

(iii) The total sign area, including support structure, shall conform to the size requirements for the district in which it is located, and the height of the sign, including support structure, may not exceed 10 feet.

(iv) The sign shall incorporate items of subsection (J)(2)(a)(iii), (iv), (v), (vi) and (vii) of this section relating to sound, timing, animation, brightness and malfunction.

(v) The sign shall be housed in a support structure made of brick, stone or similar material and be appropriately landscaped so as to limit its impact in the residential neighborhood. (Ord. 3762 § 4, 2017; Ord. 3706 § 7, 2012; Ord. 3618 § 20, 2005; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1309.02 R-1, R-2 and R-3 residential districts and the I-1 institutional core district.

In the R-1, R-2 and R-3 residential districts and the I-1 institutional core district, the following signs shall be permitted:

(A) Home occupation or nameplate sign displaying the name and address of the occupant or the profession or activity of the occupant of a dwelling unit; provided, that not more than one such sign shall be erected for each permitted use; and provided, that the area of each such sign shall not exceed four square feet; and provided, that each such sign shall be fixed flat on the main wall of such building or may be erected in the front yard, but not closer than 10 feet from a lot line.

(B) Sign, bulletin board, announcement board or identification signs for schools, churches, hospitals, multiple-family dwellings, subdivisions, allotments or other principal uses and buildings other than dwellings on the same lot therewith for the purpose of displaying the name of the institution and its activities or services; provided, that the area of any such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet and not more than one such sign shall be erected on any one street frontage. Such signs shall only be illuminated by indirect means. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1309.03 I-2, I-3 and I-4 institutional districts.

In the I-2, I-3 and I-4 institutional districts, the following signs shall be permitted:

(A) All signs permitted in the R-1, R-2 and I-1 institutional districts.

(B) All nondwelling uses may maintain up to two signs of any type per street frontage for informational or identification purposes, provided the total area of such signs does not exceed 64 square feet. Only wall signs, as defined by this code, and electronic signs as regulated by this article, may be self-illuminated. All other sign types shall employ indirect means of lighting. (Ord. 3762 § 5, 2017; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1309.04 T-1, B-1, B-2 and B-3 or EDC districts.

In the T-1, B-1, B-2 and B-3 or EDC districts, signs will be permitted as authorized by Table 1309.04:

	TABLE 1309.04 – SIGNS IN T-1, B-1, B-2, B-3 AND EDC DISTRICTS 

	Sign Type

	District	Freestanding	Projecting	Facade/Wall	Roof

	Area 	Height	Area	Height	Projection	Area	Area	Height

	T-1	32 sf	8 ft	9 sf	8 ft	6 ft	32 sf	NA	NA

	B-1	32 sf	15 ft	12 sf	8 ft	6 ft	20% of surface	NA	NA

	B-2	64 sf	35 ft	12 sf	8 ft	6 ft	30% of surface	NA	NA

	B-3	32 sf	15 ft	9 sf	8 ft	6 ft	32 sf	NA	NA

	EDC	100 sf	35 ft	25 sf	8 ft	15 ft	30% of surface	100 sf	10 ft

Supplementary Criteria 

	T-1	1 permanent sign of any type per street frontage

	B-1	2 permanent signs per street frontage

	B-2	3 permanent signs

	B-3	1 permanent sign per street frontage

	EDC	3 permanent signs

(A) Within the T-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, or EDC, all signs allowed in the R-1, R-2, R-3 or I-1 districts shall be permitted by right.

(B) Temporary Signs. In all the business districts and the EDC, temporary signs shall be permitted in building windows, and shall not require a permit. Except for window signs and those signs noted in MMC 1309.01, all temporary or portable signs shall be prohibited.

(C) Permanent Window Signs. Permanent window signs are permitted in all business districts and the EDC by right without a permit provided no more than 50 percent of each window surface and 25 percent of all building windows include such a sign.

(D) Projection of Permanent Signs into Rights-of-Way. A freestanding sign, otherwise lawful under Table 1309.04, may project into the public right-of-way up to six feet, provided no structural support or portion of the sign is within eight feet of grade as measured vertically from the right-of-way line. Under no circumstances shall any such projecting sign be placed nearer than two feet from a vehicular cartway, loading zone, or on-street parking lane.

(E) Signs advertising the occupant’s commercial industry or products sold on the premises are permitted only on a building and shall not exceed 20 percent of the surface of the wall on or in front of which the sign is mounted. No permit shall be required to post such a sign and such signs shall not count toward the limit on the number of signs allowed in this section. (Ord. 3706 § 7, 2012; Ord. 3618 § 20, 2005; Ord. 3578 § 26, 2001; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1309.05 Sign regulations and nonconforming uses. 

Nonconforming uses may keep all permanent, pre-existing signs; provided, that such signs do not obstruct vehicular lines of sight or threaten public safety. If the signage for the use is changed, all future signs shall comply with regulations for the district in which the nonconforming use is located. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)




Article 1310       ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS

Sections:

1310.01  Zoning administrator.

1310.02  Duties of the zoning administrator.

1310.03  Building and zoning permits.

1310.04  Sign permit.

1310.05  Fees.

1310.06  Variances, special exceptions and conditional uses.

1310.07  Violations.

1310.08  Causes of action.

1310.09  Enforcement remedies.


1310.01       Zoning administrator. 

The City of Meadville shall appoint the zoning administrator who shall administer and enforce the provisions of this code, and shall do so in accordance with the provisions of this code and of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. The zoning administrator shall also have the duties as set forth by this code. The zoning administrator shall not hold any elective office in the city. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1310.02       Duties of the zoning administrator.

The zoning administrator shall administer this code in accordance with its literal terms, and shall not have the power to permit any construction or any use or change of use which does not conform to this code. The administrator shall be considered as qualified to perform his/her duties by meeting the qualifications established by the city. In addition, the zoning administrator’s duties, obligations and responsibilities include the following:

(A) Application for Building/Zoning Permits. The zoning administrator shall receive applications for building and zoning permits. A building and zoning permit is an application filed prior to the start of construction/development by a developer to describe the proposed activity in sufficient detail to determine whether or not it meets the requirements of this and other applicable city ordinances and regulations. The zoning administrator shall consult with other city officials responsible for administering and enforcing other applicable regulations, including but not limited to building code officials. Applications conforming to this code shall be approved; those not conforming to this code shall be denied.

(B) Inspections. The zoning administrator or a duly appointed assistant may examine, or cause to be examined, all structures and/or land for which an application for a building and zoning permit or a zoning permit has been requested. Such inspections may be made from time to time during construction and shall be made upon the termination of construction.

(C) Appeals. The zoning administrator shall receive all applications for conditional uses, special exceptions and variances and forward same to the appropriate body. 

(D) Enforcement. The zoning administrator is authorized to institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of enforcing this code. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1310.03       Building and zoning permits.

(A) Permit Required. A building and zoning permit shall be required for and prior to:

(1) Construction, erection, movement, alteration or enlargement of a building or structure.

(2) Placement of a mobile home.

(3) Change in use of any building or structure.

(4) Use and development of land or change in the use, except the placing of vacant land under cultivation.

(5) Change in use or extension of a nonconforming use.

(6) Construction or alteration of a driveway or lawful service driveway.

(B) Permits Not Required. Building and zoning permits are not required for:

(1) Sidewalks, terraces, patios, flag poles, dog houses, and lawn and recreational equipment (such as swings, playhouses, benches, picnic tables and ornamental objects).

(2) Minor repairs to existing buildings or structures including minor alterations to the interiors of buildings and alterations involving exterior siding and roofing which do not affect the external form and size of a building, consistent with the permit exceptions of the city’s various building codes.

(C) Application for Permit. All applications for building and zoning permits shall be made, in writing, on a form furnished by the city and shall include a dated plot plan drawn as accurately as possible. This plan shall be scaled to a reasonable level of accuracy. The following information shall be provided:

(1) Name, address and phone number of applicant and the landowner or landowners, and relationship of applicant to landowner.

(2) Description of property, including geographic orientation.

(3) Existing use of property.

(4) Proposed use of property.

(5) Zoning district.

(6) Description of work contemplated.

(7) Estimated cost.

(8) Actual dimensions of the lot and dimensions and location of buildings or proposed additions (including such things as floor area, number of floors or stories, height, and other dimensions).

(9) Existing and proposed setbacks.

(10) Existing and proposed percent of lot coverage.

(11) Location of all buildings and structures on abutting land within 50 feet of the lot line.

(12) Location of road access, curb cuts, and location and number of parking spaces and loading facilities, if applicable.

(13) The number of dwelling units, if applicable.

(14) Existing and proposed screening or buffering, including materials or plant types.

(15) A statement that the applicant is the owner of the lot or a copy of a written agreement between the owner and the applicant to permit the proposed construction.

(16) A statement regarding other permits required and whether they have been obtained.

(17) All other information necessary for the zoning administrator to determine compliance with this code and all other pertinent ordinances.

(D) Issuance of Permits.

(1) No building and zoning permit shall be issued until the applicant has established that the proposed work or use will be undertaken in conformity with the requirements of this and all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, the subdivision and land development regulations, any and all city building codes, Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities and Clean Streams Acts, Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act, Pennsylvania Fire and Panic Act, and that all other permits required have been, or will be, issued under these laws or regulations.

(2) Within 15 days after receipt of the application, the zoning administrator shall issue or deny the permit or issue a written request for additional information required in order to determine whether a permit should be issued.

(3) No permit shall be issued unless all required fees have been paid.

(4) If, 90 days after receipt of the application, sufficient information has not been received to determine whether the permit should be issued, the application shall be denied unless the zoning administrator finds there is good cause for allowing additional time for consideration of the application and grants a written extension of time.

(E) Expiration of Permit. If work described in the permit application has not begun within one year from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. (Ord. 3618 § 21, 2005; Ord. 3578 § 27, 2001; Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1310.04       Sign permit. 

A sign permit shall be required prior to the erection or alteration of any sign, except those signs specifically exempted from this requirement by this code.

(A) Application for a sign permit shall be made, in writing, to the zoning administrator, and shall contain all information necessary for such administrator to determine whether the proposed sign, or the proposed alterations, conform to all the requirements of this code.

(B) No sign permit shall be issued except in conformity with the regulations of this code, except after written order from the zoning hearing board or the courts.

(C) All applications for sign permits shall be accompanied by plans or diagrams in duplicate and approximately to scale, showing the following:

(1) Dimensions of lot or building upon which the sign is proposed to be erected.

(2) Exact size, dimensions and location of the said sign on lot or building.

(3) Any other lawful information which may be required by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1310.05       Fees. 

Fees for building and zoning permits and sign permits, applications for special exceptions, variance and conditional use, appeal proceedings before the zoning hearing board or city council, and other matters of zoning administration shall be established in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and other governing law and be adopted by resolution of the city council. These fees shall be set forth in a schedule of fees which shall be posted and made available to the public. The applicable fees shall be paid to the zoning administrator at the time of application, appeal or such other time as the zoning administrator may direct. Action on applications or appeals may be withheld if fees have not been paid in full. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1310.06       Variances, special exceptions and conditional uses.

(A) Uses permitted by special exception and variance are only permitted when approved by the zoning hearing board in accordance with the criteria set forth in this code and as required by law, after public hearing pursuant to public notice, and in accordance with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.

(B) Uses permitted by conditional use are only permitted when approved by the city council in accordance with the criteria set forth in this code and as required by law, after public hearing pursuant to public notice, and in accordance with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.

(C) Applications. Requests for variance, special exception or conditional use shall be first presented to the zoning administrator for review by filing an application containing the information required by MMC 1310.03, with the zoning administrator who shall determine whether a variance, special exception or conditional use is necessary.

(D) Standards for Variance. A variance may be granted where the provisions of the code inflict unnecessary hardship and all the following findings are made, where relevant, in a given case:

(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of the zoning code in the neighborhood or district in which the property is located.

(2) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the zoning code and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property.

(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.

(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.

(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue.

(E) Standards for Special Exception. Special exceptions shall be granted where the following findings are made:

(1) The use is permitted as a special exception under the terms of this code.

(2) The specific criteria, if any, for allowing the use by special exception will be met.

(3) The use, if permitted, will be consistent with the community and development objectives and plans, and suitable to the tract with respect to matters such as highway access, availability of utilities and services, traffic impact, economic impact and impact on the neighborhood.

(4) It has not been established that the use for which the permit is sought would be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, that the proposed use would create unreasonable traffic congestion, traffic hazards, fire hazards, water hazards, sanitary, or other health hazards, or that the proposed use would unreasonably interfere with or impair the supply of adequate and safe light, water, or air, the availability of adequate drainage or sewage or refuse facilities, or other utilities, or otherwise impose an undue threat to the health and safety of adjoining property owners.

(F) Standards for Conditional Use. A conditional use permit shall be granted where the following findings are made:

(1) The use is permitted as a conditional use under the terms of the code.

(2) The specific criteria, if any, for allowing a conditional use will be met.

(3) The use conforms with the community and economic development objectives, would be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance and function with the existing or intended character of the general area in which the use is located, and would not be hazardous, disturbing, or detrimental to existing or future neighboring uses, physically, environmentally, socially or economically.

(4) The use will be adequately served by public facilities and services such as highways, police and fire protection, drainage systems, refuse disposal, water and sewers, and schools, and that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide additional or supplementary public facilities and services should their need be demonstrated.

(5) The use will not involve activities, processes, materials, equipment and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property, or the general welfare by reason of excessive traffic, noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, fumes, electrical disturbance, glare or odors; undue pollution of or danger to the air or water by dust, dirt, fumes, smoke, odor, radioactivity or other polluting substances.

(6) The use will cause no emissions and/or discharges into the air or water which do not meet governmental standards.

(7) The use will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural, scenic or historic feature of major importance and significance.

(8) The use will provide through maintenance of setbacks and screening by plantings, fences or other landscape features an effective buffer to block unsightly views and noise from adjacent properties and public roadways.

(G) Conditions. The zoning hearing board may approve variances and special exceptions and the city council may approve conditional uses subject to reasonable and appropriate conditions.

(H) Expiration of Special Exceptions, Variances and Conditional Uses. The validity of a special exception variance or conditional use permit shall not exceed one year from the date of authorization and shall expire if the applicant has failed to obtain other appropriate permits, and commence work or use as planned and approved within one year. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1310.07       Violations.

(A) Enforcement Notice. When it appears to the city and/or the zoning administrator that a violation has occurred, the zoning administrator shall send an enforcement notice. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding the parcel, and to any other person requested, in writing, by the owner of record. The enforcement notice shall state the following:

(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the city intends to take action.

(2) The location of the property in violation.

(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions of the code.

(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced and the date before which the steps must be completed.

(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the zoning hearing board within a prescribed period of time in accordance with procedures set forth in this code.

(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified, unless extended by appeal to the zoning hearing board, constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1310.08       Causes of action.

In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in violation of this code, the city, the zoning administrator of the city, or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that his property or person will be substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When any such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be served upon the city at least 30 days prior to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the Meadville city council. No such action may be maintained until such notice has been given. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1310.09       Enforcement remedies.

Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of this zoning code shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the city, pay a judgment of not more than $500.00 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the city as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the city may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the district justice determining that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good-faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this code to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of zoning ordinances shall be paid over to the city. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant any person or entity other than the city and its zoning administrator the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


Article 1311       ZONING HEARING BOARD

Sections:

1311.01  Creation.

1311.02  Appointment.

1311.03  Removal of members.

1311.04  Organization of board.

1311.05  Expenditures for services.

1311.06  Legal counsel.

1311.07  Hearings.

1311.08  Board’s functions.

1311.09  Parties appellant before board.

1311.10  Time limitations – Persons aggrieved.

1311.11  Stay of proceedings.


1311.01       Creation. 

There is hereby created a zoning hearing board, herein referred to as the "board," consisting of five residents of the city appointed by the city council pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. Said board shall perform all the duties, and exercise all powers prescribed by said code and as herein further provided. It is the intention of this code that the currently constituted zoning hearing board of the City of Meadville shall be continued and the same members are hereby appointed to the zoning hearing board created by the code with the same terms as were provided under the previous code. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1311.02       Appointment.

The terms of office of the board shall be three years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire each year. The board shall promptly notify the city council of any vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term. Members of the board shall hold no other office in the city, nor be a member of the planning commission. The city council shall also appoint three alternate members to the board. The appointment, rights and duties of the alternates shall be in accordance with Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. It is the intention of this code that the currently constituted zoning hearing board of Meadville shall be continued and the same members are hereby appointed to the zoning hearing board created by the code with the same terms as were provided under the previous code. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1311.03       Removal of members.

Any board member may be removed for misfeasance or nonfeasance in office, or for other just cause, by a majority vote of the city council, taken after the member has received 15 days’ advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in writing. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1311.04       Organization of board.

The board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any hearing or the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than the majority of all the members of the board, but where three members are disqualified to act in a particular matter, at least one alternate member shall be seated. The board may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf, and the parties may waive further action by the board as provided in Section 908 of the Planning Code. The board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedure, consistent with city ordinances and laws of the commonwealth. The board shall keep full public records of its business and shall submit a report of its activities to the city council as requested by the city council. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1311.05       Expenditures for services.

Within the limits of funds appropriated by the city council, the board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical and clerical services. Members of the board may receive compensation for the performance of their duties, as may be fixed from time to time by the city council, but in no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the members of the city council. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1311.06       Legal counsel.

Where legal counsel is desired, an attorney, other than the city solicitor, shall be used. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1311.07       Hearings.

The board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the following requirements:

(A) Notice shall be given to the public by notice published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall be not more than 30 days or less than seven days from the date of the hearing. Written notice shall be given to the applicant, the zoning administrator, and to any person who has made timely request for the same. Written notices shall be prescribed by rules of the board. In addition to the notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing.

(B) The city council may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to hearings before the zoning hearing board. Fees for said hearings may include compensation for the secretary and members of the zoning hearing board, notice and advertising costs and necessary administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs, however, shall not include legal expenses of the zoning hearing board, expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants or expert witness costs.

(C) The hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date of the applicant’s request, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an extension of time.

(D) The hearings shall be conducted by the board or the board may appoint any member as a hearing officer. The decision or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the board, but the parties may waive decision or findings by the board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.

(E) The parties to the hearing shall be the city, any person affected by the application who has made timely appearance of record before the board, and any other person including civic or community organizations permitted to appear by the board. The board shall have power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter appearances, in writing, on forms provided by the board for that purpose.

(F) The chairman or acting chairman of the board or the hearing officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested by the parties.

(G) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.

(H) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.

(I) The board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the board. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the board if the transcript is ordered by the board or hearing officer or shall be paid by the person appealing from the decision of the board if such appeal is made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases the party requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.

(J) The board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate, except that advice from the board’s solicitor is exempt from this restriction, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or other materials unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed, and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.

(K) The board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before the board or hearing officer. Where application is contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of this code or the Planning Code, or any rule or regulation, shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the board shall make his report and recommendations available to the parties within 45 days, and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to the board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the board’s decision shall be entered no later than 30 days after the report of the hearing officer. Where the board fails to render the decision within the period required by this code or the Planning Code, or fails to hold the required hearing within 60 days from the date of the applicant’s request for a hearing, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the board to meet or render a decision as herein above provided, the board shall give public notice of said decision within 10 days in the same manner as provided in Subsection 607(1) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.

(L) A copy of the final decision, or where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him no later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have filed their names and addresses with the board no later than the last day of the hearing, the board shall provide, by mail or otherwise, a brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or findings may be examined. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1311.08       Board’s functions. 

(A) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except those brought before the governing body pursuant to Sections 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of the Planning Code.

(B) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of said ordinance. Where the ordinance appealed from is the initial zoning ordinance of the city and a zoning hearing board has not been previously established, the appeal raising procedural questions shall be taken directly to court.

(C) Appeals from the determination of the zoning administrator, including, but not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or lot.

(D) Appeals from a determination by the city engineer or the zoning administrator with reference to the administration of any floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance.

(E) Applications for variances from the terms of the zoning ordinance and flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance, pursuant to Section 910.2 of the Planning Code. 

(F) Appeals from the zoning administrator’s determination under Section 916.2 of the Planning Code.

(G) Appeals from the determination of the zoning administrator or municipal engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and storm water management insofar as the same relate to development not involving Article V or VII applications of the Planning Code.

(H) Variances. The board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that the provisions of this code inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The board may by rule prescribe the form of application and may require preliminary application to the zoning administrator. The board may grant a variance provided that all of the following findings are made where relevant in a given case:

(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of this code in the neighborhood or district in which the property is located;

(2) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of this code and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property;

(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the applicant;

(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare; and

(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue.

In granting any variance, the board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purpose of this code.

(I) Hearing Applications for Special Exceptions. In hearing an application for special exception, the board shall refer to the specific criteria applicable for the particular use. If the use is not listed within the code, the board shall utilize the criteria set forth in Article 1301 MMC. The board may also attach reasonable safeguards in addition to specific criteria listed. These additional criteria may be based upon impacts addressed in Article 1301 MMC. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1311.09       Parties appellant before board.

Appeals and proceedings to challenge the code may be filed with the board, in writing, by the landowner affected, any officer or agency of the city, or any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance may be filed with the board by any landowner or any tenant with the permission of such landowner. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1311.10       Time limitations – Persons aggrieved.

No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the board later than 30 days after an application for development, preliminary or final, has been approved by an appropriate city officer, agency or body if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to limit the approval in any manner unless such person alleges and proves that he had no notice, knowledge, or reason to believe that such approval had been given. If such person has succeeded to his interest after such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in interest. See also Section 914.1 of the Planning Code. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1311.11       Stay of proceedings.

Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in MMC 1310.08 and during its pendency before the board, all land development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the zoning administrator or of any agency or body, and all official action thereunder shall be stayed unless the zoning administrator or any other appropriate agency or body certifies to the board facts indicating that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board or by the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals on petition after notice to the zoning administrator or other appropriate agency or body. See also Section 915.1 of the Planning Code. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


Article 1312       AMENDMENTS

Sections:

1312.01  General.

1312.02  Petitions.

1312.03  Referral.

1312.04  Action.

1312.05  Curative amendments.


1312.01       General.

The city council may introduce and/or consider amendments to this code and to the zoning map, as proposed by a member of the city council, the planning commission, or by a petition of a person or persons residing or owning property within the city. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1312.02       Petitions.

Petitions for amendments shall be filed with the zoning administrator, and the petitioners, upon such filing, shall pay an advertising deposit and a filing fee, in accordance with a fee schedule affixed by the city. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1312.03       Referral.

Any proposed amendment presented to the city council without written findings and recommendations from the city planning commission and the Crawford County planning commission shall be referred to these agencies for their review and recommendations prior to the public hearing by the city council. The board shall not hold a public hearing upon such amendments until required reviews and recommendations are received or the expiration of 30 days from the date that such proposed amendments were submitted to the city and county planning commissions. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1312.04       Action.

Before acting upon a proposed amendment, the city council shall, as required by law, hold a public hearing thereon. Public notice of such hearing is required and shall contain a brief summary of the proposed amendment and reference to the place where copies of the same be examined, and shall be published in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. If the proposed amendment involves a change to the zoning map, notice of the public hearing shall be posted at the affected tract in accordance with Section 609 of the Planning Code at least one week prior to the date of the hearing. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


1312.05       Curative amendments.

(A) A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the validity of this zoning code or map or any provision thereof, which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he has an interest, may submit a curative amendment to the city council with a written request that his challenge and proposed amendment be heard and decided as provided in Section 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247), as amended. The city council shall commence a hearing thereon within 60 days. As with other proposed amendments, the curative amendment shall be referred to the Meadville planning commission and the Crawford County planning commission at least 30 days before the hearing is conducted by the city council. Public notice shall be given in accordance with applicable provision of the Planning Code. The hearings shall be conducted in accordance with instructions as set forth by Section 916.1 of the Planning Code. The findings, actions and considerations of the city council shall be in accordance with Section 609.1 of the Planning Code.

(B) The City of Meadville may institute a municipal curative amendment in accordance with Section 609.2 of the Planning Code. (Ord. 3384 § 2, 1994)


Article 1313       (Reserved)


Article 1314       (Reserved)


Article 1315       STREETSCAPE ADVISORY COMMITTEE

Sections:

1315.01  Statement of policy.

1315.02  Creation of streetscape advisory committee.

1315.03  Duties of the streetscape advisory committee.

1315.04  Integration into building permit application system.

1315.05  Process.

1315.06  Advisory nature of committee and its comments.


1315.01       Statement of policy. 

The city council is concerned that development may occur within the city which is technically consistent with the city’s zoning and other land use regulation but which does not maximize its potential benefit to the community because some developers may be unfamiliar with the city, its culture, needs, interests and concerns. The city council believes that the interests of developers and the interests of the city can be best served if a mechanism is created by which developers are afforded the benefit of receiving the views, comments and recommendations of knowledgeable citizens concerning proposed developments and the impact those developments will have upon the city and its neighborhoods. The city council has determined that its concern can be addressed through the creation of a special advisory committee to assist developers in maximizing their return upon their investments in the city while maximizing the benefits which their developments can bring to the community. (Ord. 3528 § 1, 1999)


1315.02       Creation of streetscape advisory committee.

There is hereby created among the committees, commissions and boards of the city a special advisory committee to be known as the streetscape advisory committee which shall consist of five members, each of whom shall be appointed by the city council of the City of Meadville. Persons appointed to the streetscape advisory committee shall serve for terms of five years; provided, that the terms of the initial appointees to the streetscape advisory committee shall serve for staggered terms as follows:

(A) The first person appointed to serve on the committee shall serve for an initial term of five years;

(B) The second person appointed to serve on the committee shall serve for an initial term of four years;

(C) The third person appointed to serve on the committee shall serve for an initial term of three years;

(D) The fourth person appointed to serve on the committee shall serve for an initial term of two years;

(E) The fifth person appointed to serve on the committee shall serve for an initial term of one year. (Ord. 3528 § 1, 1999)


1315.03       Duties of the streetscape advisory committee.

The streetscape advisory committee shall:

(A) Review all plans for the development of land located within the city which involve the construction of new buildings or the making of additions to existing structures for purposes other than single-family residential dwelling units; and

(B) Meet with all persons proposing the development of land within the city as defined in subsection (A) of this section to discuss the proposed development and to communicate to the proposed developers the views and concerns of the community related to:

(1) The appropriateness of the proposed use for the community and for the specific site proposed for development; and

(2) The aesthetic impact of the proposed development upon the community and the neighborhood in which the development is proposed; and

(3) Methods and means by which the proposed development can be made more responsive to the needs, interests and values of the community and of the neighborhood in which the development is proposed; and

(4) Such other matters as the committee may deem to be appropriate for each specific proposed development. (Ord. 3528 § 1, 1999)


1315.04       Integration into building permit application system.

(A) No application for the issuance of any building permit for any proposed development as defined in MMC 1315.03(A) shall be accepted unless and until the developer has requested a meeting with the streetscape advisory committee. It is recommended that all developers meet with the city’s streetscape advisory committee prior to submitting any plans for review and approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor; and 

(B) Except as provided in MMC 1315.05(G), no building permits for projects of the size and type described in MMC 1315.03(A) shall be issued until after the conduct of a meeting between the applicant for the building permit and the streetscape advisory committee as required hereby. (Ord. 3528 § 1, 1999)


1315.05       Process. 

The creation of the streetscape advisory committee is intended to provide a benefit and an asset to persons and entities proposing development within the city as well as to assure the citizens of the city that community needs, interests and values are considered by developers. The committee is directed to conduct its actions in a positive and realistic manner which does not delay or hinder development. The work of the streetscape advisory committee shall be conducted as follows:

(A) Notice of the existence of this article and of the streetscape advisory committee process governed hereby shall be included in the initial informational packets provided by the city to all potential developers.

(B) Notice of all proposed developments within the definition of MMC 1315.03 shall be provided to the streetscape advisory committee by the city’s director of planning and development within two business days after the day upon which such the city’s director of planning and development receives a request for a meeting from a potential developer of a project as defined in MMC 1315.03. 

(C) The city’s director of planning and development shall be staff to the streetscape advisory committee. The director of planning and development may designate other city employees of the planning and development office to act in his absence as may be required for the business of the streetscape advisory committee.

(D) A meeting between the developer and the streetscape advisory committee should be scheduled within 10 calendar days of (but in no event more than 14 days after) the date of the giving of notice of the potential for such development to the streetscape advisory committee by the city’s planning director at a date and time reasonably convenient to the permit applicant and to a majority of the streetscape advisory committee by the city’s planning and development office.

(E) The streetscape advisory committee will review the proposed development and will communicate its views and concerns to the developer at the meeting scheduled in accord with subsection (D) of this section. 

(F) The city’s planning and development office shall keep minutes of all meetings between the streetscape advisory committee and building permit applicants and shall forward copies of those minutes to the members of the streetscape advisory committee, the members of the city’s planning commission, to the members of the city council and to the potential developer within two business days of the date of any meeting.

(G) Should the streetscape advisory committee fail to meet or to take any other action required by this article within the time limitations herein set forth (except for a failure to meet with a potential developer as a result of the potential developer’s unreasonable refusal to cooperate in the scheduling of a time for a meeting), the applicant shall be deemed to have fully complied with the terms and requirements of this article and the building permit process for the proposed development shall be permitted to proceed without further action under this article. (Ord. 3528 § 1, 1999)


1315.06       Advisory nature of committee and its comments. 

The comments, statements and recommendations of the streetscape advisory committee are advisory only and shall not in any way bind or restrict the actions of any developer or building permit applicant which are otherwise consistent with the laws, rules, regulations and ordinances of the United States of America, the commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the City of Meadville. (Ord. 3528 § 1, 1999)


Article 1351       

TITLE, PURPOSE, APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION

Sections:

1351.01  Short title.

1351.02  Purpose.

1351.03  Application.

1351.04  Installation of improvements – Issuance of permit.

1351.05  Interpretation.

1351.06  Flood hazard areas.


1351.01       Short title.

This title, which consists of Ordinance 2624, passed November 23, 1965, as amended, shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Meadville land subdivision regulations", hereinafter referred to as the "land subdivision regulations." (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1351.02       Purpose.

The land subdivision regulations, including the requirements hereinafter set forth, are for the following purposes: 

(A) To assure sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation and to provide for the harmonious development of the city; and

(B) To coordinate the existing streets with proposed streets, parks or other features of the city’s official map; and 

(C) To provide adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light and air and for proper distribution of population, thereby creating conditions favorable to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city; and 

(D) To establish rules for the processing, design and construction of subdivisions. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1351.03       Application.

From and after the effective date of the land subdivision regulations (November 23, 1965), all plans, plots or replots of lands laid out in building lots, and the streets or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to public use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto, and located within the city limits, or for a distance of three miles outside thereof, shall be submitted to the Meadville city planning commission and be approved by it before it shall be recorded. No plan, plot or replot shall be received or recorded in any public office unless the same shall bear thereon, by endorsement or otherwise, the approval of the Meadville city planning commission, as required by law. From and after the effective date of the land subdivision regulations (November 23, 1965), no plan or plot of streets within the Meadville city limits shall be entered in any public office of the county of Crawford until approved by the council of the City of Meadville. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1351.04       Installation of improvements – Issuance of permit.

From and after the effective date of the land subdivision regulations (November 23, 1965), no sewer, water or gas main or pipes or other improvement shall be voted or made within the area under the jurisdiction of the Meadville city planning commission for the use of any such purchasers or owners, nor shall any permit for connection with or other use of any such improvement existing, or for any other reason made, be given to any such purchasers or owners until such plan is so approved and, where required, recorded. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1351.05       Interpretation.

In interpreting the requirements of the land subdivision regulations, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the creation of conditions favorable to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city. It is not intended by the land subdivision regulations to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by the land subdivision regulations, or with private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or other private agreements, or with restrictive covenants running with the land to which the city is a party. Where the land subdivision regulations impose a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other provisions of law, ordinance, regulation, contract or deed, the provisions of the land subdivision regulations shall control. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1351.06       Flood hazard areas.

All subdivisions hereinafter proposed in flood hazard areas as such areas are defined upon the official flood hazard boundary map of the City of Meadville dated June 1, 1977, shall be designed and constructed in accord with the provisions of this article and with the following specific requirements:

(A) Street Elevations. The finished elevation of proposed streets shall be established with due consideration given to the need for access to developed properties during times of flooding. The city council may require, where necessary, profiles and elevations of streets to determine compliance with this requirement. Drainage openings shall be sufficient to discharge flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights. 

(B) Water Facilities. All new or replacement water systems located in flood hazard areas identified in the flood hazard boundary map, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed to a point one foot above the base flood elevation. 

(C) All new or replacement sanitary sewer systems located within the flood hazard areas identified on the flood hazard boundary map, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed up to an elevation one foot above the base flood elevation. 

(D) Floodproofing of All Other Utilities. All other new or replacement public and/or private utilities and facilities shall be elevated or floodproofed to a point one foot above the base flood elevation. 

(E) Plan Information. In addition to the information normally required by the city for review and approval of preliminary plans, the following information, prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor, shall be required when any part of the proposed subdivision or other development is within the flood hazard area of the flood hazard boundary map:

(1) Name of engineer, surveyor, or other qualified person responsible for providing the information required in this section.

(2) A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and/or land development with respect to the municipality’s flood-prone areas including information on, but not limited to, the base flood elevations, boundaries of flood-prone areas, proposed lots and sites, fills, flood or erosion protective facilities and areas subject to special deed restrictions. 

(3) Where the subdivision and/or land development lies partially or completely in the flood-prone areas, or where the subdivision and/or land development borders on the flood-prone areas, the preliminary plan map shall include detailed information giving the location and elevation of proposed roads, public utilities, and building sites. All such maps shall also show contours at intervals of two or five feet, depending upon the slope of the land, and identify accurately the boundaries of the flood-prone areas. 

(F) The following information shall be required as part of the final plan and shall be prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor:

(1) All information required for the submission of the preliminary plan incorporating any changes requested by the city council. 

(2) A map showing the exact location and elevation of all proposed buildings, structures, roads, and public utilities to be constructed in flood-prone areas. All such maps shall show contours at intervals of two or five feet and identify accurately the boundaries of the flood-prone areas. 

(3) Copies of all federal and state permits required for construction of the facilities shown on the subdivision plan, which may include, but are not limited to, water quality management permits, erosion and sedimentation control permits, dams and encroachment permits, and driveway permits. 

(G) Flood Hazard Area Regulations. For all new mobile home parks, for expansions to existing mobile home parks, and for existing mobile home parks where the repair, reconstruction, or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equal or exceed 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction, or improvement has commenced, the following requirements shall be met for any construction within the flood hazard areas as defined by the flood hazard boundary map of the City of Meadville: 

(1) Stands or lots shall be elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of each mobile home will be at least one foot above the base flood elevation. 

(2) Adequate surface drainage and access for a mobile home hauler shall be provided. 

When mobile homes are to be elevated on pilings, lots shall be large enough to permit steps, piles shall be placed in stable soil no more than 10 feet apart, and reinforcement shall be provided for pilings more than six feet above ground level. (Ord. 2927 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2624, 1965)


Article 1353       DEFINITIONS

Sections:

1353.01  Definitions generally.

1353.02  Alley.

1353.03  Cartway (roadway).

1353.04  Owner.

1353.05  Pavement.

1353.06  Right-of-way.

1353.07  Street.

1353.08  Street, arterial.

1353.09  Street, collector.

1353.10  Street, half (or partial).

1353.11  Street, marginal access.

1353.12  Street, minor.

1353.13  	Subdivider.

1353.14  Subdivision.

1353.15  Base flood elevation.

1353.16  Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM).

1353.17  Floodproofing.

1353.18  100-year flood.

1353.19  Existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision.

1353.20  Expansion to an existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision.

1353.21  New mobile home park or mobile home subdivision.


1353.01       Definitions generally.

For the purpose of the land subdivision regulations, certain terms, phrases and words shall have the meanings given herein. Words used in the singular include the plural and those in the plural include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. The word "may" is permissive. The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely directory. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1353.02       Alley.

"Alley" means a minor way whose right-of-way width is 20 feet or less in width. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1353.03       Cartway (roadway).

"Cartway (roadway)" means a portion of a street intended for vehicular use. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1353.04       Owner.

"Owner" means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land which has been subdivided or is sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under the land subdivision regulations. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1353.05       Pavement.

"Pavement" means the wearing or exposed surface of the roadway used for vehicular traffic or the sidewalk used by pedestrians. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1353.06       Right-of-way.

"Right-of-way" means the land opened, intended, reserved or dedicated for a street, walk, drainage or other public purpose. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1353.07       Street.

"Street" means a way including the entire right-of-way of a street, road, land, alley, court, highway or public square, and which is intended for public use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation providing access to abutting lots and space for water mains, sewers and public utilities. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1353.08       Street, arterial.

"Street, arterial" means a street, such as a highway or other thoroughfare, which is used primarily for fast or heavy traffic and shall include facilities classified as main and secondary highways by the Pennsylvania State Highway Department. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1353.09       Street, collector.

"Street, collector" means a street which carries traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1353.10       Street, half (or partial).

"Street, half (or partial)" means a minor street, generally parallel and adjacent to a lot line, having a lesser right-of-way width than normally required for satisfactory improvement and use of the street. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1353.11       Street, marginal access.

"Street, marginal access" means a minor street which is parallel or adjacent to arterial streets, and which provides access to abutting lots and protection from through traffic. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1353.12       Street, minor.

"Street, minor" means a street which is used primarily for access to the abutting lots. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1353.13       Subdivider.

"Subdivider" means the registered owner or authorized agent of the registered owner of a subdivision. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1353.14       Subdivision.

"Subdivision" means the division of a single lot, tract or parcel of land or a part thereof into two or more lots, tracts or parcels of land, including changes in street lines or lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future of transfer of ownership or of building development; provided, however, that divisions of land for agricultural purposes in parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new streets or easements of access, shall be exempt from the provisions of the land subdivision regulations. The term "subdivision" includes re-subdivision and, as appropriate in the provisions of the land subdivision regulations, shall refer to the process of subdividing land or to the land subdivided. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1353.15       Base flood elevation.

"Base flood elevation" means the 100-year flood elevation. Within the general flood plain the base flood elevation shall be established as a point on the boundary of the general flood plain which is nearest to the construction site in question. (Ord. 2927 § 2, 1977; Ord. 2624, 1965) 


1353.16       Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM).

"Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM)" means an official map of a community issued by the Federal Insurance Administrator, where the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as zone A, M and/or E. (Ord. 2927 § 2, 1977; Ord. 2624, 1965) 


1353.17       Floodproofing.

"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to lands, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and contents of buildings. (Ord. 2927 § 2, 1977; Ord. 2624, 1965)


1353.18       100-year flood.

"100-year flood" means a flood that has one chance in 100, or a one percent chance, of being equaled or exceeded in any year. For the purposes of this title, the 100-year flood (base flood) as defined by the Federal Insurance Administration, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, in flood insurance study, City of Meadville, Crawford County, Pennsylvania. (Ord. 2927 § 2, 1977; Ord. 2624, 1965)


1353.19       Existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision.

"Existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more mobile home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is completed before the effective date of flood plain management regulations adopted by a community. (Ord. 2927 § 2, 1977; Ord. 2624, 1965)


1353.20       Expansion to an existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision.

"Expansion to an existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the mobile homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads, or the construction of streets). (Ord. 2927 § 2, 1977; Ord. 2624, 1965)


1353.21       New mobile home park or mobile home subdivision.

"New mobile home park or mobile home subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more mobile home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities, for servicing the lot on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is completed on or after the effective date of flood plain management regulations adopted by a community. (Ord. 2927 § 2, 1977; Ord. 2624, 1965) 


Article 1355       DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:

1355.01  Land suitability.

1355.02  Street system.

1355.03  Street widths.

1355.04  Street alignment.

1355.05  Street grades.

1355.06  Street intersections.

1355.07  Storm drainage.

1355.08  Blocks.

1355.09  Lots.

1355.10  Sidewalks.

1355.11  Alleys.

1355.12  Easements.

1355.13  Parks, playgrounds and other community facilities.


1355.01       Land suitability.

Land subject to flooding and land deemed as subject to hazards to life, health or property, such as quarry land, open ditches, etc., shall not be subdivided for residential uses until all such hazards have been eliminated or unless adequate safeguards against such hazards are provided by the subdivision plan, or such land is set aside for such other uses as are appropriate to the existing conditions. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1355.02       Street system.

(A) Conformity with Official Maps and Plans. The arrangement, type, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform with the official map of the city, the comprehensive general plan, any neighborhood plan and any other official city, regional, county or state plan which has been prepared, adopted and/or filed, as prescribed by law. 

(B) Continuance of Streets. Provisions shall be made for continuing or extending any existing streets or adjoining subdivisions or land where such extension may be necessary for public service or convenience and opportunities shall be provided for extending streets beyond the boundaries of any subdivision where such extension may be required for public service or convenience. 

(C) Relation to Topography and Proposed Use. Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce usable lots and reasonable grades and shall be in appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 

(D) Minor Street Location. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic shall be discouraged, but provisions for street connections into and from adjacent areas will generally be required. 

(E) Subdivision Abuts an Arterial Street. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, there may be required marginal access streets, deep lots with rear service alleys, reversed frontage lots with screen planting contained in a non-accessible reservation along the rear lot line, or such other treatment as shall provide protection for abutting lots, reduction in the number of intersections with the arterial street and separation of local and through traffic. 

(F) Half or Partial Streets. New half or partial streets shall not be permitted, except where essential to the reasonable subdivision of a tract and where satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street can be secured. Wherever a tract to be subdivided borders an existing half or partial street, the other part of the street shall be platted with such tract. 

(G) Dead-End Streets. A dead-end street shall be prohibited, except as a stub to permit future street extension into adjoining tracts or when designed as a cul-de-sac. Dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer than 400 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around or cul-de-sac having an outside roadway diameter of at least 100 feet and a street lot line diameter of at least 120 feet. Dead-end streets, designed to be so temporarily, shall not be longer than one lot depth. 

(H) Subdivision Borders on a Railroad or Limited Access Highway. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, there may be required a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for business or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. All railroad crossings shall be subject to approval by the public utility commission. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1355.03       Street widths.

(A) Minimum Right-of-Way and Cartway Widths. Minimum street right-of-way and cartway (roadway) widths shall be as shown on any official plans or maps and where not shown shall not be less than as follows: 

(1) Arterial street: 80-foot right-of-way and two 23-foot cartways and four-foot median or 90-foot right-of-way and two 24-foot cartways and 16-foot dividing strip (if a state or federal highway, as determined by the State Department of Highways). 

(2) Collector street: 60-foot right-of-way and 36-foot cartway. 

(3) Minor street: 50-foot right-of-way and 26-foot cartway. 

(4) Marginal access street, one-way: 40-foot right-of-way and 18-foot cartway. 

(5) Marginal access street, two-way: 40-foot right-of-way and 26-foot cartway. 

(6) Alley: 20-foot right-of-way and 19-foot cartway. 

(B) Insufficient Right-of-Way Widths. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of insufficient right-of-way width as required above, additional right-of-way width in conformance with the above standards shall be required. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1355.04       Street alignment.

(A) Deflection. For purposes of sight distance and proper design, whenever street lines are deflected in excess of 10 degrees, connection shall be made by horizontal curves. However, a long radius curve shall be used rather than a series of curves connected by short tangents, and minimum radius curves at the end of long tangents shall not be approved. 

(B) Adequate Sight Distances. To ensure adequate sight distance, minimum center line radii for horizontal curves shall be as follows: 

(1) Arterial streets: 500 feet.

(2) Collector streets: 300 feet.

(3) Minor streets: 150 feet.

(C) Tangents on Reversed Curves. A tangent shall be required between reversed curves on arterial and collector streets of at least 100 feet. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1355.05       Street grades.

(A) Minimum Grade. Center line grade shall be not less than one percent.

(B) Maximum Grade. Center line grades shall not exceed the following: 

(1) Arterial or collector street: seven percent.

(2) Minor street: 10 percent.

(C) Vertical Curves. Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade exceeding an algebraic difference of one percent, and shall be designed in relation to the extent of the grade change and to provide the following minimum sight distances: 

(1) Arterial street: 400 feet.

(2) Collector street: 200 feet.

(3) Minor street: 100 feet. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1355.06       Street intersections.

(A) Range of Intersection Angle. Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. No street shall intersect another at an angle of less than 60 degrees.

(B) Multiple Intersections. Multiple intersections involving junction of more than two streets shall be prohibited. Where this proves impossible, such intersections shall be designed with extreme care for both pedestrian and vehicular safety. 

(C) Street Jogs. Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out either directly opposite one another or with a minimum offset of 125 feet between their center lines. 

(D) T-Intersections. Where practicable, for purposes of traffic safety, T-intersections should be used in residential areas. 

(E) Curb Radii. Minimum curb radii at street intersections shall be 15 feet for intersections involving only minor streets, 25 feet for intersections including other type streets, or such greater radius as is deemed necessary by the planning commission. The planning commission may permit comparable cut-offs or chords in place of rounded corners. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1355.07       Storm drainage.

(A) Grading. Lots shall be laid out and graded to provide that runoff from roofs, driveways and other impervious surfaces shall be towards the street, unless a watercourse abutting the rear of the lot shall be collected either in storm sewers or in the ditches and/or gutters along the street in short runs (400 feet) and shall then be diverted from the street surface into storm sewers or natural watercourses. Streets should be located away from watercourses unless storm sewers are to be installed. Subdivision and development of an area increases and concentrates the runoff of storm water from the area. Subdividers are warned that such increase may cause flood or erosion damage to undeveloped properties lying downstream. Storm drainage channels opening on unimproved land shall empty into natural watercourses, unless suitable agreement is reached with the owner of the downstream property for other methods of handling. In any instance, the disposal of storm drainage downstream shall be satisfactory to the city engineer. 

(B) Bridges or Culverts. Bridges or culverts serving a drainage area of more than one-half a square mile shall be approved by the Pennsylvania State Water and Power Resources Board. 

(C) Design of Ditches and Gutters. Subdivisions should be so designed that length of flow of water in a gutter or roadside ditch shall not exceed 400 feet. Runs exceeding this maximum shall be put in storm sewers or diverted to natural drainageways. All enclosed drainage courses shall be designed with sufficient grade to create a cleansing velocity of five feet per second, except that a minimum cleansing velocity of three feet per second may be permitted where a greater grade cannot be achieved. Water in gutters and ditches shall not be allowed to flow over intersecting streets, but shall be placed in adequate culverts. Where roadside ditches are permitted for runs of more than 300 feet or where subgrade drainage is necessary, the bottom of such ditch shall be below the subgrade and approximately 18 inches below the crown of the finished street grade. Ditches shall be V-shaped or parabolic, with sides sloping at approximately one inch vertical to three inches horizontal, except where other cross section plan is authorized. Suitable headwalls, endwalls, ditch seeding or sodding and other procedures or devices to prevent erosion shall be designed where necessary. 

(D) Design of Storm Sewers. Storm sewers shall have a minimum diameter of 12 inches and a minimum grade of 0.5 percent. Manholes shall not be more than 300 feet apart where pipe sizes of 24 inches or less are used, and not more than 450 feet apart where larger sizes are installed. When approved by the city engineer, inlets may be substituted for manholes. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1355.08       Blocks.

(A) Maximum and Minimum Length. As far as practicable, blocks should have a maximum length of 1,600 feet and a minimum length of 500 feet. 

(B) Required Depth. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two tiers of lots, except where reversed frontage lots bordering an arterial street are used. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1355.09       Lots.

(A) Conformity with Zoning Ordinance and Health Regulations. Lot dimensions and sizes shall not be less than specified by provisions of the municipal zoning ordinance, where in effect. 

(B) Setback Building Lines. The minimum setback building lines (restrictive lines) shall be controlled by the provisions of the zoning ordinance, where in effect. Where no municipal zoning ordinance exists, there shall be a minimum setback of 25 feet on minor streets and 35 feet on collector or arterial streets. For lots to be used for business or industrial purposes, the minimum setback shall be 15 feet. 

(C) Side Lot Lines. Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles or radial to the street line of which the lot faces. 

(D) Access to Public Street. Every lot shall abut on a public street, other than an alley, or an officially approved publicly owned cul-de-sac. 

(E) Corner Lots. Corner lots for residential use shall be increased in size whenever necessary, so as to provide that any building placed thereon shall conform to the setback building line as required for each street. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1355.10       Sidewalks.

All sidewalks, where provided in any residential development, shall be in the right-of-way, at least six feet wide, and in any other development eight feet wide and at least one and one-half feet from the lot line. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1355.11       Alleys.

(A) Location. Alleys shall be prohibited in residential developments. They may be provided in business or industrial districts to provide access to off-street parking, loading and unloading facilities. An alley terminating in a permanent barrier shall not be approved unless a turning area having a minimum radius of 35 feet at the right-of-way line at the dead-end shall be provided. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1355.12       Easements.

(A) Utility Easements. Easements with a minimum width of 10 feet shall be provided as necessary for utilities. 

(B) Drainage. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse and of such width (generally 20 feet) as shall be adequate to preserve natural drainage and provide sufficient width for maintenance. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1355.13       Parks, playgrounds and other community facilities.

Due consideration should be given to the allocation of suitable areas for schools, churches, parks, playgrounds and other community facilities to be dedicated for public use or reserved for the common use of all property owners within the proposed subdivision by covenants in the deeds. In the interest of the public welfare, at least five percent of the area of every subdivision, exclusive of streets, should be set aside for recreational purposes. Where the tract contains less than 40 acres, such reservation for open space shall be combined, wherever possible, with similar reservations in adjoining tracts. Such recreation areas and facilities shall be located in a manner to best serve the public, likely to use the same, and to utilize to the greatest degree any topographical features. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


Article 1357       PLAN REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

1357.01  Preliminary plat.

1357.02  Final plat.

1357.03  Offer of dedication may be noted on final plat.

1357.04  Streets, parks and other improvements private until dedicated or condemned.


1357.01       Preliminary plat.

Each subdivider shall submit to the city clerk for transmittal to the planning commission a preliminary plat, together with a completed application for approval. Each application for approval of any preliminary plat shall be accompanied by one inked or inked (existing) and pencil (proposed) drawing on tracing cloth and four legible black and white copies. If the subdivision is located outside the city limits, one black and white copy shall also be given to the municipality in which the subdivision is located. The remaining copies shall be filed by the city. A preliminary plat shall have a horizontal scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch, a vertical scale of not more than 40 feet to the inch, and an overall sheet size of 24 inches by 36 inches. Separate sheets shall be numbered to show their relation to the total sheets. The preliminary plat shall show or be accompanied by the following information: 

(A) Tract boundary lines: bearings and distances.

(B) Easements: (existing) location, width and purpose. 

(C) Streets on and adjacent to the tract: (existing) name and right-of-way width and location; type, width and elevation of surfacing; any legally established center line elevations; walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, etc. 

(D) Utilities on and adjacent to the tract: (existing) location, size and invert elevation of sanitary, storm and combined sewers; location and size of water mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles and street lights; if water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract, the direction and distance to; and size of nearest ones, including invert elevation of sewers. 

(E) Ground elevations on the tract: (existing) based on U.S.G.S. datum plane or one approved by the city engineer; for land that slopes less than two percent, spot elevations at all breaks in grade along all drainage channels or swales, and at selected points, not more than 100 feet apart in all directions; for land that slopes more than two percent, either contours with an interval of not more than five feet if ground slope is regular, or not more than two feet if ground slope is irregular. 

(F) Subsurface conditions on the tract: (if required by the planning commission), location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and ground water conditions; depth to ground water unless test pits are dry at a depth of five feet; location and results of solid percolation tests, if individual sewage disposal systems are proposed. 

(G) Other conditions on the tract: watercourses, marshes, rock outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot or more in diameter, houses, barns, shacks and other significant features. 

(H) Other conditions on adjacent land: approximate direction and gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls; character and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent unplatted land; for adjacent platted land, refer to the subdivision plat by name, recordation date and number, and show approximate percent built-up, typical lot size and dwelling type. 

(I) Zoning district boundaries: if any on or within 300 feet of the tract. 

(J) Public improvements: highway or other major improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract. 

(K) Key map (on the plat): including proposed street system of any adjoining land owned by subdivider. 

(L) Streets: (proposed) names; right-of-way and roadway widths; approximate grades and gradients; cross sections; profiles; similar data for alleys, if any; preliminary design of bridges or culverts, if any. 

(M) Other rights-of-way or easements: (proposed) location, width and purpose, including street extensions as are necessary to provide adequate street connections to adjacent land. 

(N) Location of utilities: (proposed) including sizes and grades.

(O) Lot lines, lot numbers and block numbers.

(P) Sites: (if any) for multiple-family dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of one-family detached dwellings. 

(Q) Sites: (if any) reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, or other public uses. 

(R) Minimum setback building lines. 

(S) Site data: including number of residential lots, typical lot size and acres in parks, etc. 

(T) Title and certificates: title under which proposed subdivision is to be recorded, with names and addresses of owner(s) and subdivider(s), notation stating acreage, scale, north arrow, datum, bench marks, certification and seal of professional engineer or land surveyor, date of survey. 

(U) Approval certificates: places for signatures of chairman and secretary of the planning commission and date of conditional approval by the planning commission; place for the certificate of the city engineer. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1357.02       Final plat.

Each subdivider shall submit to the city clerk for transmittal to the planning commission a final plat together with a completed application for approval. Each application for approval of any final plat shall be accompanied by two (three for a subdivision located outside the city limits) inked drawings on tracing cloth and four legible black and white copies. If the subdivision is located outside the city limits, one black and white copy shall also be given to the municipality in which the subdivision is located. One inked drawing on tracing cloth and the remaining black and white copies shall be filed by the city. A final plat shall have a horizontal scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch, a vertical scale of not more than 40 feet to the inch, an overall sheet size of 24 inches by 36 inches, and separate sheets shall be numbered to show their relation to the total sheets. For large subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted for approval in contiguous sections. The final plat shall show the following information: 

(A) Primary control points and datum plane: to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, elevations and similar data are referred. 

(B) Lines, dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, radii, arcs, central angles: tract boundary, easements, rights-of-way, lots, other sites, curves (dimensions in feet and hundredths of feet and angles in degrees and minutes). 

(C) Streets: names, cross sections and profiles. 

(D) Easements: location and purpose. 

(E) Utilities: cross sections and profiles (including inlets, manholes and culverts). 

(F) Lots: numbers, block numbers and size of each lot in square feet or acreage. 

(G) Sites other than residential lots: name, purpose and size in square feet or acreage. 

(H) Minimum setback building lines: lots and other sites. 

(I) Monuments: location and description.

(J) Adjoining unplatted land: names of record owners as it appears in the county courthouse. 

(K) Adjoining platted land: reference by record name, date and number as it appears in the county courthouse. 

(L) Key map.

(M) Titles and certificates: title under which the subdivision is to be recorded; municipality in which the subdivision is located; names and addresses of owner(s) and subdivider(s); notarized affidavit of the applicant that he is the recorded owner(s) of the plat and he approves the plat; scale, north arrow; name, address and certification of the professional engineer or land surveyor; date of the survey. 

(N) Approval certificates: if the subdivision is within the city, a certificate by the city engineer that either the subdivider has installed all the improvements required by the requirements of the land subdivision regulations or a proper completion guarantee has been posted which is available to the city, and in sufficient amount to assure the completion of all required improvements or a proposed method for the installation of required improvements in accordance with Act 247 (The Municipalities Planning Code); place for the signatures of the chairman and secretary of the planning commission and date approved by the planning commission; place for the signatures of the chief officer and attesting officer of the legislative body in which the subdivision is located and the resolution number and date of final approval; place for the certificate of the city engineer. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1357.03       Offer of dedication may be noted on final plat.

Streets, parks and other public improvements shown on a subdivision plan to be recorded may be offered for dedication to the municipality by formal notation thereof on the plan, or the owner may note on the plan that such improvements have not been offered for dedication to the municipality. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1357.04       Streets, parks and other improvements private until dedicated or condemned.

Every street, park or other improvement shown on a subdivision plan that is recorded, as provided herein, shall be deemed to be a private street, park or improvement until such time as the same has been offered for dedication to the municipality and accepted by council, or until it has been condemned for use as a public street, park or other improvement, or until the proper authorities of the municipality shall have made actual appropriation of the same by acceptance, entry, use or improvement. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


Article 1359       PLAN PROCESSING REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

1359.01  Procedure – Preliminary plat.

1359.02  Procedure – Final plat.

1359.03  Where legislative body refuses approval.

1359.04  Recording of final plat.

1359.05  Recorded final plat becomes part of official map.


1359.01       Procedure – Preliminary plat.

(A) When Preliminary Plat is Required. A preliminary plat shall be required for any land proposed to be subdivided as shall be termed a subdivision as defined in MMC 1353.14. 

(B) Submission. The preliminary plat, together with the necessary completed written application form and an application fee of $15.00, shall be filed with the city clerk at least 30 days before the meeting of the planning commission at which it is to be considered. If no meeting is held by the planning commission within 30 days from the date of application, the subdivider may apply directly to the legislative body of the municipality in which the subdivision is located for approval of his plat. 

(C) Action by City Engineer. The city clerk, upon receipt of the preliminary plat, shall transmit it to the city engineer who shall determine that the proposed preliminary plat meets with the requirements of MMC 1357.01, and if he so finds, he shall sign the certification as to form and content as provided for his signature on the plat. This certification shall not bind the other municipal officials as to approval of the plat. The city engineer shall then submit the plat to the planning commission at its next meeting. If any township, regional or county planning commission shall be interpreted to have jurisdiction on subdivision review, the city engineer shall transmit two copies of the preliminary plat to the appropriate commission for review and recommendation and return of one copy with their approval or disapproval and any conditions determined attached thereto. 

(D) Action by Planning Commission. Any township, regional or county planning commission which has jurisdiction on subdivision review shall transmit its report to the planning commission within 30 days from the date of submission of the preliminary plat to it, or in the case of a township planning commission, the subdivider shall submit the preliminary plat to the township planning commission after action by the city planning commission. Within 60 days from the date of the first planning commission meeting at which the preliminary plat was considered and pending report, if any, of any township, regional or county planning commission, the planning commission shall act thereon as submitted or modified, and if approved, the planning commission shall express its approval by resolution as conditional approval and state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved shall express its disapproval by resolution and its reasons therefor. The action of the planning commission shall be noted on the one drawing on tracing cloth, and the remaining black and white copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. The approved drawing on tracing cloth shall be returned to the subdivider. 

(E) Expiration of Approval. Conditional approval of any preliminary plat by the planning commission shall be effective for one year only, after the expiration of which such approval shall be considered canceled and rescinded, unless extended in writing by the planning commission. 

(F) Conditional Approval Revocable. Conditional approval of the preliminary plat is revocable and shall not constitute acceptance of the plat of the proposed subdivision. It is to be considered only as approval of the design, with the understanding that the legislative body of the municipality in which the subdivision is located and/or the municipal engineer may examine the grades of streets, the types of improvements, the layout of drainage and sewerage system and the water distribution system as proposed, and may modify any engineering or construction details submitted by the subdivider, whenever required for the protection of the public interest. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1359.02       Procedure – Final plat.

(A) When Final Plat is Required. Within one year of conditional approval of a preliminary plat by the planning commission, a final plat shall be submitted to the planning commission. 

(B) Submission. The final plat, together with the necessary completed written application form and a fee of $10.00, shall be filed with the city clerk at least 30 days before the meeting of the planning commission at which it is to be considered. 

(C) Action by City Engineer. The city clerk shall transmit the final plat to the city engineer, who before accepting the final plat shall do the following: 

(1) Determine if the conditions of approval by the planning commission for the preliminary plat have been complied with. 

(2) Determine that the proposed final plat meets with the requirements of MMC 1357.02, and if he so finds, he shall sign the certificate as to form and content as provided for his signature on the plat. 

(3) If the subdivision is located within the city limits, determine the status of required improvements, and if he approves those installed, he shall sign the certificate as to status of required improvements. 

(D) Action by the Planning Commission. Following a review of the final plat and within 30 days of the acceptance by the city engineer of the plat, the planning commission shall express its approval by resolution or its disapproval by resolution and its reasons therefor. Upon approval, the planning commission shall recommend the final plat for approval by the legislative body of the municipality in which the subdivision is located. The action of the planning commission shall be noted on the two (three, if the subdivision is located outside the city limits) drawings on tracing cloth of the final plat. 

(E) Submission to the Legislative Body. The approved final plat shall forthwith be submitted to the city clerk or Township Secretary of the municipality in which the subdivision is located for submission to the next meeting of the legislative body. 

(F) Action by the Legislative Body. The city council, before acting on any final plat within the city limits, may arrange for a public hearing thereon after giving such notice as the legislative body may deem desirable in each case. The city council, for a subdivision within the city limits, shall take action by the second regular meeting after receipt by the city clerk of the final plat or after any public hearing held on the final plat. The action of the city council shall be by resolution, which resolution shall include approval of the final plat for recording and acceptance of the proper completion guarantee, if any is required. Upon approval, the action of council shall be noted on the two drawings on tracing cloth of the final plat and referenced, one copy of which shall be returned to the subdivider. If the city council disapproves the final plat, they shall indicate such disapproval by resolution stating their reasons therefor. For a subdivision located outside the city limits, the action by the legislative body shall be as set forth in the municipal code governing the particular subdivision. The action of the legislative body shall be noted on the three drawings on tracing cloth of the final plat and referenced, one copy of which shall be returned to the subdivider and one copy to the city clerk. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1359.03       Where legislative body refuses approval.

In any case where the legislative body disapproves a final plat, any person aggrieved thereby may, within 30 days thereafter, appeal therefrom by petition to the Court of Quarter Sessions of the County of Crawford, Pennsylvania, which court shall hear the matter de novo and after hearing, enter a decree affirming, reversing or modifying the action of the legislative body as may appear just in the premises. The court shall designate the manner in which notices of the hearing of any such appeal shall be given to all parties interested. The decision of the court shall be final. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1359.04       Recording of final plat.

The action of council for any subdivision located within the city limits or of the court on appeal in approving any final plat and an approved duplicate copy of any such final plat shall, within 30 days, be recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of Crawford County, Pennsylvania. Within 10 days after the recording of the final plat, the owner shall notify the city clerk for a subdivision located within the city limits, in writing, that the final plat was duly recorded. The notification for a subdivision located outside the city limits shall be as set forth in the municipal code governing the particular political subdivision and/or as determined by the legislative body of the particular political subdivision. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1359.05       Recorded final plat becomes part of official map.

After a final plat has been duly recorded, the streets, parks and other public improvements shown thereon shall be considered to be a part of the official map of the municipality. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


Article 1361       IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

1361.01  Monuments.

1361.02  Required improvements within the city limits.

1361.03  Required improvements outside the city limits.

1361.04  Notification to and inspection by city inspectors.


1361.01       Monuments.

Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points of curves in streets and at such intermediate points as shall be necessary to re-establish the ground survey of the tract or blocks included in the tract. The monuments shall be of the permanent type and shall be constructed of concrete at least six inches on the top, at least 36 inches long, at least 30 inches below ground and containing an imbedded brass plate on the top. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1361.02       Required improvements within the city limits.

(A) Standards and Specifications. The standards and specifications for each general type of development shall be as follows: 

(1) For one-family detached dwellings, improvements shall be in accordance with the following schedule. 

(2) For commercial, industrial and other types, improvements shall be determined by the planning commission with the advice of the city engineer. 

(B) Schedule of Required Utilities and Street Improvements. 

(1) Public sanitary sewer: per plans approved by the city engineer.

(2) Grading and center line gradients: per plans and profiles approved by the city engineer. 

(3) Street sub-base in cartway: six inches bank gravel, per data sheet prepared by city engineer. 

(4) Street name signs: at all intersections, per data sheet prepared by city engineer. 

(C) Other Improvements. The city council may require any other improvement construction requirements that are in keeping with the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1361.03       Required improvements outside the city limits.

Improvements for subdivisions located outside the city limits shall be provided in accordance with the standards and specifications of the land subdivision regulations and with those of the municipality in which the subdivision is located and shall be installed, where and when specified by the legislative body of that municipality. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1361.04       Notification to and inspection by city inspectors.

For a subdivision located within the city limits, the city engineer shall be notified 48 hours before the contemplated installation or construction of any improvement. The city engineer and his staff shall have the power and duty to inspect all improvements and modify or alter the engineering details or construction in the field as they believe will be in the best interests of the general welfare of the city. For a subdivision located outside the city limits, notification and inspection shall be as determined by the legislative body of the municipality in which the subdivision is located. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


Article 1363       CONDITIONS OF ACCEPTANCE

Sections:

1363.01  Conditions of acceptance within the city limits.

1363.02  Acceptance by council.

1363.03  Conditions of acceptance outside the city limits.


1363.01       Conditions of acceptance within the city limits.

Every acceptance of public improvements by city council, as shown on any approved final plat, shall be subject to the following conditions: 

(A) The final plat for the subdivision on which the public improvement is to be accepted shall have been approved by the planning commission and council, or on appeal, the Court of Quarter Sessions of Crawford County, Pennsylvania, and duly recorded in the office of recorder of deeds of Crawford County, Pennsylvania, in accordance with the Act of Assembly requiring the recording.

(B) The public improvement shall have been offered for dedication to council, which deed for dedication shall have been approved as to legal form and adequacy by the city solicitor, together with a fee of $10.00 to cover any legal or engineering expense incurred by council in the preparation of documents for inspection of or approval of any public improvement. 

(C) Any bridge, culvert, viaduct or railroad crossing shall have been approved, where required by Act 247 (The Municipalities Planning Code) or the Third Class City Code, by the appropriate state agency or in accordance with any other controlling Pennsylvania Act of Assembly. 

(D) All improvement construction requirements required by the requirements of the land subdivision regulations and other improvements, where specified by council before final approval of the final plat, shall have been installed in accordance with the standards and specifications of the city and have been certified as such by the city engineer, or a proper completion guarantee to cover all the improvements shall have been accepted by the city council or other suitable arrangements for the installation of the improvements have been accepted by the city council in accordance with Act 247 (The Municipalities Planning Code). 

(E) The owner shall agree in writing that all utilities to be installed will be installed before paving any street or before constructing any curb or sidewalk, or if these utilities have been installed, they were either installed before the paving of any street or construction of any curb or sidewalk, or if installed afterwards, the contractor or engineer responsible for the improvement shall certify in writing that the replaced base, grading and surface of the street are in accordance with the standards and specifications of the city. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1363.02       Acceptance by council.

The city shall not have any responsibility with respect to any street or other improvement, notwithstanding the use of the same by the public, unless the street or other improvement shall have been accepted by ordinance of the city council. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


1363.03       Conditions of acceptance outside the city limits.

Every acceptance of public improvements by the legislative body in which the subdivision is located as shown on any approved final plat shall be subject to the conditions of the municipal code governing the municipality and those conditions established by the legislative body of that municipality. (Ord. 2624, 1965)


Article 1365       

VARIANCES, AMENDMENT AND PENALTY

Sections:

1365.01  Variances.

1365.02  Amendment.

1365.03  Validity.

1365.04  Repealer.

1365.99  Penalty.


1365.01       Variances.

Where the city officials find that extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with the requirements of the land subdivision regulations, the planning commission may recommend and council may vary the requirements of the land subdivision regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided, that such variation shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the comprehensive general plan of the City of Meadville, Pennsylvania. (Ord. 2736 § 1, 1970) 


1365.02       Amendment.

The requirements of the land subdivision regulations may, from time to time, be supplemented, amended or repealed all or in part by the vote of the majority of the members of council and in accordance with the same process as required for the original adoption of the land subdivision regulations. (Ord. 2736 § 1, 1970) 


1365.03       Validity.

Should any article, section, subsection or requirement of the land subdivision regulations be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the land subdivision regulations as a whole or of any other part thereof. (Ord. 2736 § 1, 1970) 


1365.04       Repealer.

Any regulations, resolutions or ordinances, or part of same, inconsistent with the requirements of the land subdivision regulations, are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency. (Ord. 2736 § 1, 1970) 


1365.99       Penalty.

Any person, partnership or corporation who or which being the owner or agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall lay out, construct, open or dedicate any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other improvements for public use, travel or other purposes or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, or who sells, transfers or agrees or enters into an agreement to sell any land in a subdivision or land development whether by reference to or by other use of a plat of such subdivision or land development or otherwise, or erect any building thereon, unless and until a final plat has been prepared in full compliance with the provisions of these land subdivision regulations and has been recorded as provided herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof such person or the members of such partnership or the officers of such corporation, or the agent of any of them, responsible for such violation shall pay a fine not exceeding $100.00 per lot or parcel or per dwelling within each lot or parcel. All fines collected for such violations shall be paid over to the City of Meadville. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided. (Ord. 2736 § 1, 1970) 


Article 1370 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

1370.01    Authority.

1370.02    Intent.

1370.03    Applicability.

1370.04    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

1370.05    Warning and disclaimer of liability.


1370.01 Authority.

The ordinance codified in this title is adopted under authority of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, Act 166 of 1978, P.L. 851, found at 32 P.S. Section 679.101 et seq., as amended. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1370.02 Intent.

The intent of this title is to:

(a) Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.

(b) Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize flood damage.

(c) Minimize danger to public health and safety by protecting water supply and natural drainage.

(d) Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units and its residents, by preventing excessive or harmful development in areas subject to flooding.

(e) Comply with federal and state floodplain management regulatory requirements.

(f) Secure the availability of federal flood insurance for property within floodplain areas. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1370.03 Applicability.

The regulatory requirements of this title shall apply within all designated floodplain areas of the City of Meadville as identified on the Flood Insurance Study and Flood Insurance Rate Maps as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and referenced in MMC 1372.01. These regulations are applicable for all construction, development and use of lands within the designated floodplain areas. These regulations apply along with and in addition to all other applicable uniform construction code, zoning, subdivision and land development, storm water, and other regulations which are applicable to construction, development and use of land within these areas. The application of these regulations shall be coordinated with all other applicable regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or development anywhere within the City of Meadville unless a permit has been obtained from the floodplain administrator. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1370.04 Abrogation and greater restrictions.

The ordinance codified in this title supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this title, the more restrictive shall apply. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1370.05 Warning and disclaimer of liability.

The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this title is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This title does not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas or that land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.

This title shall not create liability on the part of the City of Meadville or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this title or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


Article 1371 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

1371.01    Designation of the floodplain administrator.

1371.02    Permits required.

1371.03    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.

1371.04    Application procedures and requirements.

1371.05    Review of application by others.

1371.06    Changes.

1371.07    Placards.

1371.08    Start of construction.

1371.09    Enforcement notice.

1371.10    Remedies.

1371.11    Civil penalty.

1371.12    Additional enforcement remedies.

1371.13    Fees.

1371.14    Appeals.


1371.01 Designation of the floodplain administrator.

This title shall be administered by the zoning administrator, also known as the floodplain administrator, and such deputies as may be specifically appointed by the city. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1371.02 Permits required.

A permit shall be required before any construction or development or use of land is undertaken within any floodplain area of the City of Meadville that is designated and identified under Article 1372 MMC. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1371.03 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.

(a) The floodplain administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances.

(b) Prior to the issuance of any permit, the floodplain administrator shall review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary government permits required by state and federal laws have been obtained or will be obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended); the U.S. Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 1344; the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code; Zoning; Subdivision and Land Development; and Stormwater Management Regulations. No permit shall be issued until this determination has been made.

(c) During the construction period, the floodplain administrator or other authorized official shall have the right and shall inspect premises as often as necessary to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and ordinances.

(d) The floodplain administrator shall have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour, to enforce the provisions of this title.

(e) In the event the floodplain administrator discovers that the work does not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the floodplain administrator shall revoke the permit and report such fact to the city for appropriate action.

(f) The floodplain administrator shall maintain all records associated with the requirements of this title, including, but not limited to, permitting, inspection and enforcement. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1371.04 Application procedures and requirements.

For any construction or development or use of land within any designated or identified floodplain area, an application with the following information must be completed and filed with the floodplain administrator.

(a) A permit application form which contains the following:

(1) Name and address of applicant.

(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed construction is to occur.

(3) Name and address of contractor.

(4) Site location including address.

(5) Listing of other permits required.

(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.

(b) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:

(1) North arrow, scale and date;

(2) Topographic contour lines, if available;

(3) The size and location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and other improvements on the site, including the location of any existing or proposed subdivision and development;

(4) The location of all existing streets, drives and other access ways; and

(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information which pertains to the floodway and the flow of water, including direction and velocities.

(c) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements within the designated floodplain area, drawn at suitable scale and showing the following:

(1) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;

(2) The elevation of the base flood;

(3) Supplemental information as may be necessary under the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code and applicable regulations.

(d) The following data and documentation:

(1) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with a base flood elevation;

(2) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing measures and corresponding elevations;

(3) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed development within a special flood hazard area, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point;

(4) When required by the Uniform Construction Code, a document, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, which states that the proposed construction or development has been adequately designed to withstand the pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with the floods.

Such statement shall include a description of the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the development.

(5) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with MMC 1373.03 and 1373.04, including the amount, location and purpose of any materials or substances referred to in MMC 1373.03(f) and 1373.04 which are intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise maintained on site, and a description of the safeguards incorporated into the design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed in MMC 1373.04 during a base flood.

(6) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental Protection’s “Planning Module for Land Development.”

(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control.

(e) The application shall provide all information in sufficient detail and clarity to enable the floodplain administrator to determine that:

(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances;

(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;

(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards;

(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement;

(5) Building materials are flood resistant;

(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;

(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities have been designated and/or located to prevent water entry or accumulation.

(f) Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the City of Meadville, as established by resolution of the City of Meadville. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1371.05 Review of application by others.

A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval may be submitted by the floodplain administrator to any other appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g., planning commission, county conservation district, adjacent municipalities, municipal engineer, etc.) for review and comment. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1371.06 Changes.

After the issuance of a permit by the floodplain administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit, or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the application without the written consent or approval of the floodplain administrator. Requests for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant to the floodplain administrator for consideration. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1371.07 Placards.

In addition to the permit, the floodplain administrator shall issue a placard which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its issuance, and be signed by the floodplain administrator. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1371.08 Start of construction.

Work on the proposed construction and/or development shall begin within 180 days after the date of issuance of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the permit, at which time the permit shall expire, unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the floodplain administrator. Construction and/or development shall be considered to have started with the preparation of land, land clearing, grading, filling, excavation of basement, footings, piers, or foundations, erection of temporary forms, the installation of piling under proposed subsurface footings, or the installation of sewer, gas and water pipes, or electrical or other service lines from the street.

Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request, which sets forth reasonable cause for the extension, is submitted by the applicant. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1371.09 Enforcement notice.

Whenever the floodplain administrator or other authorized municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this title, or any conditions pertaining to the issuance of the permit, the floodplain administrator shall give written notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall state the following:

(a) The name and owner of record and any other responsible person;

(b) The location of the property in violation;

(c) The specific violation, with a description of the requirements which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions of this title;

(d) The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced and the date before which the steps must be completed, not to exceed 30 days;

(e) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the board of appeals within a prescribed period of time, in accordance with procedures set forth in this title;

(f) That failure to comply within the time specified, unless extended by appeal, constitutes a violation with possible sanctions clearly described. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1371.10 Remedies.

If the violation has not been corrected and if no appeal is taken from the enforcement notice within 30 days, the city council or floodplain administrator may seek any remedy provided by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code or amendment thereto, or otherwise permitted by law, including a civil enforcement proceeding before the district magistrate to obtain a civil penalty as provided in MMC 1371.11. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1371.11 Civil penalty.

Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the violation of this title shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the city, pay a judgment of not more than $500.00, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the district magistrate. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the city may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the district magistrate determining that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this title to have believed that there was no such violation; in which event, there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the district magistrate. Each day thereafter a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees collected for the violation of this title shall be paid over to the city. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant any person or entity other than the city and its floodplain administrator the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1371.12 Additional enforcement remedies.

In case any building, structure or land is, or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in violation of this title, the city, in addition to other remedies, may institute in its name any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1371.13 Fees.

The city may, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees for permits, appeals, and other matters pertaining to the administration of this title. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1371.14 Appeals.

(a) Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the floodplain administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this title may appeal to the board of appeals. Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or action of the floodplain administrator.

(b) The board of appeals shall be the zoning hearing board.

(c) Upon receipt of such appeal, the board shall set a time and place, within not less than 10 and not more than 60 days, for the purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place at which the appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.

(d) The board shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 908 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. Section 10908, as amended. All hearings shall be subject to the requirements of the Pennsylvania Sunshine Law, 65 PA C.S. Sections 701 through 716.

(e) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the board of appeals may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Crawford County as provided by the laws of this Commonwealth, including the Municipalities Planning Code and the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


Article 1372 IDENTIFICATION OF FLOODPLAIN AREAS

Sections:

1372.01    Identification.

1372.02    Description and special requirements of identified floodplain areas.

1372.03    Changes in identification of area.

1372.04    Boundary disputes.


1372.01 Identification.

The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of the City of Meadville, classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated August 16, 2012, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study.

The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and amendments are hereby adopted by the City of Meadville and declared to be a part of this title. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1372.02 Description and special requirements of identified floodplain areas.

The floodplain areas shall consist of the following specific areas and shown and identified on the applicable FIRM and FIS and construction and development shall be subject to these restrictions set forth for each specified area as follows:

(a) Floodway Area.

(1) Description: the area identified as floodway in the FIS which represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more than one foot at any point.

This term shall also include floodway areas which have been identified in other available studies or sources of information for those special floodplain areas where no floodway has been identified in the FIS.

(2) Special Requirements.

(i) Any encroachment that would cause any increase in flood heights shall be prohibited.

(ii) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.

(b) Special Floodplain Area/AE Area/District.

(1) Description: the areas identified as zones AE and A1-30 in the FIS which are subject to inundation by the one-percent-annual-chance flood event determined by detailed methods and have base flood elevations (BFEs) shown.

(2) Special Requirements.

(i) No new construction or development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection regional office.

(ii) In special floodplain areas without a designated floodway, no new development shall be permitted unless it can be demonstrated that the cumulative effect of all past and projected development will not increase the BFE by more than one foot.

(c) Approximate Floodplain Area/A Area/District.

(1) Description: the areas identified as zone A in the FIS which are subject to inundation by the one-percent-annual-chance flood event determined using approximate methodologies. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no BFEs or flood depths are shown.

(2) Special Requirements.

(i) No new construction or development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection regional office.

(ii) When available, information from other federal, state and other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the BFE, as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no other information is available, the BFE shall be determined by using a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site in question.

In lieu of the above, the city may require the applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the city.

(d) Shallow Flooding Area.

(1) Description: the areas identified as zones AO and AH in the FIS. These areas are subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance shallow flooding where average depths are between one and three feet.

(2) Special requirements: establish drainage paths to guide floodwaters around and away from structures on slopes. (Ord. 3751 § 1, 2016; Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1372.03 Changes in identification of area.

The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any change, approval must be obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1372.04 Boundary disputes.

Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be made by the floodplain administrator in consultation with the county planning commission. Any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the board of appeals. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


Article 1373 TECHNICAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

1373.01    General.

1373.02    Elevation and floodproofing requirements.

1373.03    Design and construction standards.

1373.04    Development which may endanger human life.

1373.05    Special requirements for subdivisions.

1373.06    Special requirements for manufactured homes.

1373.07    Special requirements for recreational vehicles.


1373.01 General.

(a) Alteration or Relocation of Watercourse.

(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action have been notified by the city, and until all required permits or approvals have been first obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.

(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity will not reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse in any way.

(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.

(b) Technical or scientific data shall be submitted to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR) within six months of the completion of any new construction, development or other activity resulting in changes in the BFE.

(c) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development shall be permitted that would cause any increase in the base flood elevation.

(d) Within any AE area/district, no new construction or development shall be allowed unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.

(e) Within any identified floodplain area, no new construction or development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection regional office.

(f) Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in this title and any other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 3751 § 2, 2016; Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1373.02 Elevation and floodproofing requirements.

(a) Residential Structures.

(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation, and shall meet the design and construction standards, specifications and applicable provisions of the Uniform Construction Code as adopted under the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, as amended.

(2) In AO zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the FIRM.

(3) In A zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with the following:

When available, information from other federal, state and other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the BFE, as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no other information is available, the BFE shall be determined by using a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site in question. In lieu of the above, the city may require the applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the city.

(b) Nonresidential Structures.

(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH zones, any new construction or substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:

(i) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and

(ii) Has structural components with the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.

(2) In AO zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have their lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth number specified on the FIRM.

(3) In A zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with the following: 

(4) When available, information from other federal, state and other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the BFE, as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no other information is available, the BFE shall be determined by using a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site in question. In lieu of the above, the city may require the applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the city.

(5) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards contained in the publication entitled “Flood-Proofing Regulations” published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and methods of construction conform to the above-referenced standards.

(c) Space Below the Lowest Floor.

(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements) which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access or incidental storage in an area other than a basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term “fully enclosed space” also includes crawl spaces.

(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

(i) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.

(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.

(iii) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

(d) Accessory Structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, if the structure meets the following requirements:

(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or storage of tools, material and equipment related to the principal use or activity.

(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.

(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.

(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.

(5) Power lines, wiring and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory flood elevation.

(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.

(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.

(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

(i) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.

(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.

(iii) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. (Ord. 3751 § 3, 2016; Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1373.03 Design and construction standards.

The following minimum standards apply for all construction and development proposed within any identified floodplain area:

(a) Fill. If fill is used, it shall:

(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all points;

(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only – sanitary landfills shall not be permitted;

(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring or settling;

(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet, unless substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and approved by, the floodplain administrator; and

(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties.

(b) Drainage Facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of storm water runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.

(c) Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities and Systems.

(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters. 

(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters. 

(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a flood.

(4) The design and construction of provisions of the UCC and FEMA No. 348, “Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damages” and the International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.

(d) Other Utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.

(e) Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.

(f) Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or in times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal or plant life and not listed in MMC 1373.04, Development which may endanger human life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation and/or floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.

(g) Placement of Buildings and Structures. All buildings and structures shall be designed, located and constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.

(h) Anchoring.

(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement.

(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks and other similar objects or components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.

(i) Floors, Walls and Ceilings.

(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural damage to the building.

(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a “marine” or “water-resistant” variety.

(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed of materials that are “water-resistant” and will withstand inundation.

(4) Windows, doors and other components at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be made of metal or other “water-resistant” material.

(j) Paints and Adhesives.

(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of “marine” or “water-resistant” quality.

(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a “marine” or “water-resistant” variety.

(3) All wooden components (doors, trims, cabinets, etc.) shall be finished with a “marine” or “water-resistant” paint or other finishing material. 

(k) Electrical Components.

(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation. 

(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be dropped from above.

(l) Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.

(m) Fuel Supply Systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration occurs.

(n) Uniform Construction Code Coordination. The Standards and Specifications of the Uniform Construction Code (herein referred to as the UCC) as adopted under the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act and applicable regulations of the Department of Labor and Industry, as amended, including, but not limited to, the following provisions, shall apply to the above and other sections and subsections of this title, to the extent that they are more restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of this title:

International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof:

Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, Appendix G, and revisions and supplements thereto.

International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof:

Sections R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix AE101, Appendix E, Appendix J, and revisions and supplements thereto.

Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry regulations found at 34 PA Code, Chapters 401 through 405, as amended. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1373.04 Development which may endanger human life.

(a) In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially improved structure which:

(1) Will be used for the production or storage of any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or

(2) Will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or

(3) Will involve the production, storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances;

shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are considered dangerous to human life:

• Acetone

• Ammonia

• Benzene

• Calcium carbide

• Carbon disulfide

• Celluloid

• Chlorine

• Hydrochloric acid

• Hydrocyanic acid

• Magnesium

• Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen

• Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)

• Phosphorus

• Potassium

• Sodium 

• Sulfur and sulfur products

• Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides)

• Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated.

(b) Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in subsection (a) of this section shall be prohibited.

(c) Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or substantially improved structure of the kind described in subsection (a) of this section shall be:

(1) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up to base flood elevation;

(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during the course of a base flood elevation.

Any such structure or part thereof that will be built below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing contained in the publication “Flood-Proofing Regulations” (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972 as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent watertight standard.

(d) Within any floodplain area, any new or substantially improved structure of the kind described in subsection (a) of this section shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection regional office. (Ord. 3751 § 4, 2016; Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1373.05 Special requirements for subdivisions.

All subdivision and land development proposals containing 50 lots or more, or five acres or more, in flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data is not available, shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1373.06 Special requirements for manufactured homes.

(a) Within any FW (floodway area), manufactured homes shall be prohibited.

(b) Within floodplain or special flood hazard areas, manufactured homes shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.

(c) Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:

(1) Placed on a permanent foundation;

(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above base flood elevation; and

(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.

(d) Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with the manufacturers’ installation instructions as provided by the manufacturer, the applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, or the requirements of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s “Permanent Foundations for Manufactured Housing,” 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, as applicable. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1373.07 Special requirements for recreational vehicles.

Recreational vehicles in zones A1-30, AH and AE must:

(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or

(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or

(c) Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in MMC 1371.04. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


Article 1374 PROHIBITED DEVELOPMENT AND ACTIVITIES

Sections:

1374.01    General.


1374.01 General.

In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following activities shall be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:

(a) The commencement of any of the following activities; or the construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following:

(1) Hospitals.

(2) Nursing homes.

(3) Jails or prisons.

(b) The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


Article 1375 EXISTING STRUCTURES IN IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREAS

Sections:

1375.01    Existing structures.


1375.01 Existing structures.

The provisions of this title do not require any changes or improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure in any identified floodplain area, the following standards and requirements apply:

(a) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the elevation of the base flood elevation. 

(b) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within any special flood hazard area that would, together with all other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.

(c) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50 percent or more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this title.

(d) The above activity shall also comply with the applicable provisions of the Uniform Construction Code. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


Article 1376 VARIANCES

Sections:

1376.01    Variance procedures and conditions.


1376.01 Variance procedures and conditions.

If compliance with any of the requirements of this title would result in an exceptional hardship to a builder, developer or landowner, the city may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of the requirements, in accordance with the following procedures and requirements:

(a) Requests for variances shall be considered by the city in accordance with the procedures contained in Section 910.2 of the Planning Code and the following:

(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or activity within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the BFE.

(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use or activity within any special flood hazard area that would, together with all other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.

(3) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation requirements involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other requirements pertaining specifically to development regulated by special permit or to development which may endanger human life (MMC 1373.04).

(b) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to provide relief.

(c) In granting any variance, the city shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this title.

(d) Whenever a variance is granted, the city shall notify the applicant in writing that:

(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.

(2) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.

(e) In reviewing any request for a variance, the city shall consider, at a minimum, the following:

(1) That there is good and sufficient cause.

(2) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant. 

(3) That the granting of the variance will:

(i) Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense;

(ii) Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances and regulations.

(f) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the City of Meadville. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to FEMA.

Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


Article 1377 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

1377.01    General.

1377.02    Specific definitions.


1377.01 General.

Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this title shall be interpreted so as to give this title its most reasonable application. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


1377.02 Specific definitions.

“Accessory use or structure” means a use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.

“Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100-year flood”).

“Base flood elevation (BFE)” means the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for zones AE, AH and A1-30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

“Basement” means any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all sides.

“Building” means a combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human habitation.

“City” means the City of Meadville, its council and duly authorized representatives.

“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities; filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.

“Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

“Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

“Flood” means a temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.

“Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

“Flood Insurance Study (FIS)” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

“Floodplain area” means a relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface waters from any source.

“Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.

“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

“Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

“Historic structures” means any structure that is:

(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior;

(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation that have been certified either:

(i) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or

(ii) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 

“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished, flood resistant, partially enclosed area used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and incidental storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered the lowest floor of a building; provided, that such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this title. 

“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.

“Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 

“Minor repair” means the replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof; the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support; the removal or change of any required means of egress; or the rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.

“New construction” means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after June 1, 1977, and includes any subsequent improvements thereto.

“New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

“Person” means an individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.

“Recreation vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

(1) Built on a single chassis;

(2) Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal projections;

(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck;

(4) Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.

“Regulatory flood elevation” means the base flood elevation (BFE).

“Repetitive loss” means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.

“Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99 or AH.

“Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The “actual start” means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the “actual start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

“Structure” means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.

“Subdivision” means the division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.

“Substantial damage” means damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent or more of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

“Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure, before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage” (or “repetitive loss” when a repetitive loss provision is used) regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

(2) Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

“Uniform Construction Code (UCC)” means the statewide building code adopted under the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act applicable to new construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality, a third-party or the Department of Labor and Industry.

“Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. (Ord. 3702 § 1, 2012)


PART 15 FIRE PREVENTION CODE

Articles:

1503    Fire Prevention Code

1504    Commercial Fire Inspection Program

1505    Disposition of Insurance Covering Fire-Damaged Structures

1507    Outdoor Burning


Article 1503 FIRE PREVENTION CODE

Sections:

1503.07    Response service fee.

1503.08    Extrication service fee.

1503.09    False alarm fee.


1503.07 Response service fee.

Whenever firefighters of the City of Meadville, in the course of responding to a fire alarm or other notification of fire, explosion, or other hazardous condition, unreel one or more hoses from any fire truck or vehicle owned by the city of Meadville, a service fee shall be assessed against the owner of the property damaged or affected by the fire, explosion, or other hazardous condition in accordance with a schedule of fees determined and set from time to time by the city manager and approved by resolution of the city council. The amount of the fee shall vary according to whether the property damaged or affected is vacant grassland or woodland, building or other structure, or motor vehicle. The fee shall include an additional charge for responding to any activity involving a fire, explosion, or other hazardous condition to persons or property by reason of the maintenance, handling, storage or use of hazardous or flammable substances and materials, or by reason of conducting processes which produce hazardous conditions, or by reason of installing equipment or facilities relating to such activities. (Ord. 3638 § 1, 2006)


1503.08 Extrication service fee.

Any individual requiring extrication from a vehicle by firefighters of the city of Meadville shall pay a service fee in accordance with a schedule of fees determined and set from time to time by the city manager and approved by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 3638 § 2, 2006)


1503.09 False alarm fee.

Any person responsible for falsely placing a fire alarm or otherwise falsely reporting a fire, explosion, or other hazardous condition to which firefighters of the city of Meadville respond shall pay a service fee in accordance with a schedule of fees determined and set from time to time by the city manager and approved by resolution of the city council. The amount of the fee shall vary in accordance with the number of false alarms placed by such person during a calendar year. (Ord. 3638 § 3, 2006)


Article 1504 COMMERCIAL FIRE INSPECTION PROGRAM

Sections:

1504.01    Purpose.

1504.02    Definitions.

1504.03    Periodic inspection.

1504.04    Subsequent inspections.

1504.05    Powers of inspection.

1504.06    Dual residential/commercial use structures.

1504.07    Duties of code enforcement officer.

1504.08    Search warrant.

1504.09    Inspection items/criteria.

1504.10    Results of inspection.

1504.11    Appeal procedures.

1504.12    Fees.

1504.13    Penalties.

1504.14    Nonexclusive remedies.

1504.15    Miscellaneous provisions.

1504.16    Rebuttable presumption.

1504.17    Severability.

1504.18    Conflicts.


1504.01 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this article and the policy of the City of Meadville, in order to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare of the residents and citizens of the City of Meadville, as well as the work force, regardless of residency, to establish rights and obligations of commercial building owners and tenants relating to the maintenance and upkeep of the commercial buildings and structures throughout the City of Meadville. It is the purpose and intent of this article to enforce the applicable building and fire codes as well as any other applicable law of the city and of the commonwealth which may affect the health, safety and welfare of those who may occupy or traverse through the said building or structure. Given the age, condition and ever-changing standards of building, fire and construction codes, it is the responsibility of the City of Meadville to attempt to ensure that any potential violations of the said laws and ordinances of the City of Meadville and commonwealth of Pennsylvania are effectively eliminated through the biennial inspection of the commercial buildings and structures within the city limits.

The purpose of this article is also to establish fees for inspections which will be used to supplement the general fund resources used to provide the enhanced level of inspection service and to authorize the code enforcement officers, and fire and building code officials to implement a program of safety reviews in order to effect the intent and purpose of this article. (Ord. 3771 § 1, 2018)


1504.02 Definitions.

The following words shall have their corresponding meanings for the purpose of this article, in addition to those which have already been defined in the zoning and uniform construction codes of the City of Meadville and/or any other applicable ordinance governing building code or fire inspections. In the event that any definition is inconsistent with the definitions set forth herein, these definitions shall govern:

“City” means the City of Meadville, county of Crawford, commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

“Code” means any code or ordinance adopted, enacted, and/or in effect in and for the City of Meadville, concerning fitness for habitation, tenancy, fire protection, zoning, or any other law or ordinance adopted within the City of Meadville. For purposes of the ordinance codified in this article, “code” specifically includes, but is not limited to, the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 Edition, as such code may be amended from time to time.

“Code enforcement officer” means the duly appointed building code official(s), code enforcement officer(s) and/or fire official(s) having charge of the Uniform Construction Code, the fire code, Property Maintenance Code or zoning code of the City of Meadville, and any assistants or deputies thereof.

“Commercial building” means (1) any structure, building or property that is not used or intended for use for residential occupancy; and/or (2) any area in a residential building containing more than 10 dwelling units that is not integral to, and/or a contiguous part of, a dwelling unit. Such areas include, but are not limited to, mechanical rooms, lobbies, hallways, community rooms, laundry rooms, and the exterior property. Building areas covered under tenant/owner common area maintenance (CAM) agreements shall not be considered part of a dwelling unit.

“Fire regulations/fire code” means the statutes and administrative rules adopted by the commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the City of Meadville and/or which may be adopted by the city council of the City of Meadville which are for the purpose of safeguarding life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling, and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use or occupancy of commercial buildings.

“IFC” means the International Fire Code, 2009 Edition, as such code may be amended from time to time.

“IFGC” means the International Fuel Gas Code, 2009 Edition, as such code may be amended from time to time.

“IPC” means the International Plumbing Code, 2009 Edition, as such code may be amended from time to time.

“IPMC” the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 Edition, as such code may be amended from time to time.

“NFPA” means the National Fire Protection Association.

“Owner” means one or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested all or part of the legal title to the premises, or commercial building, or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to the present use and enjoyment of the premises.

“Person” means a natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, limited partnership, trust or any other entity.

“Police” means the police department of the City of Meadville, or any properly authorized member or officer thereof, or any other law enforcement agency having jurisdiction within the City of Meadville.

“Tenant” means an individual or entity which occupies all or a portion of a commercial building, whether or not he or she is the owner thereof, with whom a legal interest and legal relationship with the landlord is established by a lease agreement of some nature or by the laws of the City of Meadville and/or the commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (Ord. 3771 § 1, 2018)


1504.03 Periodic inspection.

All commercial buildings located within the city limits of the City of Meadville, shall be subject to an inspection every two years by the code enforcement officers of the City of Meadville for the purpose of ensuring that no violations exist of the applicable codes of the City of Meadville. Code enforcement officers shall give notice to the property owner in advance of the scheduled inspection date. This commercial fire inspection program shall be preempted by state law and regulations which require that certain organizations be inspected on an annual basis. Nothing herein is intended to prevent an inspection, at any time, based on information or documentation received by the city alleging a code violation. (Ord. 3771 § 1, 2018)


1504.04 Subsequent inspections.

The code enforcement officers of the City of Meadville shall have the power and authorization to conduct subsequent inspections during the term of the same, in the event of any complaint or concern as registered by any tenant, patron, business invitee, or at the code enforcement officer’s own discretion, based upon reasonable concern for violations, public safety, public health and/or other valid reasons. (Ord. 3771 § 1, 2018)


1504.05 Powers of inspection.

All inspections by the code enforcement officers of the City of Meadville shall be conducted during normal business hours of the commercial building and/or at the time when the businesses and/or commercial tenants have their hours of operation. Where there is an emergency, the code enforcement officers shall be permitted to inspect the commercial building during the time of the said emergency for any violations which may be present.

The code enforcement officers shall identify themselves to the owner or manager, or duly authorized agent of the commercial building, if available; and to the owner or manager, or duly authorized agent, of the specific business which is or may be a tenant on the property. The code enforcement officers of the City of Meadville shall give reasonable notice of the date and time of the inspection. (Ord. 3771 § 1, 2018)


1504.06 Dual residential/commercial use structures.

For commercial buildings which also have residential units attached or contained within the said commercial building, only the commercial portions of the structure shall be subject to the inspection and certification requirements of this article. (Ord. 3771 § 1, 2018)


1504.07 Duties of code enforcement officer.

The code enforcement officers of the City of Meadville conducting the inspections of the commercial buildings shall be required to keep a list and detailed outline of the code violations which may be present during the said inspection. In the event that any violations exist, the code enforcement officers are granted the approval and the right to take whatever action is necessary under the applicable code in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Meadville and the owners, managers, tenants and patrons of the said commercial building. Such action(s) shall include, but not be limited to, temporary or permanent closure of the commercial building. In the event any party prohibits or prevents the code enforcement officer from performing his or her duty to inspect the commercial building, the entire structure, or a portion thereof, as deemed necessary by the code enforcement officer, shall be closed until the said inspection is permitted to occur and no violations that would warrant continued closure exist. (Ord. 3771 § 1, 2018)


1504.08 Search warrant.

Upon showing of probable cause that a violation of this article or any other ordinance or code of the City of Meadville has occurred, the code enforcement officers may apply to the magisterial district judge having jurisdiction in the City of Meadville for a search warrant to enter and inspect the commercial building. The costs of the same shall be borne by the individual or entity which prohibited the inspection. (Ord. 3771 § 1, 2018)


1504.09 Inspection items/criteria.

The code enforcement officers shall inspect the following items:

(1) Exterior Structure.

(a) General (IPMC 304.1). The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.

(b) Unsafe Conditions (IPMC 304.1.1). The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the International Building Code or the International Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings:

(i) The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength;

(ii) The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or load effects;

(iii) Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit state;

(iv) Siding and masonry joints including joints between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights are not maintained, weather resistant or water tight;

(v) Structural members that have evidence of deterioration or that are not capable of safely supporting all nominal loads and load effects;

(vi) Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings, are not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;

(vii) Exterior walls that are not anchored to supporting and supported elements or are not plumb and free of holes, cracks or breaks and loose or rotting materials, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;

(viii) Roofing or roofing components that have defects that admit rain, roof surfaces with inadequate drainage, or any portion of the roof framing that is not in good repair with signs of deterioration, fatigue or without proper anchorage and incapable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;

(ix) Flooring and flooring components with defects that affect serviceability or flooring components that show signs of deterioration or fatigue, are not properly anchored or are incapable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;

(x) Veneer, cornices, belt courses, corbels, trim, wall facings and similar decorative features not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;

(xi) Overhang extensions or projections including, but not limited to, trash chutes, canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;

(xii) Exterior stairs, decks, porches, balconies and all similar appurtenances attached thereto, including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; or

(xiii) Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and similar appurtenances not structurally sound or not properly anchored, or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects.

Exceptions: (1) When substantiated otherwise by an approved method. (2) Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by the code enforcement officer.

(c) Premises Identification (IPMC 304.3). Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm).

(d) Roofs and Drainage (IPMC 304.7). The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.

(e) Window, Skylight and Door Frames (IPMC 304.13). Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight.

(2) Interior Structure.

(a) General (IPMC 305.1). The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property.

(b) Unsafe Conditions (IPMC 305.1.1). The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the International Building Code or the International Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings:

(i) The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength;

(ii) The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls and columns to foundations, is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or load effects;

(iii) Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit state;

(iv) Structural members are incapable of supporting nominal loads and load effects;

(v) Stairs, landings, balconies and all similar walking surfaces, including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not properly anchored or are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;

(vi) Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings are not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects.

Exceptions: (1) When substantiated otherwise by an approved method. (2) Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by the code enforcement officer.

(c) Structural Members (IPMC 305.2). All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.

(d) Interior Surfaces (IPMC 305.3). All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected.

(e) Stairs and Walking Surfaces (IPMC 305.4). Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair.

(f) Handrails and Guards (IPMC 305.5). Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.

(g) Interior Doors (IPMC 305.6). Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware.

(3) Occupancy.

(a) Posting of Occupant Load (IFC 1004.3). Every room or space that is an assembly occupancy shall have the occupant load of the room or space posted in a conspicuous place, near the main exit or exit access doorway from the room or space. Posted signs shall be of an approved legible, permanent design and shall be maintained by the owner or authorized agent.

(4) Fire Extinguishers.

(a) Where Required (IFC 906.1). Portable fire extinguishers shall be installed in the following locations:

(i) In new and existing Group A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R-l, R-2, R-4 and S occupancies.

Exception: In new and existing Group A, B, and E occupancies equipped throughout with quickresponse sprinklers, portable fire extinguishers shall be required only in locations specified in subsections (4)(a)(ii) through (vi) of this section.

(ii) Within 30 feet (9,144 mm) of commercial cooking equipment.

(iii) In areas where flammable or combustible liquids are stored, used or dispensed.

(iv) On each floor of structures under construction, except Group R-3 occupancies, in accordance with Section 1415.1 of the IFC.

(v) Where required by the sections indicated in Table 906.1 of the IFC.

(vi) Special-hazard areas, including but not limited to laboratories, computer rooms and generator rooms, where required by the code enforcement officer.

(b) General Requirements (IFC 906.2). Portable fire extinguishers shall be selected, installed and maintained in accordance with this section and NFPA 10.

Exceptions: (1) The travel distance to reach an extinguisher shall not apply to the spectator seating portions of Group A-5 occupancies.

(c) Conspicuous Location (IFC 906.5). Portable fire extinguishers shall be located in conspicuous locations where they will be readily accessible and immediately available for use. These locations shall be along normal paths of travel, unless the fire code or code enforcement officer determines that the hazard posed indicates the need for placement away from normal paths of travel.

(d) Unobstructed and Unobscured (IFC 906.6). Portable fire extinguishers shall not be obstructed or obscured from view. In rooms or areas in which visual obstruction cannot be completely avoided, means shall be provided to indicate the locations of extinguishers.

(e) Hangers and Brackets (IFC 906.7). Handheld portable fire extinguishers, not housed in cabinets, shall be installed on the hangers or brackets supplied. Hangers or brackets shall be securely anchored to the mounting surface in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

(f) Maintenance inspection frequency for fire extinguishers shall be as specified by Chapter 10 NFPA, as published by NFPA.

(5) Means of Egress.

(a) General (IPMC 702.1). A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the International Fire Code.

(b) Locked Doors (IPMC 702.3). All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the International Building Code.

(c) Illumination Required (IFC 1006.1). The means of egress, including the exit discharge, shall be illuminated at all times the building space served by the means of egress is occupied.

Exceptions: (1) Occupancies in Group U. (2) Aisle accessways in Group A. (3) Dwelling units and sleeping units in Groups R-l, R-2 and R-3. (4) Sleeping units of Group I occupancies.

(6) Exits.

(a) Means of Egress (IFC 315.2.2). Combustible materials shall not be stored in exits or exit enclosures.

(7) Exit Signs.

(a) Where Required (IFC 1011.1). Exits and exit access doors shall be marked by an approved exit sign readily visible from any direction of egress travel. The path of egress travel to exits and within exits shall be marked by readily visible exit signs to clearly indicate the direction of egress travel in cases where the exit or the path of egress travel is not immediately visible to the occupants. Intervening means of egress doors within exits shall be marked by exit signs. Exit sign placement shall be such that no point in an exit access corridor or exit passageway is more than 100 feet, or the listed viewing distance for the sign, whichever is less, from the nearest visible exit sign.

Exceptions: (1) Exit signs are not required in rooms or areas that require only one exit or exit access. (2) Main exterior exit doors or gates that are obviously and clearly identifiable as exits need not have exit signs where approved by the building official. (3) Exit signs are not required in occupancies in Group U and individual sleeping units or dwelling units in Group R-1, R-2 or R-3. (4) Exit signs are not required in dayrooms, sleeping rooms or dormitories in occupancies in Group I-3. (5) In occupancies in Groups A-4 and A-5, exit signs are not required on the seating side of vomitories or openings into seating areas where exit signs are provided in the concourse that are readily apparent from the vomitories. Egress lighting is provided to identify each vomitory or opening within the seating area in an emergency.

(b) Illumination (IFC 1011.2). Exit signs shall be internally or externally illuminated.

(c) Power Source (IFC 101.5.3). Exit signs shall be illuminated at all times. To ensure continued illumination for a duration of not less than 90 minutes in case of primary power loss, the sign illumination means shall be connected to an emergency power system provided from storage batteries, unit equipment or an on-site generator. The installation of the emergency power system shall be in accordance with Chapter 27 of the International Building Code.

Exception: Approved exit sign illumination means that provide continuous illumination independent of external power sources for a duration of not less than 90 minutes, in case of primary power loss, are not required to be connected to an emergency electrical system.

(8) Electrical.

(a) Facilities Required (IPMC 604.1). Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section and Section 605 of the International Property Maintenance Code.

(b) Luminaires (IPMC 605.3). Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at least one electric luminaire.

(c) Abatement of Electrical Hazards (IFC 605.1). Identified electrical hazards shall be abated. Identified hazardous electrical conditions in permanent wiring shall be brought to the attention of the responsible code enforcement officer. Electrical wiring, devices, appliances and other equipment that is modified or damaged and constitutes an electrical shock or fire hazard shall not be used.

(d) Illumination (IFC 605.2). Illumination shall be provided for service equipment areas, motor control centers and electrical panelboards.

(e) Working Space and Clearance (IFC 605.3). A working space of not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in width, 36 inches (914 mm) in depth and 78 inches (1,981 mm) in height shall be provided in front of electrical service equipment. Where the electrical service equipment is wider than 30 inches (762 mm), the working space shall not be less than the width of the equipment. No storage of any materials shall be located within the designated working space.

Exceptions: (1) Where other dimensions are required or allowed by Chapter 70 NFPA. (2) Access openings into attics or under-floor areas which provide a minimum clear opening of 22 inches (559 mm) by 30 inches (762 mm).

(f) Labeling (IFC 605.3.1). Doors into electrical control panel rooms shall be marked with a plainly visible and legible sign stating ELECTRICAL ROOM or similar approved wording. The disconnecting means for each service, feeder or branch circuit originating on a switchboard or panelboard shall be legibly and durably marked to indicate its purpose unless such purpose is clearly evident.

(g) Multiplug Adapters (IFC 605.4). Multiplug adapters, such as cube adapters, unfused plug strips or any other device not complying with Chapter 70 NFPA shall be prohibited.

(h) Extension Cords (IFC 605.5). Extension cords and flexible cords shall not be a substitute for permanent wiring. Extension cords and flexible cords shall not be affixed to structures, extended through walls, ceilings or floors, or under doors or floor coverings, nor shall such cords be subject to environmental damage or physical impact. Extension cords shall be used only with portable appliances.

(i) Unapproved Conditions (IFC 605.6). Open junction boxes and open-wiring splices shall be prohibited. Approved covers shall be provided for all switch and electrical outlet boxes.

(j) Power Supply (IFC 605.4.2). Relocatable power taps shall be directly connected to a permanently installed receptacle.

(k) Portable, Electric Space Heaters (IFC 605.10). Where not prohibited by other sections of this code, portable, electric space heaters shall be permitted to be used in all occupancies other than Group I-2 and in accordance with Sections 605.10.1 through 605.10.4.

(i) 605.10.1 Listed and labeled. Only listed and labeled portable, electric space heaters shall be used.

(ii) 605.10.2 Power supply. Portable, electric space heaters shall be plugged directly into an approved receptacle.

(iii) 605.10.3 Extension cords. Portable, electric space heaters shall not be plugged into extension cords.

(iv) 605.10.4 Prohibited areas. Portable, electric space heaters shall not be operated within three feet (914 mm) of any combustible materials. Portable, electric space heaters shall be operated only in locations for which they are listed.

(9) Emergency and Standby Power Systems.

(a) Where Required (IFC 604.2). Emergency and standby power systems shall be provided where required by Sections 604.2.1 through 604.2.18.4 of the International Fire Code.

(b) Maintenance (IFC 604.3). Emergency and standby power systems shall be maintained in accordance with Chapters 110 and 111 NFPA such that the system is capable of supplying service within the time specified for the type and duration required.

(c) Schedule (IFC 604.3.1). Inspection, testing and maintenance of emergency and standby power systems shall be in accordance with an approved schedule established upon completion and approval of the system installation.

(d) Written Record (IFC 604.3.2). Written records of the inspection, testing and maintenance of emergency and standby power systems shall include the date of service, name of the servicing technician, a summary of conditions noted and a detailed description of any conditions requiring correction and what corrective action was taken. Such records shall be kept on the premises served by the emergency or standby power system and be available for inspection by the code enforcement officer.

(10) Fire Protection System.

(a) General (IPMC 704.1). All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the International Fire Code.

(b) Inspection (IFC 901.6). Fire detection, alarm and extinguishing systems shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times and shall be replaced or repaired where defective. Nonrequired fire protection systems and equipment shall be inspected, tested and maintained or removed.

(c) Records (IFC 901.6.2). Records of all system inspections, tests and maintenance required by the referenced standards shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of three years and shall be copied to the code enforcement officer upon request.

(d) Equipment Access (IFC 509.2). Approved access shall be provided and maintained for all fire protection equipment to permit immediate safe operation and maintenance of such equipment. Storage, trash and other materials or objects shall not be placed or kept in such a manner that would prevent such equipment from being readily accessible.

(e) Removal of or Tampering with Equipment (IFC 901.8). It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant, fire detection and alarm system, fire suppression system, or other fire appliance required by this code except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, training purposes, recharging or making necessary repairs, or when approved by the code enforcement officer

(f) Installation (IFC 901.4). Fire protection systems shall be maintained in accordance with the original installation standards for that system. Required systems shall be extended, altered or augmented as necessary to maintain and continue protection whenever the building is altered, remodeled or added to. Alterations to fire protection systems shall be done in accordance with applicable standards.

(11) Automatic Sprinkler Systems.

(a) Standards (IFC 901.6.1). Fire protection systems shall be inspected, tested and maintained in accordance with the referenced standards listed in Table 901.6.1 of the IFC.

TABLE 901.6.1

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM  MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 

	SYSTEM	STANDARD

	Portable fire extinguishers	Chapter 10 NFPA

	Carbon dioxide fire-extinguishing system	Chapter 12 NFPA

	Halon 1301 fire-extinguishing systems	Chapter 12A NFPA

	Dry-chemical extinguishing systems	Chapter 17 NFPA

	Wet-chemical extinguishing systems	Chapter 17A NFPA

	Water-based fire protection systems	Chapter 25 NFPA

	Fire alarm systems	Chapter 72 NFPA

	Water-mist systems	Chapter 750 NFPA

	Clean-agent extinguishing systems	Chapter 2001 NFPA

(b) Spare Heads and Wrenches (NFPA 25 5.2.1.4). The number of spare heads and wrenches provided shall be in conformance with NFPA 25.

(c) Locking Fire Department Connection Caps (IFC 912.3.1). The fire chief is authorized to require locking caps on fire department connections for water-based fire protection systems where the responding fire department carries appropriate key wrenches for removal.

(d) Access (IFC 912.3). Immediate access to fire department connections shall be maintained at all times and without obstruction by fences, bushes, trees, walls or any other fixed or moveable object. Access to fire department connections shall be approved by the fire chief.

(e) Clear Space around Connections (IFC 912.3.2). A working space of not less than 36 inches (762 mm) in width, 36 inches (914 mm) in depth and 78 inches (1,981 mm) in height shall be provided and maintained in front of and to the sides of wall-mounted fire department connections and around the circumference of freestanding fire department connections, except as otherwise required or approved by the fire chief.

(f) Ceiling Clearance (IFC 315.2.1). Storage shall be maintained two feet (610 mm) or more below the ceiling in nonsprinklered areas of buildings or a minimum of 18 inches (457 mm) below sprinkler head deflectors in sprinklered areas of buildings.

(g) Fire Department Connection Identification (IFC 912.2.2). On existing buildings, wherever the fire department connection is not visible to approaching fire apparatus, the fire department connection shall be indicated by an approved sign mounted on the street front or on the side of the building. Such sign shall have the letters “FDC” at least six inches (152 mm) high and words in letters at least two inches (51 mm) high or an arrow to indicate the location. All such signs shall be subject to the approval of the fire chief.

(12) Hood Systems.

(a) Commercial Hood and Duct Systems (IFC 904.2.1). Each required commercial kitchen exhaust hood and duct system required by Section 609 of the IFC to have a Type I hood shall be protected with an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system installed in accordance with this code.

(b) Ventilation System (IFC 609.3.1). The ventilation system in connection with hoods shall be operated at the required rate of air movement, and classified grease filters shall be in place when equipment under a kitchen grease hood is used.

(c) Cleaning (IFC 609.3.3). Hoods, grease-removal devices, fans, ducts and other appurtenances shall be cleaned at intervals as required by Sections 609.3.3.1 through 609.3.3.3 of the IFC.

(d) Records (IFC 609.3.3.3). Records for inspections shall state the individual and company performing the inspection, a description of the inspection and when the inspection took place. Records for cleanings shall state the individual and company performing the cleaning and when the cleaning took place. Such records shall be completed after each inspection or cleaning, maintained on the premises until the next inspection and copied to the code enforcement officer upon request.

(e) Commercial Cooking Systems (IFC 904.11). The automatic fire-extinguishing system for commercial cooking systems shall be of a type recognized for protection of commercial cooking equipment and exhaust systems of the type and arrangement protected. Preengineered automatic dry- and wet-chemical extinguishing systems shall be tested in accordance with UL 300 and listed and labeled for the intended application. Other types of automatic fire-extinguishing systems shall be listed and labeled for specific use as protection for commercial cooking operations. The system shall be installed in accordance with this code, its listing and the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Automatic fire-extinguishing systems of the following types shall be installed in accordance with the referenced standard indicated, as follows:

(i) Carbon dioxide extinguishing systems, NFPA 12.

(ii) Automatic sprinkler systems, NFPA 13.

(iii) Foam-water sprinkler system or foam-water spray systems, NFPA 16.

(iv) Dry-chemical extinguishing systems, NFPA 17.

(v) Wet-chemical extinguishing systems, NFPA 17A.

Exception: Factory-built commercial cooking recirculating systems that are tested in accordance with UL 71 OB and listed, labeled and installed in accordance with Section 304.1 of the International Mechanical Code.

(f) Operations and Maintenance (IFC 904.11.6). Automatic fire-extinguishing systems protecting commercial cooking systems shall be maintained in accordance with Sections 904.11.6.1 through 904.11.6.3 of the IFC.

(13) Heating Facilities and Equipment.

(a) Installation (IFC 603.1). The installation of nonportable fuel gas appliances and systems shall comply with the International Fuel Gas Code. The installation of all other fuel-fired appliances, other than internal combustion engines, oil lamps and portable devices such as blow torches, melting pots and weed burners, shall comply with this section and the International Mechanical Code.

(b) Access (IFC 603.1.5). The installation shall be readily accessible for cleaning hot surfaces; removing burners; replacing motors, controls, air filters, chimney connectors, draft regulators and other working parts; and for adjusting, cleaning and lubricating parts.

(c) Appliance Shutoff Valve (IFGC 409.5). Each appliance shall be provided with a shutoff valve in accordance with Section 409.5.1, 409.5.2 or 409.5.3 of the IFGC. The shutoff valve shall be located in the same room as the appliance. The shutoff valve shall be within six feet (1,829 mm) of the appliance, and shall be installed upstream of the union, connector or quick disconnect device it serves. Such shutoff valves shall be provided with access. Appliance shutoff valves located in the firebox of a fireplace shall be installed in accordance with the appliance manufacturer’s instructions.

(d) Sediment Trap (IFGC 408.4). Where a sediment trap is not incorporated as part of the appliance, a sediment trap shall be installed downstream of the appliance shutoff valve as close to the inlet of the appliance as practical. The sediment trap shall be either a tee fitting having a capped nipple of any length installed vertically in the bottommost opening of the tee or other device approved as an effective sediment trap. Illuminating appliances, ranges, clothes dryers and outdoor grills need not be so equipped.

(e) Removal of Combustion Products (IPMC 603.2). All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent.

Exception: Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented operation.

(f) Slope of Vent Pipe (IFGC 503.10.8). A vent connector shall be installed without dips or sags and shall slope upward toward the vent or chimney at least 1/4 inch per foot (21 mm/m). Exception: Vent connectors attached to a mechanical draft system installed in accordance with the appliance and draft system manufacturers’ instructions are excepted from this requirement.

(14) Water Heaters.

(a) Where Required (IPC 607.1). In residential occupancies, hot water shall be supplied to all plumbing fixtures and equipment utilized for bathing, washing, culinary purposes, cleansing, laundry or building maintenance. In nonresidential occupancies, hot water shall be supplied for culinary purposes, cleansing, laundry or building maintenance purposes. In nonresidential occupancies, hot water or tempered water shall be supplied for bathing and washing purposes. Tempered water shall be supplied through a water temperature limiting device that conforms to ASSE 1070 and shall limit the tempered water to a maximum of 110°F (43°C). This provision shall not supersede the requirement for protective shower valves in accordance with Section 424.3.

(b) General (IPMC 505.1). Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet, water heater, or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the International Plumbing Code.

(c) Water Heating Facilities (IPMC 505.4). Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not more than 110°F (43°C). A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters.

(d) Appliance Shutoff Valve (IFGC 409.5). Each appliance shall be provided with a shutoff valve in accordance with Section 409.5.1, 409.5.2 or 409.5.3 of the IFGC. The shutoff valve shall be located in the same room as the appliance. The shutoff valve shall be within six feet (1,829 mm) of the appliance, and shall be installed upstream of the union, connector or quick disconnect device it serves. Such shutoff valves shall be provided with access.

(e) Sediment Trap (IFGC 408.4). Where a sediment trap is not incorporated as part of the appliance, a sediment trap shall be installed downstream of the appliance shutoff valve as close to the inlet of the appliance as practical. The sediment trap shall be either a tee fitting having a capped nipple of any length installed vertically in the bottommost opening of the tee or other device approved as an effective sediment trap. Illuminating appliances, ranges, clothes dryers and outdoor grills need not be so equipped.

(15) Boilers.

(a) Appliance Shutoff Valve (IFGC 409.5). Each appliance shall be provided with a shutoff valve in accordance with Section 409.5.1, 409.5.2 or 409.5.3 of the IFGC. The shutoff valve shall be located in the same room as the appliance. The shutoff valve shall be within six feet (1,829 mm) of the appliance, and shall be installed upstream of the union, connector or quick disconnect device it serves. Such shutoff valves shall be provided with access.

(b) Sediment Trap (IFGC 408.4). Where a sediment trap is not incorporated as part of the appliance, a sediment trap shall be installed downstream of the appliance shutoff valve as close to the inlet of the appliance as practical. The sediment trap shall be either a tee fitting having a capped nipple of any length installed vertically in the bottommost opening of the tee or other device approved as an effective sediment trap. Illuminating appliances, ranges, clothes dryers and outdoor grills need not be so equipped.

(c) Equipment Rooms (IFC 315.2.3). Combustible material shall not be stored in boiler rooms, mechanical rooms or electrical equipment rooms.

(d) A boiler inspection certificate showing the boiler is in compliance with applicable Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry requirements shall be available for review by the code enforcement officer.

(16) Compressed Gases.

(a) Security (IFC 3003.5). Compressed gas containers, cylinders, tanks and systems shall be secured against accidental dislodgement and against access by unauthorized personnel in accordance with Sections 3003.5.1 through 3003.5.3 of the IFC.

(17) Key Boxes.

(a) Key Box Maintenance (IFC 506.2). If a building is equipped with a key box accessible by the fire department, the operator of the building shall immediately notify the code enforcement officer and provide the new key when a lock is changed or rekeyed. The key to such lock shall be secured in the key box.

(18) Fueled Equipment (IFC 313.1 and 313.1.1).

(a) Fueled equipment including, but not limited to, motorcycles, mopeds, lawn-care equipment, portable generators and portable cooking equipment, shall not be stored, operated or repaired within a building.

Exceptions include buildings or rooms constructed for such use in accordance with the International Building Code. Where allowed by Section 314 of the IFC and storage of equipment utilized for maintenance purposes is allowed in approved locations when the aggregate fuel capacity of the stored equipment does not exceed 10 gallons (38 L) and the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. The code enforcement officer is authorized to require removal of fueled equipment from locations where the presence of such equipment is determined by the code enforcement officer to be hazardous. (Ord. 3771 § 1, 2018)


1504.10 Results of inspection.

The code enforcement officers shall follow the general guidelines as set forth below:

(1) All code enforcement officers shall determine when the occupancy of the commercial building satisfies the inspection criteria set forth in MMC 1504.09 in addition to all fire regulations, uniform construction code regulations, health regulations, zoning ordinances, subdivision ordinances and general ordinances and laws of the City of Meadville and the laws of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

(2) In the event that an inspection reveals a violation of any of the regulations set forth in subsection (1) of this section, the code enforcement officers shall give the owner notice, prescribing the date by which all violations shall be abated. The code enforcement officers shall be permitted to prescribe a different abatement date for different violations.

(3) Any material change of use from the current building code classification of a commercial property, or the addition of uses outside of the approved classification in an existing occupancy shall trigger a new inspection as to the changed use and the additional uses only. (Ord. 3771 § 1, 2018)


1504.11 Appeal procedures.

(1) Application for Appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code enforcement officer, or a notice or order issued under this article, shall have the right to appeal to the code appeals board; provided, that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this article has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this article do not fully apply, or the requirements of this article are adequately satisfied by other means.

(2) Notice of Meeting. The code appeals board shall meet upon notice from the chairman, within 20 days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings.

(3) Open Hearing. All hearings before the code appeals board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant’s representative, the code enforcement officer and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. A quorum shall consist of not less than two-thirds of the code appeals board membership.

(a) Procedure. Hearings and appeal proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Local Agency Law, 2 Pa. C.S. § 551 et seq., and in accordance with the applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Sunshine Law, 65 Pa. C.S. § 701 et seq. Proceedings need not comply with the strict rules of evidence.

(4) Postponed Hearing. When the full code appeals board is not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant’s representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing.

(5) Board Decision. The code appeals board shall modify or reverse the decision of the code enforcement officer only by a concurring vote of a majority of the total number of appointed board members.

(a) Records and Copies. The decision of the code appeals board shall be recorded. Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the code enforcement officer.

(b) Administration. The code enforcement officer shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the code appeals board.

(6) Court Review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief administrative officer.

(7) Stays of Enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other than imminent danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the code appeals board. (Ord. 3771 § 1, 2018)


1504.12 Fees.

There shall be an inspection fee applicable to all inspections conducted by the code enforcement officers of the City of Meadville for each commercial occupancy. Starting on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article, the initial inspection fee, which fee may include a base charge and incremental hourly charge, shall be as established by resolution of the city council of the City of Meadville. Any future change in the inspection fee shall be set by resolution of city council upon recommendation by the city manager. (Ord. 3771 § 1, 2018)


1504.13 Penalties.

Any person who shall violate a provision of this article or shall fail to comply with any requirements hereof, or who or which shall be in violation of any directive of the code enforcement officer to cure a violation of this article, shall, upon conviction thereof, before the magisterial district judge having jurisdiction in the City of Meadville, be liable for a fine up to a maximum of $1,000, or 30 days’ imprisonment, or both.

Nothing within this penalty section shall serve to hamper the rights of the code enforcement officers of the City of Meadville to take any and all necessary legal action to force the abatement of any violation and/or nuisance which is discovered and/or known by the code enforcement officers as a result of any information received or observed, including, but not limited to, the temporary or permanent closure of the commercial building, or any other rights or remedies which are permissible under any other code or ordinance of the City of Meadville or law of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania. If deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of citizens of the City of Meadville, the code enforcement officer may order a commercial building to be closed to the public, pending abatement of any violation, and/or shall have the power to abate a violation on behalf of the property owner and seek reimbursement from said property owner. The above referenced penalties shall be in addition to the course of action taken by the code enforcement officer. (Ord. 3771 § 1, 2018)


1504.14 Nonexclusive remedies.

The penalty provisions of this article and the nonrenewal, suspension, revocation and closure procedures provided in this article shall be independent, nonmutually exclusive separate remedies, all of which shall be available to the city as may be deemed appropriate for carrying out the purposes of this article. The remedies and procedures provided in this article for violation hereof are not intended to supplant or replace, to any degree, the remedies and procedures available to the city in the case of a violation of any other code or ordinance of the City of Meadville or the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, whether or not such code or ordinance is referenced in this article and whether or not an ongoing violation of such other code or ordinance is cited as the underlying ground for a finding of a violation of this article. (Ord. 3771 § 1, 2018)


1504.15 Miscellaneous provisions.

For purposes of this article, any notice required hereunder and/or identification which is given to a manager or authorized agent of the owner of a commercial building shall be deemed as notice or identification provided to the owner directly. (Ord. 3771 § 1, 2018)


1504.16 Rebuttable presumption.

There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any notice required to be given to the owner of a commercial building under this article shall be received by such owner if the notice/identification was given to the owner in the manner provided herein. (Ord. 3771 § 1, 2018)


1504.17 Severability.

If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such holdings shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this article which can be given their full force and effect without the invalid provisions where application and, to this end, the provisions of this article are declared severable. (Ord. 3771 § 1, 2018)


1504.18 Conflicts.

All ordinances, or parts of ordinances, of the City of Meadville in conflict with this article to the extent of such conflicts, and no further, are hereby repealed. The provisions of this article are severable. If any part of this article is declared to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, the validity of the remaining provisions shall be unaffected thereby. (Ord. 3771 § 1, 2018)


Article 1505 DISPOSITION OF INSURANCE COVERING FIRE-DAMAGED STRUCTURES

Sections:

1505.01    Payment of claims.

1505.02    Notification of delinquent taxes, assessments or penalties.

1505.03    Losses exceeding 60 percent of aggregate limits.

1505.04    Payment of taxes, assessments, penalties, and charges.

1505.05    Responsible officer designated.

1505.06    Losses greater than $7,500.

1505.07    Use of proceeds.

1505.08    Insurance information.

1505.09    Recovery of costs – Agreements.

1505.10    Procedures – Fees.

1505.11    Violation – Penalty.


1505.01 Payment of claims.

No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter referred to as “insurer”) doing business in the commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the City of Meadville where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500 unless the insurer has complied with the requirements set forth in this article and in Sections 508(a) through (d) of the Act of July 9, 1992, P.L. Section 682, known as Act 98 of 1992, as amended by Act of October 13, 1994, P.L. 609, known as Act 93 of 1994, the provisions of which Act are hereby adopted by reference together with any amendments thereto, as though set forth in full (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”). (Ord. 3413 § 1, 1995)


1505.02 Notification of delinquent taxes, assessments or penalties.

(A) In accordance with Section 508(b) of the Act, the city treasurer shall, upon the written request of the named insured specifying the tax description of the property, the name and address of the insurance company, association or exchange and the date agreed upon by the insurance company, association or exchange and the named insured as of the date of a loss report of the claim, furnish the insurance company, association or exchange either of the following within 14 days of the request:

(1) A certificate or, at the discretion of the city, a verbal notification which shall be confirmed in writing by the insurer, to the effect that, as of the date specified in the request, there are no delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against the property and that, as of the date of the treasurer’s certificate or verbal notification, the city has not certified any amount of total costs incurred by the city for the removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure on the property; or

(2) A certificate and bill showing the amount of delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties and user charges against the property as of the date specified in the request that have not been paid as of the date of certificate and also showing, as of the date of the treasurer’s certificate, the amount of the total costs, if any, certified to the treasurer that have been incurred by the city for the removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure on the property. For purposes of this subsection only, the city shall certify to the treasurer the total amount, if any, of such costs. 

(B) A tax, assessment, penalty or user charge becomes delinquent at the time and on the date a lien could otherwise have been filed against the property by the city under applicable law. (Ord. 3413 § 1, 1995)


1505.03 Losses exceeding 60 percent of aggregate limits.

Upon receipt of a certificate pursuant to MMC 1505.02(A)(1), the insurer shall pay the claim of the named insured in accordance with the policy terms, unless the loss agreed to between the named insured and the insurer equals or exceeds 60 percent of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building or other structure. In the case of such a loss, the insurer, the insured property owner and the city shall follow the procedures set forth in MMC 1505.06 and 1505.07. (Ord. 3413 § 1, 1995)


1505.04 Payment of taxes, assessments, penalties, and charges.

Upon the receipt of a certificate and bill pursuant to MMC 1505.02(A)(2), the insurer shall return the bill to the city treasurer and transfer to the treasurer an amount from the insurance proceeds necessary to pay the taxes, assessments, penalties, charges and costs as shown on the bill. The city upon receipt of such amount shall apply or credit it

to payment of the items shown in the bill. (Ord. 3413 § 1, 1995)


1505.05 Responsible officer designated.

The city finance director is hereby designated as the officer authorized to carry out the responsibilities imposed under MMC 1505.06 through 1505.08 and Sections 508(c) and (d) of the Act. (Ord. 3413 § 1, 1995)


1505.06 Losses greater than $7,500.

In accordance with Section 508(c) of the Act, if the fire loss is greater than $7,500, and equals or exceeds 60 percent of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire insurance policies covering the building or structure, as agreed between the named insured and the insurer, then the insurer shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the city finance director such amounts as shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule:

(A) If the named insured and insurer have agreed on a proof of loss, and the named insured has submitted a contractor’s signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or structure, the amount specified in the estimate shall be transferred to the city finance director.

(B) In all other cases, the insurer shall transfer to the city finance director, in the aggregate, $2,000 for each $15,000, and each fraction of that amount, of the agreed upon loss. 

(C) The transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all insurers insuring the building or other structure. Policy proceeds remaining after the transfer to the city shall be disbursed in accordance with the policy terms. (Ord. 3413 § 1, 1995)


1505.07 Use of proceeds.

Upon receipt of proceeds under MMC 1505.06, the city shall do the following:

(A) The city finance director shall place the proceeds in a separate fund to be used solely as security against the total costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or structure which are incurred by the city. Such costs shall include, without limitation, any engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the city in connection with such removal, repair or securing of the building or any proceedings related thereto; and

(B) It is the obligation of the insurer when transferring the proceeds to provide the city with the name and address of the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the name and address of the named insured, the city finance director shall contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have been received by the city and notify the named insured that the procedures under this subsection shall be followed; and

(C) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable regulations and orders of the city and the required proof of such completion has been received by the city finance director, and if the city has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure, the fund shall be returned to the named insured. If the city has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the fund and, if excess funds remain, the city shall transfer the remaining funds to the named insured; and

(D) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the city pursuant to this section, and retained by it, such interest shall belong to the city. To the extent that proceeds are returned to the named insured, interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named insured at the time that the proceeds are returned. (Ord. 3413 § 1, 1995)


1505.08 Insurance information.

At the request of the city finance director or his representative, any person who owns a building or structure damaged by fire or who is a named insured under a fire insurance policy covering such building or structure shall provide information to the finance director regarding the insurer or insurers providing fire insurance covering such property and any other pertinent information relating thereto. An insurer with insurance coverage on a building or structure within the city which has been damaged by fire shall provide information to the city finance director concerning the insurance, the loss and any other pertinent information relating thereto. (Ord. 3413 § 1, 1995)


1505.09 Recovery of costs – Agreements.

Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the ability of the city to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the city and the named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of funds to the named insured if some other reasonable disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated. (Ord. 3413 § 1, 1995)


1505.10 Procedures – Fees.

The city council may by resolution adopt procedures for administering the Act and this article and may by resolution fix reasonable fees to be charged for administrative services provided pursuant to the Act and this article, including, but not limited to, issuance of certificates and bills, and opening separate fund accounts. (Ord. 3413 § 1, 1995)


1505.11 Violation – Penalty.

Any person or insurance company, association or exchange who shall violate any provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs, and in default of payment shall be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. (Ord. 3413 § 1, 1995)


Article 1507 OUTDOOR BURNING

Sections:

1507.01    Purpose.

1507.02    Applicability.

1507.03    Definitions.

1507.04    Regulations for outdoor burning.

1507.05    Administration.

1507.06    Appeals.

1507.07    Enforcement proceedings.

1507.08    Penalty.

1507.09    Violations.


1507.01 Purpose. 

This article is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare and to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Meadville by regulating the air pollution and fire hazards of outdoor burning. (Ord. 3765 § 1, 2017)


1507.02 Applicability. 

This article applies to all outdoor burning within the City of Meadville, with the exception of grilling or cooking food using charcoal, wood, propane or natural gas in UL-approved cooking or grilling appliances. (Ord. 3765 § 2, 2017)


1507.03 Definitions. 

As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:

“Approved” means something that is acceptable to or accepted by the fire code official.

“Bonfire” means any large outdoor fire which does not qualify as a recreational fire.

“Fire code official” means the fire chief of the City of Meadville fire department or authorized designee, including the duty officer.

“Open burning” means the burning of materials wherein products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or chimney from an enclosed chamber. Open burning does not include recreational fires as defined herein, road flares, devices associated with safety or occupational uses typically considered open flames. For the purpose of this definition, a chamber shall be regarded as enclosed when, during the time combustion occurs, only apertures, ducts, stacks, flues or chimneys necessary to provide combustion air and permit the escape of exhaust gas are open.

“Portable outdoor fireplace” means a portable, outdoor, solid-fuel-burning fireplace that may be constructed of steel, clay or other noncombustible material. A portable outdoor fireplace may be open in design, or may be equipped with a small hearth opening and a short chimney or chimney opening in the top.

“Recreational fire” means an outdoor fire burning materials other than rubbish where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, barbeque grill or barbeque pit and has a total fuel area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in height for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar purposes.

“Rubbish” means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust and other similar materials. (Ord. 3765 § 3, 2017)


1507.04 Regulations for outdoor burning.

(A) Open burning is prohibited.

(B) At no time may any material other than charcoal or dry, seasoned, non-pressure-treated wood which has not been painted or otherwise covered with any sealants or spirits such as polyurethane, stains or preservatives be burned.

(C) Recreational fires are permitted with the following provisions:

(1) All recreational fires must be contained by a noncombustible material and constantly attended by a competent adult until the fire is extinguished. No recreational fires are permitted between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day.

(2) A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire extinguishing equipment or materials, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization.

(3) Recreational fires, with the exception of those in a UL-approved container such as a portable outdoor fireplace, shall not be conducted within 25 feet of a structure or combustible material and not within 10 feet of a property line. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition.

(4) Recreational fires in UL-approved containers such as portable outdoor fireplaces shall comply with the requirements herein and the manufacturer’s instructions. Further, the amount of fuel in use shall not exceed the safe capacity of the device, and portable outdoor fireplaces shall be at least 15 feet from a structure, including decks and balconies, and at least 10 feet from a property line. Their placement shall be stable and reasonably level so as to make tipping unlikely. They shall not be used on a deck, within any tent, or on or under any roof.

(D) Recreational fires found to be offensive or objectionable because of smoke or odor emissions when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous shall be prohibited as determined by the fire code official in his discretion.

(E) The fire code official is authorized to order the extinguishment of any fire which creates a hazardous or objectionable situation in the fire code official’s discretion or which otherwise violates any provision of this article.

(F) Bonfires. A bonfire shall not be conducted within 50 feet of a structure or combustible material. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 50 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. Bonfires require a permit and prior approval of the fire code official.

(G) Sky Lanterns. No person shall release or cause to be released any untethered, free-floating sky lantern or similar devices utilizing an open flame within the City of Meadville. (Ord. 3765 § 4, 2017)


1507.05 Administration.

This article shall be administered and enforced by the fire code official. (Ord. 3765 § 5, 2017)


1507.06 Appeals.

The appeal provisions as adopted by MMC 1721.18 shall apply. (Ord. 3765 § 6, 2017)


1507.07 Enforcement proceedings.

Enforcement proceedings may be instituted by the fire code official by citation or complaint in the manner provided by the applicable Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, Rules 402 through 424, or amendments thereto, and the provisions of this code. (Ord. 3765 § 7, 2017)


1507.08 Penalty.

Any person who shall violate a provision of this article, or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article, or who shall fail to comply with an order issued by the fire code official, shall, except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, be subject to a fine of no less than $50.00 and no more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days, or both. (Ord. 3765 § 8, 2017)


1507.09 Violations.

(A) Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit a condition to exist contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this article; or to fail to obey a lawful order of the fire code official.

(B) Notice of Violation. Due to the nature of open burning, no written notice to extinguish an illegal fire shall be required from the fire code official prior to taking action to abate or to file a citation. Persons responsible shall have the opportunity to be heard in any court proceeding instituted for imposition of a penalty for violation.

(C) Action to Remedy Unlawful Act. In the event of a violation of this article, or if action is not taken to remedy a violation or to comply with a notice or order directing certain action to correct a violation, the fire code official may institute an action for imposition of a penalty in accordance with MMC 1507.07; or institute appropriate legal proceedings to restrain, correct or abate the violation; or institute legal proceedings to enforce an order. In the case of an emergency, the code official may take immediate action to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 3765 § 9, 2017)


PART 17 BUILDING CODE 

Articles:

Title 1. Standards Adopted

1701    Uniform Construction Code

1703    Repealed

1705    Repealed

1707    Plumber Licensing Code

1709    Repealed

Title 3. Local Provisions

1711    Repealed

1713    Signs and Awnings

1715    Building Lines

1717    Numbering Buildings

1721    Property Maintenance Code 


Article 1701       UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE

Sections:

1701.01  Adoption of Uniform Construction Code.

1701.02  Authority.

1701.03  Contents of Uniform Construction Code.

1701.04  Definitions.

1701.05  Supplemental standards.

1701.06  Administration and enforcement.

1701.07  Prohibited conduct.

1701.08  Fees.

1701.09  Board of appeals.

1701.10  Appeals board membership.

1701.11  Appeal procedure.

1701.12  Conduct of board of appeals.

1701.13  Penalties.

1701.14  Other remedies.

1701.15  Minimum requirements – Greater restriction to control.

1701.16  Maintenance of code for public use.


1701.01       Adoption of Uniform Construction Code. 

The Uniform Construction Code as defined in this article and as established from time to time by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry or its successor, in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, as amended, is adopted by reference as and for the building and construction code of and for the City of Meadville. (Ord. 3607 § 2, 2004)


1701.02       Authority.

The authority for the adoption of the Uniform Construction Code is found in Section 501 of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act and Section 303 of the Optional Third Class City Charter Law (53 P.S. Section 41303) and Section 4131 of the Third Class City Code (53 P.S. Section 39131). (Ord. 3607 § 2, 2004)


1701.03       Contents of Uniform Construction Code.

The Uniform Construction Code hereby adopted by reference shall consist of the following identified codes as adopted by regulation of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry and as published by the International Code Council, Inc. and such other codes and successive and replacement codes as may be designated and adopted, from time to time, by regulation of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry, or its successor, as part of the Uniform Construction Code in accordance with the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act. The current codes comprising the Uniform Construction Code are Chapters 2 through 29, and 31 through 35 of the International Building Code, 2003 Edition; ICC Electrical Code, 2003 Edition; International Mechanical Code, 2003 Edition; International Fuel Gas Code, 2003 Edition; International Plumbing Code, 2003 Edition; International Fire Code, 2003 Edition; International Residential Code, 2003 Edition; the International Energy Conservation Code, 2003 Edition; Sections AE501 through AE503 and AE601 through AE605 of Appendix E of the International Residential Code; International Existing Building Code; International Urban-Wildland Interface Code; Appendix E of the International Building Code; Appendix H of the International Building Code; and Appendix G of the International Residential Code. The codes designated and adopted from time to time by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry or its successors shall automatically become the Uniform Construction Code for the City of Meadville upon adoption by the Department of Labor and Industry and shall be incorporated herein by reference without further action of the city council unless otherwise required by law. (Ord. 3607 § 2, 2004)


1701.04       Definitions. 

The definitions set forth in the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry and the Uniform Construction Code, as amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated as definitions applicable to the administration and enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code. In addition, when used in this code, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings:

(A) "City" shall mean the City of Meadville, the city council of the city, and its designated officials and representatives.

(B) "Building code official," "construction code official," "municipal code official," "code official" or "code officer" shall have the same meanings ascribed in the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act and Department of Labor and Industry regulations and in addition shall be the person or persons qualified under the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act and Department of Labor and Industry regulations to perform the required administrative, inspection and enforcement responsibilities, who are employed or appointed in accordance with this code to perform those functions.

(C) "Department of Labor and Industry" or "L&I" shall mean the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry or its successors.

(D) "Owner" shall mean any person with a legal or equitable ownership interest in property, and any person holding title to property by deed or other instrument duly recorded in the records of Crawford County.

(E) "Persons responsible" shall mean any persons in possession or control of real estate by reason of a lease, contract or other legal right or claim, and all persons performing work for the owner or person responsible.

(F) "Pennsylvania Construction Code Act" shall mean Act 45 of November 10, 1999, P.L. 491, as amended, found in 35 P.S. Section 7210.101, et seq., as same shall be amended from time to time.

(G) "Person" shall mean any corporation, partnership, business trust, other association, estate, trust, foundation, natural person, governing authority for a county or municipality or any governmental entity other than the commonwealth. In any provisions of this code prescribing a fine or penalty, the term "person" shall include the officers and directors of any corporation or other legal entity with officers and directors.

(H) "Uniform Construction Code" or "UCC" shall be the code and codes identified in MMC 1701.03 and such other code and codes adopted and established by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry, from time to time, in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, as amended. (Ord. 3607 § 2, 2004)


1701.05       Supplemental standards. 

The following sections of the codes adopted as part of the Uniform Construction Code or their successor codes are hereby modified by addition of the standards set forth below:

(A) The Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria of Table R301.2(1) of the International Residential Code shall read as follows:

Table R301.2(1)Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria

	GROUND SNOW LOAD	WIND SPEED MPH	SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY	 SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM	WINTER DESIGN TEMP.	ICE SHIELD UNDER-LAYMENT REQUIRED	 FLOOD HAZARDS	AIR FREEZING INDEX	 MEAN ANNUAL TEMP.

	Weathering	Frost line depth	Termites	Decay

	40	90	B	Severe	42''	Medium to Heavy	Light to Med.	5Ë F	Yes	6-1-1977	1418	 47.0

(B) For purposes of the International Building Code and International Residential Code, unless otherwise established, the frost line depth shall be 42 inches.

In the event a standard applicable in the city has not been established in a provision of a code comprising the Uniform Construction Code, in the regulations of L&I, or in this article, the city council may by resolution adopt and designate a standard approved by the city’s engineer. (Ord. 3607 § 2, 2004)


1701.06       Administration and enforcement.

(A) The Uniform Construction Code shall be administered and enforced in the City of Meadville in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act and regulations established from time to time by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry under the supervision of the city manager.

(B) Administration and enforcement shall be provided in any one of the following ways:

(1) The city manager may employ or designate a qualified employee to serve as a construction code official and building code official.

(2) With approval of the city council, the city manager may contract with third-party agencies, or qualified building or construction code officials.

(3) With approval of the city council, the city manager may contract with the Department of Labor and Industry for plan reviews, inspection and enforcement of structures other than one-family and two-family dwelling units and utility and miscellaneous-use structures. At the direction of city council, the city may contract with another municipality or delegate the administration and enforcement to an intergovernmental agency under authority of the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation laws.

(4) Some combination of the above.

(C) Permits and certificates of occupancy shall only be issued by the building code official employed, appointed or designated by the city.

(D) Plan reviews and inspections shall be performed only by the construction code officials, third party agencies or other qualified persons employed, appointed or designated by the city, or as may otherwise be approved by the city manager and the designated construction code official.

(E) The city manager may employ, retain, or designate technical assistants and qualified deputy inspectors or deputy code officials on a temporary and as-needed basis to assist in the administration and enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code.

(F) Issuance of permits, plan reviews, inspections, certificates of occupancy, enforcement notices and proceedings shall be undertaken in conformity with the applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, the regulations adopted from time to time by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry, and this article.

(G) Building code officials, construction code officials and inspectors shall have those powers provided by and under the Uniform Construction Code and applicable L&I regulations and shall exercise those powers in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Construction Code and applicable L&I regulations. (Ord. 3607 § 2, 2004)


1701.07       Prohibited conduct. 

No person shall erect, construct, install, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, move, replace, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy, change occupancy, or maintain a building or structure or part thereof, or erect, install, enlarge, alter, replace, repair, move, or convert an electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system regulated under the Uniform Construction Code, or cause or permit the same to be done:

(A) Without a permit issued by an authorized building code official in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code and applicable regulations; or 

(B) In a manner contrary to or in violation of any provisions of the Uniform Construction Code, applicable regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry, applicable provisions of this code, permits issued under and in accordance with applicable codes and regulations, approved plans and construction documents and any orders properly issued by the building code official. (Ord. 3607 § 2, 2004)


1701.08       Fees. 

Fees for the administration and enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code including, but not limited to, fees for permits, plan reviews, inspections, certificates of occupancy, and appeals shall be those established by resolution of the city council from time to time. (Ord. 3607 § 2, 2004)


1701.09       Board of appeals.

There is hereby created a board of appeals to consider and decide appeals relating to the Uniform Construction Code in accordance with the applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry. (Ord. 3607 § 2, 2004)


1701.10       Appeals board membership. 

The board of appeals shall consist of three members and three alternate members appointed by the city council, except that city council may establish an inter-municipal board of appeals by agreement with other participating municipalities that may be organized in a manner not inconsistent with applicable governing laws and regulations. A member of the appeals board shall be qualified by training and experience to pass on matters pertaining to building construction. Training and experience shall consist of licensure as an architect or engineer, substantial experience in the construction industry or such other training and experience as may be appropriate for purposes of considering such appeals. Board members and alternates may include a person with substantial training and experience in the plumbing, electrical and mechanical trades and in fire safety. Members appointed to the board should not be from the same profession or occupation. A member of the board may be appointed who is not a resident of the city if a qualified person within the city is not found who satisfies the requirements. The appeals board shall select one of its members to be chairman. Appeals board members and alternates shall be appointed or reappointed at the organization meeting or at such time as a vacancy occurs. A member of the board holds office at the pleasure of the city council. No member of city council or person employed by the city in any capacity involving the administration or enforcement of the UCC can be a member of the appeals board. No appeals board member may participate in any appeal in which he has a personal, professional or financial interest. Board members’ service shall be uncompensated unless city council by resolution provides otherwise. (Ord. 3607 § 2, 2004)


1701.11       Appeal procedure.

A person adversely affected by a decision of the building or construction code officer shall have the right to appeal to the board of appeals; provided, that the appeal is filed within 15 days of the day the decision, notice or order was served by the building or construction code officer or within such other time as may be provided by applicable statute or regulation. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the act or Uniform Construction Code has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the act or Uniform Construction Code do not fully apply or an equivalent form of construction is to be used. An owner or owner’s agent may seek a variance or extension of time or appeal a building code official’s decision by filing a petition with the building code official or other person designated by the city manager on a form provided by the City. (Ord. 3607 § 2, 2004)


1701.12       Conduct of board of appeals.

(A) The board of appeals shall hear and rule on appeals, requests for variances and requests for extensions of time in accordance with the applicable requirements and provisions of the UCC and the L&I regulations, and specifically those regulations found in Sections 403.121 and 403.122 of the L&I regulations or amendments thereto. 

(B) The board of appeals shall conduct an appeal in accordance with the requirements of the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry, as adopted from time to time, as well as this code. Hearings and appeal proceedings shall also be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Local Agency Law, 2 PA C.S. Section 551, et seq., and in accordance with the applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Sunshine Law, 65 PA C.S. Sections 701 through 716.

(C) Unless modified by an intermunicipal agreement establishing an intermunicipal board of appeals, for purposes of considering an appeal, the board shall consist of three members and, whenever possible, one of the board members considering an appeal should be a member with experience in the subject matter of the appeal. For example, if the appeal involves an electrical code provision, a member with electrical code experience should sit as a member of the board hearing the appeal. For this purpose, the chairman of the board shall have authority to substitute an alternate member for a regular member to consider appeals.

(D) The city manager may designate a person to serve as secretary to the board. The secretary shall maintain a record of all proceedings of the board. Special counsel, appointed by city council and approved by the regular members of the code appeals board, may be retained, as necessary, to advise the board.

(E) A board of appeals shall decide an appeal, variance request or request for extension of time by reviewing documents and written brief or argument unless the owner or owner’s agent requests a hearing.

(F) A board of appeals shall hold a hearing within 60 days from the date of an applicant’s request unless the applicant agreed in writing to an extension of time.

(G) If a stenographic record is requested by appellant or is required for any reason, as determined by the chairman of the board of appeals, reasonable stenographic fees shall be paid by the appellant.

(H) Action may be taken by a quorum of the members of the board who have considered the appeal.

(I) The board of appeals shall provide a written notice of its decision to the owner, building code official and the city manager. (Ord. 3607 § 2, 2004)


1701.13       Penalties. 

Consistent with the authority set forth in Section 303 of the Optional Third Class City Charter Law and Section 903 of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, any person who shall violate a provision of the Uniform Construction Code, applicable regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry, or a provision of this code, or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure or part thereof in violation of an approved plan or directive of the building or construction code officer or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the Uniform Construction Code and this code, or who shall fail to comply with an order issued by the building or construction code officer shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs, and in default of payment, shall be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate violation. (Ord. 3607 § 2, 2004)


1701.14       Other remedies. 

In addition to the penalties provided above, the city shall have the following enforcement remedies, all of which may be pursued simultaneously or in the alternative, as deemed appropriate:

(A) Upon recommendation of the building or construction code officer, the city may institute an action at law or in equity against the person responsible for a violation for the purpose of securing an order:

(1) To restrain, correct or remove the violation and to refrain from any further violation.

(2) To restrain or correct the erection, installation, alteration or condition of a structure, or premises, to require the removal of work in violation.

(3) To prevent the occupation or use of the structure or part thereof erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of, or not in compliance with, the provisions of the UCC or otherwise unfit for occupancy.

(4) To abate a public nuisance, or other health or safety hazard to the public created by violation of the UCC.

(5) To secure compliance with orders of the building or construction code officer relating to repairs and correction of violations.

(6) To obtain any appropriate remedy or relief allowed by law in the event of an unsafe building, building unfit for human occupancy, emergency situation or other public nuisance.

(B) In the event the building or construction code officer determines that action to correct a violation or to abate a public nuisance may require the demolition or removal of any structure or part thereof, or other action likely to cause injury to real or personal property, the building or construction code officer shall make reasonable efforts to identify and locate all persons with an ownership interest in such property and serve them with notice of any orders affecting said property.

(C) In the event the building code official determines, based on reasonable investigation, that the condition of a structure, property or equipment in violation of the UCC creates a serious health or safety hazard or a public nuisance which (1) necessitates immediate or prompt corrective action to protect the public health, safety or welfare, or (2) necessitates immediate action by the city to protect the public health, safety or welfare, the building code official shall provide written notice of the conditions creating the hazards, the violations of the UCC creating these conditions, and the corrective actions to be taken to protect the public health and safety and the time limit within which such action must be taken. This notice shall be served upon the owners, responsible persons and any other persons affected by such action by personal service, whenever possible, and by posting a copy in a conspicuous place on or about the property or structure. In the event personal service cannot be made, then said notice shall be served by both certified mail, return receipt requested, and regular mail to the last known address.

(D) In the event the building code official determines that the condition constituting a violation creates an imminent threat of harm to the public which necessitates immediate corrective action to protect the public health, safety or welfare, the building code official, after consultation with the city manager and other designated city officials, may take appropriate emergency action to provide for the protection of the public after making reasonable attempts, depending on the urgency of the situation, to notify the responsible persons and property owners of the violation, corrective action required, and planned city corrective action.

(E) In enforcement actions under subsections (C) and (D) of this section, if an aggrieved person requests a hearing, the building code official shall cause a hearing to be held by the code appeals board in as expeditious a manner as possible.

(F) In the event the city incurs expenses in conjunction with the correction or abatement of any violation of these codes which creates a serious health or safety hazard to the public, because of an emergency or because the persons responsible for the violation or property have failed to comply with orders issued by the building or construction code officer, such expense including reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs may be collected by means of a municipal lien against the subject property or by suit against the persons responsible for the violation or property, or in any other manner permitted by law. (Ord. 3607 § 2, 2004)


1701.15       Minimum requirements – Greater restriction to control. 

In interpreting and applying provisions of the Uniform Construction Code, the UCC provisions shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. It is not intended by this code to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed or preempted by this code, or the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, or with private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or other private agreement or with restrictive covenants running with the land to which the city is a party. Where this code imposes a greater restriction upon land, buildings or structures than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this code shall control. Where any existing provision of any law, ordinance, contract or deed imposes a greater restriction than this code, the provisions of the law, ordinance, contract or deed shall control. (Ord. 3607 § 2, 2004)


1701.16       Maintenance of code for public use.

The city shall maintain the Uniform Construction Code at the city office which shall be available for public use, inspection and copying during regular business hours. (Ord. 3607 § 2, 2004)


Article 1703       BUILDING CODE

(Repealed by Ord. 3607)


Article 1705       ELECTRICAL CODE

(Repealed by Ord. 3607)


Article 1707 PLUMBER LICENSING CODE

Sections:

1707.01    Authority.

1707.02    Administration.

1707.03    License required for business of plumbing.

1707.04    Licensing standards.

1707.05    Licensing and registration requirements.

1707.06    Coordination of plumber licensing and Uniform Construction Code of Pennsylvania.

1707.07    Revocation of registration or license.

1707.08    Appeal relating to licensing.

1707.09    Penalty.

1707.10    Repealer.

1707.11    Severability.

Prior legislation: Ord. 3277.


1707.01 Authority.

This plumber licensing code is adopted pursuant to the authority of the Act of June 7, 1901, P.L. 493, as amended and found at 53 P.S. Section 4591 et seq. (Ord. 3691 § 1, 2011)


1707.02 Administration.

This plumber licensing code shall be administered by a person designated by the city manager who shall be referred to as the plumber licensing code official. For purposes of this code, the term “code official” shall mean the designated plumber licensing code official. (Ord. 3691 § 1, 2011)


1707.03 License required for business of plumbing. 

No person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in the business of plumbing within the territorial boundaries of the City of Meadville unless licensed to conduct such activity by the City of Meadville in accord with the terms of this article. For the purpose of enforcement of the terms of this article, the term “plumbing” shall mean the performance of any work subject to regulation under the plumbing code as adopted from time to time by the commonwealth of Pennsylvania as part of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code. The term “business of plumbing” shall mean the performance of (or offer to perform) plumbing for the general public for a fee or any other payment, benefit or compensation of any nature whatsoever. The term “business of plumbing” does not include performance of regulated work by an employee of the owner of any premises nor shall such term be deemed to include the installation of appliances by employees of the vendor of such appliances. (Ord. 3691 § 1, 2011)


1707.04 Licensing standards.

Licenses to engage in the business of plumbing within the City of Meadville shall be issued in the following categories and subject to the following restrictions:

A. Apprentice.

1. Qualifications. Any person employed by a licensed master plumber in the business of plumbing but who holds no other license to perform plumbing work within the City of Meadville.

2. Limited License. The license issued to an apprentice plumber shall be in the nature of a registration. Applicants for a license as an apprentice plumber shall submit a written application therefor to the code official. All such applications shall indicate the name and address of the master plumber by whom the applicant proposes to be employed and shall be signed by the said master plumber. A license to work as an apprentice plumber shall expire upon termination of the licensee’s employment with the master plumber who signed the application for such license. It shall be the duty of both the apprentice plumber and the employing master plumber to notify the code official in writing of the termination of the employment of any apprentice plumber within 48 hours of the last hour worked by the apprentice plumber or the subject master plumber.

3. Limitations. Persons holding a license to work as an apprentice plumber shall only work in the employ of a licensed master plumber or under the direct supervision of a licensed journeyman plumber also employed by the employing master plumber. “Direct supervision” shall mean that the supervising master plumber or journeyman plumber shall be present at the site of any and all work performed by an apprentice plumber at all times while such apprentice plumber is engaged in plumbing work.

B. Journeyman Plumber.

1. Qualifications. A person who has attained the following education and experience may, upon successful completion of the journeyman plumber examination, be licensed to work as a journeyman plumber in the City of Meadville.

(a.) Three or more years of practical experience in the performance of plumbing work within or without the city or two or more years of employment as a licensed apprentice plumber for one or more licensed master plumbers; or 

(b.) Completion of a vocational/technical school curriculum in plumbing in an institution licensed by the commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by any other state plus one year of practical experience in the performance of plumbing work within or without the city or employment for one year as a licensed apprentice plumber for one or more licensed master plumbers; or 

(c.) Completion of a trade school curriculum in plumbing at an institution not licensed by any state but which is reasonably comparable with the curriculum at a vocational/technical school licensed by the commonwealth of Pennsylvania plus one year of practical experience in the performance of plumbing work within or without the city or employment for one year as a licensed apprentice plumber for one or more licensed master plumbers.

2. Limitations. A licensed journeyman plumber shall only engage in the business of plumbing as an employee of a licensed master plumber. A licensed journeyman plumber may engage in plumbing work under the general rather than the direct supervision of the employing master plumber. “General supervision” shall mean under and upon the direction, guidance, and responsibility of a licensed master plumber who may or may not be at all times present at the work site at which the licensed journeyman plumber is engaged in the plumbing business.

C. Master Plumber.

1. Qualifications. A person who has attained the following licenses and experience may be licensed to work as a master plumber in the City of Meadville.

(a.) Ten or more years of practical experience in the performance of plumbing work whether within the City of Meadville or elsewhere; or

(b.) An unrestricted license as a master plumber issued by any duly constituted governmental body in the United States; or

(c.) A license as a journeyman plumber issued by any duly constituted governmental body in the United States plus employment for two years as a journeyman plumber by a master plumber licensed by any duly constituted governmental body in the United States.

D. Temporary Master.

1. Qualifications. Any person who holds a current and unrestricted license as a master plumber, which is issued by any duly constituted governmental body in the United States, shall upon application and proof of such licensure be issued a temporary registration to act as a master plumber within the City of Meadville for specific projects as shall be disclosed upon application. 

2. Registration. Registration shall be on a form provided by the city, submitted to the designated code official along with the applicable registration fee established from time to time by resolution of city council. Temporary master plumber registrations shall continue only for the duration of the projects listed upon the application and shall only be valid for so long as the license subject to reciprocity shall remain in full force and effect in accord with its terms and without limitations or restrictions. Upon completion of the project or contract in the city, the registration shall expire and no further work shall be permitted without new registration.

E. Calculating Qualified Years. For purposes of determining satisfaction of work experience requirements under this section, a “year” shall be deemed to be a minimum of 1,920 hours of actual plumbing work regardless of the calendar year or years in which such hours were accumulated. (Ord. 3691 § 1, 2011)


1707.05 Licensing and registration requirements.

A. An application for examination, registration, and licensure shall be made in writing on a form provided by the city and submitted to the designated code official along with a fee established by resolution of the city council as amended from time to time.

B. Examinations shall be conducted by the International Code Council in accordance with the standards and procedures of the International Code Council at such times and places as may be arranged. Persons who meet the examination requirements and other requirements of this code shall be licensed.

C. Every licensed or registered apprentice, master or journeyman plumber who desires to continue to work in or at the business of plumbing in the city from year to year shall, before December 31st of each year, re-register for the ensuing year. Failure to do so may require a re-application and examination at the fees specified for original application.

D. The city manager shall establish from time to time a schedule of fees for the examination, licensing, registration and re-registration of plumbers, and this schedule of fees shall be effective upon approval by resolution of city council. (Ord. 3691 § 1, 2011)


1707.06 Coordination of plumber licensing and Uniform Construction Code of Pennsylvania. 

Regulations applicable to plumbing installations in the City of Meadville are and shall be those adopted from time to time under the authority of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act found at 35 P.S. Section 7210.101 et seq. as amended rather than those set forth in the Act of June 7, 1901, P.L. 493, as amended, governing plumbing in Third Class Cities, found at 53 P.S. Sections 4600 to 4668. Furthermore, the plumbing inspector referred to in Section 2 of the Act of June 7, 1901, as amended and as found at 53 P.S. Section 4599 is and shall be such inspectors as retained by the City of Meadville to perform building and plumbing inspections in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, as amended and found at 35 P.S. Section 7210.101 et seq. and Article 1701 MMC. (Ord. 3691 § 1, 2011)


1707.07 Revocation of registration or license.

In addition to other penalties provided herein, if it is determined by the code official that any licensed or registered plumber is not complying with the provisions of the laws and ordinances or regulations of the applicable plumbing code of the Uniform Construction Code adopted under the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, his license or registration may be revoked, making a re-application and re-examination necessary for new registration. (Ord. 3691 § 1, 2011)


1707.08 Appeal relating to licensing.

Any person aggrieved by any action, order or decision of the health officer or the board of examiners relating to the licensing and registration requirements may appeal to the board of health. Any such appeal shall be filed in writing with the secretary of the board of health within 10 days of the date of the action, order or decision giving rise thereto. (Ord. 3691 § 1, 2011)


1707.09 Penalty.

Any person who fails to comply with any provisions of this article relating to the requirements for licensing, certification or registration to engage in or work at the business of plumbing shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs, and in default of payment shall be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. After notice of the requirement, each day a person engages in or works at such business without first having obtained such certificate, license or registration shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 3691 § 1, 2011)


1707.10 Repealer.

All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. (Ord. 3691 § 1, 2011)


1707.11 Severability.

Should any section, part or provision of this article be declared by appropriate authority to be unlawful or unconstitutional, all other terms, conditions, provisions and parts hereof, and of any code of which this article may be or may be considered to be part, shall continue in full force and effect as if the provision declared to be unlawful or unconstitutional had been omitted as of the date of final enactment hereof. (Ord. 3691 § 1, 2011)


Article 1709       MECHANICAL CODE

(Repealed by Ord. 3607)


Article 1711       SWIMMING POOLS

(Repealed by Ord. 3608)


Article 1713       SIGNS AND AWNINGS

Sections:

1713.01  Permit required for certain signs – Permit fee.

1713.02  Permit application information – Issuance.

1713.03  Permit cancellation – Sign inspection – Change or alteration.

1713.04  Permit for flat signs – Fee exception – Requirements.

1713.05  Requirements for awnings – Signs above third story.

1713.06  Sign clearance, area, type and construction – Illumination of electrical signs.

1713.07  Requirements for electrically illuminated signs.

1713.08  Advertising banners under council control.

1713.09  Cloth signs prohibited.

1713.99  Penalty.


1713.01       Permit required for certain signs – Permit fee.

(A) No sign or signboard which overhangs the limits of a public highway, street or alley, except the flat signs herein authorized, and no sign on top of any building, and no sign or signboard which is within the limits of a public highway, street or alley, or sufficiently close to a public highway, street or alley to become dangerous to the traveling public, shall be maintained or hereafter erected until a permit therefor shall first be obtained from the office of the city engineer, authorizing the construction thereof as hereinafter provided. 

(B) The permit fee shall be $12.00 for the signs included in this section and all electrical signs. 

(C) No permit fee shall be charged for signs of less than five square feet, nor for flat signs excepted in MMC 1713.04. (Ord. 3177 § 2, 1988; Ord. 1231 § 4, 1916) 


1713.02       Permit application information – Issuance.

(A) The applicant for a permit for a sign, signboard or awning shall file with his application with the city engineer, plans thereof together with a statement of the method and manner of attachment of the same to the building or in the ground, duly verified and executed in duplicate on appropriate blanks to be furnished by the city engineer, together with such other information as the city engineer may require. The applicant shall also set forth the full name and residence address of the owner of the building and of the tenant, in case the sign, signboard or awning is being erected by the tenant, and the name and address of the party erecting the same. A certificate must also be obtained from the electrical inspector, certifying that the electric wiring and appliances are in conformity with the city electrical code. 

(B) Upon compliance by the applicant with the above conditions and the payment of the fee provided in MMC 1713.01, the city engineer, if he approves the design, location, electrical construction and security of the proposed fastenings, is authorized to issue a sign construction permit. (Ord. 1231 § 5, 1916) 


1713.03       Permit cancellation – Sign inspection – Change or alteration.

(A) The city engineer is hereby authorized and empowered to recall and cancel any sign permit issued or to be issued by him upon failure to comply with any of the conditions mentioned herein, or for any violation of the provisions of this article. 

(B) The city engineer shall make an inspection of all signs in the city and shall superintend and supervise the construction of all signs, signboards and awnings, and shall also supervise and inspect any change or alteration respecting the same, of which change or alteration written notice shall be given to the city engineer by the applicant at least five days in advance of the actual work thereon. (Ord. 1231 § 6, 1916) 


1713.04       Permit for flat signs – Fee exception – Requirements.

(A) The construction of flat signs which are placed flat against the building and fastened directly to the building shall be permitted upon obtaining a permit therefor, without the payment of any permit fee provided such signs do not have a larger square foot area than two times the width of the building. All flat signs shall be securely and adequately fastened to the building and properly maintained. 

(B) No sign made of muslin, canvas, cloth or other combustible material shall be permitted. The flat signs, within the meaning of this section, include only those signs which are placed directly against the building and are fastened directly to the building, and where any written matter thereon is on the side parallel with the building. (Ord. 1231 § 2, 1916)   


1713.05       Requirements for awnings – Signs above third story.

(A) All awnings below the second story window shall be so constructed that, when in use, no parts of such awning shall be less than seven feet above the level of the sidewalk. They shall be firmly and securely fastened to the building and kept in good repair. 

(B) All signs above the sills of the third story window shall be of noncombustible material. (Ord. 1231 § 3, 1916) 


1713.06       Sign clearance, area, type and construction – Illumination of electrical signs.

All projecting signs in the city, except flat signs, as herein defined, shall be subject to the following provisions: 

(A) They shall be located so that the lowest point thereof shall not be less than 10 feet above the level of the sidewalk, and in case the signs overhang an alley, they shall not be less than 15 feet above the grade of such alley. Such signs shall in no case extend more than six feet from the building line, and in no instance shall they extend beyond the curb line. They shall not be constructed to have a greater area on one side than 35 square feet, except in case of vertical signs, which may be so constructed that no side shall have a greater area than 50 square feet, and no vertical signs shall extend more than six feet beyond the building line.   

(1) However, bona fide hotel businesses in the city may erect vertical signs, subject to all the terms of this article, except that such signs may be so constructed that no side shall have a greater area than 80 square feet. 

(2) No signs projecting upon the street, except electric signs illuminated from within, shall be erected on Chestnut Street from the Erie Railroad Station to Diamond Square, or on Water Street from Poplar Street to North Street, or on Market Street from Poplar Street to North Street, or on Park Avenue from Poplar Street to North Street. Further, no sign shall be erected projecting upon a public street or highway in any location other than immediately in front of the property occupied or owned by the applicant for such sign, and in that case only when such sign is attached to the building or other property of the applicant. Further, not more than one projecting sign shall be allowed for any one place of business, except where the applicant’s place of business fronts upon two streets or highways, in which case one sign may be allowed for each street or highway. All projecting signs already erected at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this section (January 11, 1955), which do not conform to the requirements herein set forth with respect to size or type thereof, shall be removed or made to conform thereto.

(B) All signs whose weight shall exceed 100 pounds or whose area on one side shall exceed 20 square feet shall be fastened to the building with bolts which shall pass through the wall, and shall be bolted on the inside and fastened with suitable washers and plates. This requirement shall apply to all the main supports, but not to guy lines. The main support shall be of chains or rods, and all supporting material and fastenings shall be designed with a safety factor of 10. In case buildings are of steel frame construction or of such design that the foregoing provisions with respect to the fastenings to the buildings are not applicable, then the fastenings in such buildings may be made in a manner equivalent to the foregoing requirements, and satisfactory to and approved by the city engineer. Small signs shall be securely fastened to buildings in a manner satisfactory to the city engineer.

(C) In case of transparent illuminated signs, the glass shall not be less than double strength. They shall be of wire glass, glass covered with wire mesh, or of bulls-eye construction. 

(D) Wood may be used in the parts of the sign which do not contain wiring or socket. This shall apply to existing projecting signs as to the manner and method of support and fastening. All existing signs which are found to be in unsafe condition or which do not conform to the requirements of this article, respecting the support, hanging or location thereof, shall either be removed or made to conform thereto. 

(E) In the case of electrically illuminated signs, all lighting units used in such signs shall be maintained in operating condition at all times, and all such signs shall be illuminated each day, except on Sundays and legal holidays, for a period of at least two hours. Failure of any owner of an electrically illuminated sign for a period of three successive days or for a total of 15 days in any six-month period to have the same illuminated for the daily minimum of two hours or to have all lighting units in operating condition as above stipulated shall constitute sufficient grounds for revocation of the sign permit and the removal of such sign by the city engineer or his agents, at the expense of such owner. (Ord. 2373 § 1, 1955) 


1713.07       Requirements for electrically illuminated signs.

All signs illuminated with electricity intended to project from any building over and across the sidewalk or footway of any street in the city shall require a permit as provided by MMC 1713.01 and 1713.02 and shall also be subject to MMC 1713.06 as to extent over and across such sidewalk or footway and security as to fastenings, as well as to height above the level of the sidewalk. The material of which they are constructed shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer, and they shall be placed under the direction of the city engineer as hereinbefore provided. (Ord. 1231 § 7, 1916) 


1713.08       Advertising banners under council control.

It is the intention of this section to place the erection of advertising banners across city streets in the discretion of council under its general authority to deal generally with its streets and byways. (Ord. 2697 § 2, 1968) 


1713.09       Cloth signs prohibited.

The use in the city of muslin or other cloth signs or cloth posters on buildings or billboards is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 1231 § 9, 1916) 


1713.99       Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall forfeit and pay to the city a penalty of not less than $5.00 nor more than $100.00 for each and every offense. Such penalty shall be recovered by action of assumpsit or by summary process, at the election of the city, and if any judgment recovered therefor, together with costs, is not paid forthwith the defendant shall be imprisoned not more than 30 days. (Ord. 1231 § 9, 1916)   


Article 1715       BUILDING LINES*

Sections:

1715.01  Alden Street.

1715.02  Alfred Street.

1715.03  Arch Street.

1715.04  Burns Avenue.

1715.05  Catherine Street.

1715.06  Chancery Lane.

1715.07  Chestnut Street.

1715.08  Linden Street.

1715.09  Morgan Street.

1715.10  North Street.

1715.11  Park Avenue.

1715.12  Spring Street.

1715.13  Terrace Street.

1715.14  Walnut Street.

1715.15  Washington Street.

1715.16  Water Street.

1715.17  Alfred Street, Burns Avenue, Charlton Street, Alden Street, Pine Street, Arch Street, Chestnut Street, and Morgan Street.

1715.18  Norman Street.

1715.19  Limber Road, Highland Avenue Extension, Byllesby Avenue, Meadow Street, Ben Avon Street, Jefferson Street and North Main Street.

1715.20  Grove Street.

*Editor’s note: References to attached drawings in this article may be had by referring to the original ordinances on file at the office of the city clerk. 


1715.01       Alden Street.

From and after October 13, 1925, no building or any part of any projection of any building shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the center line of Alden Street on the south side than the following, within the limits as stated: from Charlton Street east to Morgan Street, 65 feet; and on the north side, no portion of any buildings, exclusive of porches and steps, nearer to the center line than the following within the limits as stated: from Chestnut Street east to Morgan Street, 57 feet. (Ord. 1678 § 1, 1925) 


1715.02       Alfred Street.

From and after April 28, 1925, no building or any part or projection of any building shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the east line of Alfred Street in the Third Ward of the city than 10 feet, nor nearer the west line of Alfred Street than 10 feet. (Ord. 1652 § 1, 1925)


1715.03       Arch Street.

From and after October 13, 1925, no portion of any building, exclusive of porch and steps, shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the street line of Arch Street than the following within the limits as stated: from Grove Street east to the west line of Burns Avenue produced, 20 feet on the north side; from the west line of Burns Avenue produced, to Alden Street 15 feet on the north side; from Grove Street to Alden Street, 25 feet on the south side. (Ord. 1679 § 1, 1925) 


1715.04       Burns Avenue.

From and after April 28, 1925, no building or any part or projection of any building shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the east line of Burns Avenue in the Third Ward of the city than 15 feet, nor nearer the west line of Burns Avenue than 15 feet. (Ord. 1654 § 1, 1925) 


1715.05       Catherine Street.

From and after April 28, 1925, no building or any part or projection of any building shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the east line of Catherine Street in the Third Ward of the city than 10 feet, nor nearer to the west line of Catherine Street than six feet. (Ord. 1653 § 1, 1925)   


1715.06       Chancery Lane.

From and after November 10, 1925, no building or any part of any projection of any building shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the street line of Chancery Lane than the following within the limits as stated: from North Street south to Walnut Street on the west side, 17 feet; from Walnut Street south to Chestnut Street on the west side, four feet; from North Street south to Chestnut Street on the east side, four feet. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 1925) 


1715.07       Chestnut Street.

(A) From and after April 8, 1924, no building or any part or projection of any building shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the street line of Chestnut Street than the following within the limits as stated: from Park Avenue west to the east line of River Street, one and one-half feet on the south side of the street; from Park Avenue west to Water Street, one and one-half feet on the north side of the street; and from Water Street west to the west end of the street, three feet on the north side of the street. Where thought necessary by the building inspector for the city, it shall be permissible for a roof above the second story to project one foot beyond the line above established. 

(B) From and after December 26, 1961, no building or structure, exclusive of open porches, steps and overhanging eaves or cornices, shall be established, erected or placed nearer to the street line of Chestnut Street than the following within the limits as stated: from Orchard Place to Grove Street on the north side, 40 feet; from Grove Street to Ernst Place on the north side, 65 feet; from Liberty Street to Alden Street on the south side, 40 feet. (Ord. 2527 § 2, 1961; Ord. 1603 §§ 1, 2, 1924) 


1715.08       Linden Street.

From and after April 8, 1924, no building or any part or projection of any building shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the street line of Linden Street than the following, within the limits as stated: from Water Street east to Park Avenue, 30 feet on both sides; from Park Avenue east to South Main Street, 30 feet on the south side and 28 feet on the north side; from South Main Street east to the east end of the street, eight feet on both sides. (Ord. 1605 § 1, 1924)   


1715.09       Morgan Street.

From and after November 10, 1925, no portion of any building, exclusive of porches and steps, shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the street line of Morgan Street than the following, within the limits as stated: from the city limits south to Alden Street, nearer than 15 feet on the west side; from Alden Street south to the city limits, nearer than 30 feet on the west side; and from Washington Street south to Walnut Street, nearer than 15 feet on the east side. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 1925) 


1715.10       North Street.

From and after April 14, 1925, no building or any part or projection of any building, except a porch, shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the street line of North Street than the following, within the limits as stated: from Water Street east to North Main Street, eight feet on the north side, from Water Street to North Main Street, 10 feet on the south side. (Ord. 1651 § 1, 1925)   


1715.11       Park Avenue.

(A) From and after March 10, 1959, no building or any part or projections of any building shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the street line of Park Avenue than the following, within the limits as stated: from Merrill Alley north to Linden Street, 30 feet on the east side and 35 feet on the west side; from Linden Street north to Poplar Street, 40 feet on both the east and west sides; from Poplar Street north to Pine Street, 10 feet on both sides; from Pine Street north to Arch Street, five feet on both sides; from Arch Street north to Walnut Street, the street line shall be the building line on both sides; from Walnut Street north to North Street, 10 feet on both sides; from North Street north to Baldwin Street, 10 feet on both sides. 

(B) From and after April 8, 1924, no building or any part or projection of any building shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the street line of Park Avenue than the following, within the limits as stated: from Baldwin Street north to Prospect Street, nine feet on the west side; on the east side, 21 feet from Baldwin Street to Loomis and 35 feet from Loomis Street to Prospect Street; from Prospect Street north to the city limits, nine feet on the west side and seven feet on the east side. (Ord. 2464 § 1, 1959; Ord. 1604 § 1, 1924)   


1715.12       Spring Street.

From and after February 24, 1925, no building or any part or projection of any building shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the street line of Spring Street than the following, within the limits as stated: from Terrace Street east to Baldwin Street, 30 feet on both the north and south sides. (Ord. 1650 § 1, 1925) 


1715.13       Terrace Street.

From and after July 23, 1923, no building or any part or projection of any building shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the east line of Terrace Street or "The Terrace" in the First Ward than 25 feet, nor nearer the west line of Terrace Street or "The Terrace" from the intersection with Randolph Street to a point where the center line of Spring Street produced intersects with the west line of Terrace Street than 20 feet; nor nearer the west line of Terrace Street, from a point where the center line of Spring Street produced intersects the west line of Terrace Street to the city limits, than seven feet. (Ord. 1582 § 1, 1923) 


1715.14       Walnut Street.

From and after February 24, 1925, no building or any part or projection of any building shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the street line of Walnut Street than the following, within the limits as stated: from North Cottage Street east to Chancery Lane, 25 feet on the north side; from Chancery Lane east to Liberty Street, 13 feet on the north side; from Liberty Street east to East Alley, six feet on the north side; from East Alley east to the city limits, 15 feet on the north side; from Diamond Park east to Liberty Street, nine feet on the south side; from Liberty Street east to the city limits, 25 feet on the south side. (Ord. 1648 § 1, 1925) 


1715.15       Washington Street.

From and after November 10, 1925, no portion of any building, exclusive of porches and steps, shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the street line of Washington Street than the following, within the limits as stated: from State Street east to Hickory Street, nearer than 13 feet on the north side; from Hickory Street east to the old city line, nearer than 15 feet on the north side; from the old city line east to Morgan Street, nearer than 30 feet on the north side; from South Grant Street east to Clark Street, nearer than 13 feet on the south side; from Clark Street east to the old city line, nearer than 15 feet on the south side; from the old city line east to the city limits, nearer than 25 feet on the south side. (Ord. 1682 § 1, 1925) 


1715.16       Water Street.

From and after July 26, 1955, no building or any part or any projection of any building shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the street line of Water Street than the following, within the limits as stated: from Center Street in a northerly direction to Randolph Street, three feet on the east side; from Center Street north to Boynton Street, two feet on the west side; and no building or structure, exclusive of open porches, steps and overhanging eaves or cornices, shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the street line of Water Street from Boynton Street to Terrace Street than 11 feet on the west side. (Ord. 2380 § 5, 1955) 


1715.17       Alfred Street, Burns Avenue, Charlton Street, Alden Street, Pine Street, Arch Street, Chestnut Street, and Morgan Street.

From and after April 16, 1926, no building or any part of any building, exclusive of porches and steps, shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the property lines of Alfred Street, Burns Avenue, Charlton Street, Alden Street, and on portions of Pine Street, Arch Street, Chestnut Street, and Morgan Street, than the building lines as shown on the attached drawing dated April 9, 1926, attached to the ordinance codified in this section and hereby made a part of the same. (Ord. 1698 § 1, 1926) 


1715.18       Norman Street.

From and after April 16, 1926, no building or any part of any building, exclusive of porches and steps, shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the property lines of Norman Street than the building lines as shown on the attached drawing dated March 30, 1926, attached to the ordinance codified in this section and hereby made a part of the same. (Ord. 1699 § 1, 1926) 


1715.19       Limber Road, Highland Avenue Extension, Byllesby Avenue, Meadow Street, Ben Avon Street, Jefferson Street and North Main Street.

From and after April 16, 1926, no building or any part of any building, exclusive of porches and steps, shall be established, erected, placed or maintained nearer to the property lines of Limber Road, Highland Avenue Extension, Byllesby Avenue, Meadow Street, Ben Avon Street, Jefferson Street and North Main Street north of Allegheny Street than the building lines as shown on the drawing dated April 5, 1926, attached to the ordinance codified in this section and hereby made a part of the same. (Ord. 1700 § 1, 1926) 


1715.20       Grove Street.

From and after December 26, 1961, no building or structure exclusive of open porches, steps and overhanging eaves or cornices shall be established, erected or placed nearer to the street line of Grove Street than the following, within the limits as stated: from Walnut Street to Chestnut Street on the east side, 50 feet. (Ord. 2527 § 1, 1961) 


Article 1717       NUMBERING BUILDINGS

Sections:

1717.01  Base lines established for numbering.

1717.02  Manner of numbering.

1717.03  Map preparation and record.

1717.04  Buildings to be numbered – Failure to comply.

1717.05  Numbering in the Fifth Ward.


1717.01       Base lines established for numbering.

For the purpose of numbering the houses and building lots in regular order within the corporate limits of the city, there shall be and hereby are established two base lines. The one taken at a point exactly one mile due north from the northeast corner of the chapel building of Allegheny College shall run eastwardly and westwardly parallel with Chestnut Street. The other, taken at a point on the eastern face of the western abutment of Dock Street Bridge, shall run northwardly and southwardly parallel with Park Avenue. (Ord. 144 § 1, 1875) 


1717.02       Manner of numbering.

The front on each and every street in this city shall be measured and divided into 20-foot lots, to each of which shall be given an alternate number at the left hand side commencing with the base line, number one, and with number two on the right hand. (Ord. 144 § 2, 1875) 


1717.03       Map preparation and record.

Council shall appoint some suitable person or persons to measure and divide the city into lots, and cause a map or chart of the city to be made showing all the streets, lanes and alleys thereof, and the number of each and every lot measured and divided as prescribed in the foregoing paragraph, which map or chart shall be filed in the council rooms of this city, and shall also be copied into a book to be kept as a record thereof. (Ord. 144 § 3, 1875) 


1717.04       Buildings to be numbered – Failure to comply.

The owner or owners of each and every house or building fronting upon any public street, court place or alley within the corporate limits of this city shall, within 30 days after the passage of the ordinance codified in this article, cause to be affixed to his, her or their house, houses, building or dwellings, in a conspicuous place thereon and in legible figures, no less than two inches in height, the number or numbers thereof, and the owners of every house, building or dwelling hereafter built shall, within 30 days after such building shall be completed or occupied, affix thereon the number or numbers as aforesaid, and upon neglect or refusal of the owner or owners of any building or buildings, within the corporate limits of this city, to comply with the provisions of this article, and, after 30 days’ written or printed notice to do so, council shall cause the number or numbers to be affixed thereon, and the costs thereof collected from the owner or owners thereof in like manner as debts due the city are collectible. (Ord. 144 § 5, 1875) 


1717.05       Numbering in the Fifth Ward.

For the purpose of providing a method of the numbering of houses and lots in the Fifth Ward of the city, it is hereby enacted that on streets running north and south in the Fifth Ward of the city the houses and lots shall begin with Number 1 at the back channel of French Creek and shall number northwardly one number for each 25 feet, the even numbers on the east side and odd numbers on the west side, continuing northwardly to Race Street; beginning on the north side of Race Street with Number 101, such numbering shall continue northward giving 25 feet for each number, the odd numbers on the west side, and even numbers on the east side, to Kearney Street; at Kearney Street the numbers shall begin with 201 and continue northward in the same manner to Lyon Street; at Lyon Street the numbers shall begin with Number 301, and continue northwardly in the same manner. Upon all streets running east and west, the numbering shall begin at Wadsworth Street, and shall number eastwardly in the same manner, giving 25 feet front to each number, the even numbers being on the south side of the street, and the odd numbers on the north side. The first number on the west side of each north and south street being 100 greater than the first number on the west side of the next street eastward therefrom. (Ord. 889 § 1, 1908) 


Article 1721 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE

Sections:

1721.01    Title.

1721.02    Authority.

1721.03    Purpose.

1721.04    Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code.

1721.05    –

1721.09    Reserved.

1721.10    Applicability.

1721.11    Administration.

1721.12    Authority of code officials.

1721.13    Violations.

1721.14    Violation notices and orders.

1721.15    Penalty.

1721.16    Enforcement proceedings.

1721.17    Unsafe structures and equipment.

1721.18    Appeals.

1721.19    Deletions.

1721.20    Additions, insertions and changes to International Property Maintenance Code.

1721.30    Weeds and high grass prohibited.

1721.31    Removal of snow and obstructions from sidewalks.

1721.32    Refuse and garbage accumulations prohibited.

1721.33    Standard of maintenance and mandatory compliance for public sidewalks.

1721.34    Repealed.

Prior legislation: Ord. 3608.


1721.01 Title. 

The title of this article shall be the City of Meadville or Meadville Property Maintenance Code (and may be referred to as “MPMC”). (Ord. 3676 § 1, 2010)


1721.02 Authority.

This property maintenance code is adopted in accordance with authority existing under Sections 4130 and 4131 of the Third Class City Code and Article III of the Optional Third Class City Charter Law. (Ord. 3676 § 1, 2010)


1721.03 Purpose.

The property maintenance code is being adopted to establish recognized minimal standards for maintenance of property to protect the health and safety of occupants and the public. (Ord. 3676 § 1, 2010)


1721.04 Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code.

The International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc. (herein referred to as the “IPMC”), is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code for the City of Meadville for the regulation and control of buildings, structures, premises and facilities as therein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of this International Property Maintenance Code are hereby incorporated, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this code, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes as set forth in this article. (Ord. 3676 § 1, 2010)


1721.05 – 1721.09 Reserved.


1721.10 Applicability.

Sections 101 and 102 of the 2009 IPMC pertaining to applicability of the Meadville Property Maintenance Code are hereby adopted in their entirety except as modified by this code. (Ord. 3676 § 1, 2010)


1721.11 Administration.

This property maintenance code shall be administered and enforced by a code official appointed by the city manager and such deputies as may be authorized and appointed by the city manager. The code official and deputies shall meet such standards relating to the property maintenance code as the manager may establish, shall receive instruction on code administration and enforcement, and shall be law enforcement officers. (Ord. 3676 § 1, 2010)


1721.12 Authority of code officials. 

A. As permitted by law, the code official and duly appointed deputies shall have those powers and responsibilities set forth in Sections 104, 105.1, 105.4, 105.5, 105.6, 108, 109, 110, 111, and 112 of the 2009 IPMC hereby adopted as well as other provisions of this code.

B. Search Warrants. If, after proper notice and request, entry or access to property is refused, the code official may compel such access by applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Judicial Code and Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure and this article. A court may issue a search warrant to the code official for purposes of inspecting or examining any property, premises, place, or physical evidence, to determine compliance with this code. Such warrant shall be issued upon probable cause. It shall be sufficient probable cause to show any of the following:

(1) That the inspection, examination or test is pursuant to a general administrative plan to determine compliance with this code; or 

(2) That the code official has reason to believe that violation of this code has occurred or may occur, and that the code official has been refused access to the property, building, premises, place or physical evidence, or has been prevented from conducting tests. (Ord. 3676 § 1, 2010)


1721.13 Violations.

A. Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to (1) cause or permit a condition to exist with respect to, maintain or fail to maintain, or use or occupy any structure, premises, or equipment, regulated by this code, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this code; (2) provide or fail to provide any equipment or facilities regulated by this code in a manner contrary or in violation of the requirements of this code; (3) permit another person to use or occupy any structure, premises or equipment in violation of this code; or to cause such unlawful acts to occur; (4) fail to obey a lawful order of the code official; or (5) remove or deface a notice posted under the provisions of this code, or remove or interfere with safety barriers or devices.

B. Notice of Violation. The code official shall serve a notice of violation or order in accordance with the requirements of MMC 1721.14.

C. Action to Remedy Unlawful Act. If action is not taken to remedy a violation or to comply with a notice or order directing certain action to correct a violation, the code official may institute an action for imposition of a penalty in accordance with MMC 1721.15 or other sections of the MPMC as applicable; or institute appropriate legal proceedings to restrain, correct or abate the violation; institute legal proceedings to remove persons from or to terminate occupancy of a structure in violation of the provisions of this code; or institute legal proceedings to enforce an order. In the case of an emergency, the code official may take immediate action to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 

D. Recovery of City’s Costs. In the event the city incurs expenses in conjunction with the correction or abatement of any violation which creates a serious health or safety hazard to the public, because of an emergency or because the persons responsible for the violation or property have failed to comply with orders/notices issued by the code official, such expense including reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs may be collected by means of a municipal lien against the subject property or by suit against the persons responsible for the violation or property, or in any other manner permitted by law. (Ord. 3676 § 1, 2010)


1721.14 Violation notices and orders.

A. Notice to Persons Responsible. When the code official determines that a violation exists, except as otherwise provided in this code, notice shall be given in the manner set forth below to the owner of the property, any person in possession of the property, and any other person responsible for the property or the violation.

In the event the code official determines that action to correct a violation or to abate a public nuisance may require the demolition or removal of any structure or part thereof, or other action likely to cause injury to real or personal property, the code official shall make reasonable efforts to identify and locate all persons with an ownership interest in such property and serve them with notice of any notices and orders affecting said property.

B. Form of Notices. Notices shall:

(1) Be in writing.

(2) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.

(3) Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued.

(4) Include a correction order, allowing a reasonable time to take corrective action or to make the repairs and improvements required to bring the premises or structure into compliance with the provisions of this code.

(5) Inform of the right to appeal.

(6) Include a statement regarding the city’s right to take corrective action under certain circumstances, recover the costs and to seek penalties as permitted by the code and the law.

C. Method of Service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:

(1) Delivered personally; or

(2) Sent by certified mail addressed to the last known address; or

(3) Posted on the property or affected structure in a conspicuous manner if it is reasonably expected that the person to be served will observe the notice.

(4) If notice cannot be made by one of the means set forth above, it may be made by regular mail. 

D. If two notices of violation are issued in any 12-month period for the same type of violation at the same property against the same person, no additional notice of violation is required to be issued prior to seeking corrective action and penalty as permitted by the code and the law, even if the violation(s) that were the subject of the said prior notices of violation were rectified in accordance with the requirements contained in the prior notices of violation. Persons responsible shall have the opportunity to be heard in any court proceeding instituted for imposition of a penalty for violation. (Ord. 3749 § 1, 2016; Ord. 3676 § 1, 2010)


1721.15 Penalty.

A. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code, or who shall fail to comply with an order issued by the code official, shall, except as otherwise specifically provided in this code, be subject to a fine or penalty as follows:

(1) No less than $50.00 and no more than $1,000 for the first two continual and uncorrected violations of the same provision of the code on the same property.

(2) No less than $50.00 and no more than $5,000 for the third and any subsequent, continual and uncorrected violation of the same provision of the code on the same property.

(3) No more than one penalty shall be imposed per month.

B. If a violation of the MPMC is found to pose a threat to the public’s health, safety or property, then the following penalties shall be applicable:

(1) A fine of no less than $500.00 and no more than $1,000 for the first two continual and uncorrected violations of the same provision of the code on the same property, and no less than $1,000 and not exceeding $10,000 for the third and any subsequent continual and uncorrected violation of the same provision of the code on the same property, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.

(2) Under this subsection, no more than one citation may be issued per five calendar days for a continual and uncorrected violation of the same provision of this code on the same property. 

C. Specific Penalty for Properties Deemed a Blighting Influence. If the owner does not comply with the violation notice or fails to correct the conditions specified in the violation notice within the required period of time from the date of the notice from the city, the owner shall be subject to a fine of $300.00; provided, that it shall be a separate offense, for which a separate fine may be imposed, for the owner to fail to secure or seal, under Section 301.3.2, each separate door, window, or other entrance or opening enumerated in the violation notice, and provided that each day that each such separate offense continues after the required period of time has expired shall be a separate offense for which a separate fine may be imposed. 

D. Any violation which remains continuing and unabated after adjudication of a summary offense shall be given no more than 25 days to abate in subsequent notices of violation before subsequent citations may be filed. This shall not apply to properties which are deemed a blighting influence as defined by this code. (Ord. 3749 § 2, 2016; Ord. 3727 § 1, 2014; Ord. 3676 § 1, 2010)


1721.16 Enforcement proceedings.

Enforcement proceedings may be instituted by the code official or duly appointed deputies with the approval of the code official by citation or complaint in the manner provided by the applicable Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, Rules 402 through 424, or amendments thereto, and the provisions of this code. (Ord. 3676 § 1, 2010)


1721.17 Unsafe structures and equipment.

A. Sections 108, 109 and 110 of the 2009 IPMC are hereby adopted in their entirety as the regulations governing unsafe structures, unsafe equipment, structures unfit for human occupancy, dangerous structures, emergency measures and demolition.

B. Review and Notice of Remedial Actions. Whenever the code official determines, under the following sections of the IPMC, that a building or structure should be vacated under Section 108, or demolished under Section 110, or that emergency measures need to be taken under Section 108.2 or 109, unless the circumstances require immediate action, such remedial action shall not be taken without:

(1) Consulting with designated professionals as necessary to determine that the proposed action is the minimum action required to protect occupants and the public;

(2) Making reasonable efforts to identify and give notice to all persons with an ownership or possessory interest in the premises, and to all persons who may be adversely affected, of the actions to be taken by the city; and

(3) Providing a reasonable opportunity for an appeal to persons adversely affected by such action who may request same.

C. Scope of Remedial Action. The remedial action taken under Sections 108.2, 109 and 110 should be no more than necessary to protect the occupants and property and the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 3676 § 1, 2010)


1721.18 Appeals.

A. The appeals provisions, Section 111 of the IPMC, are hereby adopted in full with the modifications set forth in subsections (B) through (E) of this section.

B. An application for appeal must be accompanied by an appeal fee to be established by resolution of the city council.

C. Section 111.2.5, entitled “Compensation,” is deleted.

D. Section 111.4.1, entitled “Procedure,” shall read as follows:

111.4.1 Procedure. Hearings and appeal proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Local Agency Law, 2 Pa. C.S. § 551 et seq., and in accordance with the applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Sunshine Law, 65 Pa. C.S. § 701 et seq. Proceedings need not comply with the strict rules of evidence.

E. Section 111.7, entitled “Court Review,” shall read as follows:

111.7 Court Review. An aggrieved person may take an appeal from the decision of the Board of Appeals in accordance with the applicable provisions of law.

(Ord. 3676 § 1, 2010)


1721.19 Deletions.

The following sections of the 2009 IPMC are not adopted or included as part of the MPMC:

103

105.2 and 105.3

106

107

112.4

(Ord. 3676 § 1, 2010)


1721.20 Additions, insertions and changes to International Property Maintenance Code.

The following sections of the IPMC adopted hereunder are modified as follows:

A. Revise Section 102.3 to read as follows:

Repairs, additions and alterations to a structure or changes in occupancy shall be done in accordance of the requirements of the Pennsylvania Construction Code, as amended from time to time.

B. Remove reference to International Zoning Code in Section 201.3.

C. The following definitions are added to the definitions in Section 202:

“Blighting Influence” means a vacant residential or commercial building, or portion of any such building, which lacks framed glass or plexiglass within designated window areas and/or lacks opening doors in designated entryways, provided that:

1. the City of Meadville, through its Code Enforcement personnel, has provided 180 days notice to the owner of the property that the City has determined that the lack of windows and/or entry doors has a significant adverse influence on the community, which finding shall be based upon one or more of the following factors:

a. deterioration and/or safety of the property;

b. safety of the surrounding community;

c. the value of intact, occupied properties in the surrounding vicinity of the property;

d. the marketability of the property; and

e. community morale.

2. The Property owner, within 180 days of the date of the notice, fails to cure the condition by installation of windows and/or doors.

“Jurisdiction” shall mean the City of Meadville.

“Code Official” shall mean the person appointed by the City Manager to administer and enforce the Property Maintenance Code, and duly appointed Deputies.

“Chief Appointing Authority” shall mean the City Council.

“Chief Administrative Officer” shall mean the City Manager.

“Code” or “MPMC” shall mean the Property Maintenance regulations adopted by this Ordinance as same may be amended and the International Property Maintenance Code published by the International Code Council, 2009 Edition, as modified by this Ordinance.

“Junk” shall mean any used and discarded or abandoned materials or articles including, but not limited to, boats, trailers, machinery, equipment, appliances, house furnishings, structures, recreational equipment, building materials and debris, vehicle parts, rimless tires, the scrap and parts thereon and any other article or material which has been discarded and is not generally useable for the purpose for which it was manufactured. 

“Person” shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution, cooperative enterprise, governmental entity or agency, or any other legal entity which is recognized by law. In any provision of this Ordinance prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty, or any combination of the foregoing, the term person shall include the officers and directors of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.

“Responsible Person” or “Person Responsible” shall mean an owner, renter, tenant, lessor, lessee, manager, agent or any fiduciary or person with power of attorney or other person who is occupying or having charge of, possession or control of the premises or has the authority and ability to act on behalf of, or in the interest of, the owner.

D. Add new Section 302.1.1 as follows:

302.2.2 Surfaces. Any area not used for buildings, structures, vehicle access, parking or screening shall be planted with an all-season ground cover and/or other landscape materials.

E. Add Section 302.4.1 to read:

302.4.1 Vehicular and Pedestrian Traffic Obstructions. Trees, plants, shrubs and other obstructions which constitute a traffic hazard as set forth below shall be removed or cut back to remove the obstruction. Obstructions subject to this requirement include those which restrict the stopping sight distance for drivers of through vehicles or the available corner sight distance for drivers entering from side roads or driveways to less than the appropriate minimum stopping sight distance or minimum corner sight distance standards as established by recognized traffic safety organizations, and those which significantly restrict the sight distance to a traffic-control device. Also subject to this requirement are trees, plants, shrubs and other obstructions which overhang the public sidewalk within eight (8) vertical feet of grade or overhang a curb or cartway of a public street within fourteen (14) vertical feet of grade.

F. Amend Section 302.8, entitled “Motor Vehicles,” to read as follows:

302.8.1 No vehicle without current registration or inspection shall be parked or stored outside of a building or enclosure for more than sixty (60) days.

302.8.2 No vehicle in a state of disassembly, such as but not limited to, a vehicle with a wheel or tire removed for repair, shall be parked or stored outside of an enclosed building, such as a garage, for more than sixty (60) days.

302.8.3 No vehicle in a state of major disassembly, disrepair or damage requiring substantial repairs or body work shall be parked, kept or stored outside a building or enclosed area suitable for such storage.

302.8.4 The prohibitions in Sections 302.8.1, 302.8.2, and 302.8.3 above shall not apply where such vehicles are parked and stored in specifically designated and approved outdoor areas in conjunction with a properly permitted and licensed vehicle repair business on the condition that the storage area is properly screened and secured, and that vehicles and parts stored on the premises are not stored for more than (90) days. Appropriate screening shall include fences, walls, landscape, or evergreens or combination thereof.

G. Add the following sections:

302.10 Maintenance or Storage of Junk. No junk shall be maintained, stored or accumulated on any property unless it is maintained, stored or accumulated:

(1) within an enclosed building or structure in a manner which does not violate any other law and regulation and which does not cause a public health or safety hazard or public nuisance; or

(2) on a site at least ten (10) feet from all adjoining properties and twenty-five (25) feet from adjoining public roadways and water courses, and positioned or maintained in such a manner as to be screened from the view of adjoining properties and adjoining public roadways and so as not to cause a public health or safety hazard or public nuisance. 

302.11 Outdoor Storage of Furniture. Furniture or household furnishings which deteriorate if exposed to rain or snow or are susceptible to infestations by insects, rats or other vermin is prohibited from being placed or stored on exterior property, including open or roofed decks and open or roofed porches. Such prohibited furniture shall include, but is not limited to, upholstered couches and chairs, davenports, mattresses, sofas and other interior-type fabric-covered articles not designed or intended for use in an exterior area.

302.12 Rubbish and Garbage.

(1) No rubbish, refuse or garbage shall be accumulated or stored outside of an enclosed building or structure, except in appropriate containers which are set outside for collection in the manner required by Article 931 of the Meadville Municipal Code. Appropriate containers are those receptacles or bags as required by the City regulations with contents secured to keep the contents from being scattered or leaked.

(2) All rubbish, refuse and garbage accumulated or stored inside of an enclosed building shall be regularly disposed of by use of a refuse collection service or other lawful means.

(3) No rubbish, refuse or garbage shall be accumulated or stored inside an enclosed building so as to create a nuisance.

302.13 Disposal of Certain Materials. No person shall deposit, or cause to be deposited, any refuse, garbage, offal, pomace, dead animals, decaying matter or similar substance of any kind in or upon any premises, building or structure, so that the same shall may afford food, harborage or breeding areas for vectors, or cause a nuisance.

302.14 Leaf Burning. The burning of leaves shall be prohibited at all times and in all places in the City.

302.15 Care of Animal Waste. All buildings, yards and enclosures where animals are kept shall be free from accumulation of animal waste and shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. All animal waste must be kept in proper containers and be covered. Unless another manure management plan consistent with recognized standards is approved and implemented, animal waste must be properly removed from the premises at least weekly. 

302.16 Filling of Ditches or Watercourses. No person, whether as owner or occupant of any part of any ditch or watercourse, shall fill such ditch in such a way as to cause standing pools of water or to divert the water flow onto adjacent properties. Stagnant pools of water shall be properly drained. Anyone filling such ditch shall provide proper drains or culverts to carry off the water that might collect in the same, in accordance with the requirements of the City engineers.

H. Add a sentence to Section 303.2, entitled “Enclosures,” as follows:

Swimming pools whose sides are at least forty-eight (48) inches in height above the finished ground level and provide approved access prevention measures, including but not limited to, removable or lockable ladders or decks with gates that meet the requirements of this Section are exempt from the fence or barrier requirement.

I. Section 304.14, Insect Screens. Insert “May 1st to November 1st.”

J. Amend the last sentence of Section 304.3, entitled “Premises Identification,” to read:

Numbers shall be a minimum of three (3) inches high with a minimum stroke width of one-half (1/2) inch.

K. Add Section 304.7.1 to read: 

Rainwater leaders, yard drains, footer drains, downspouts, roof drains, subsoil drains, French drains, sump pumps or other equipment discharging stormwater or groundwater shall not empty water in a manner that allows the discharged water to enter or drain directly into or onto a public sidewalk, a street or public right-of-way. This restriction shall not apply to downspouts, roof drains or other conveyances carrying only stormwater that empty into a street that were in place prior to the adoption date of this code as evidenced by a curb hole, duly issued permit or other documentation.

L. Replace Section 309, “Pest Elimination,” with the following:

309.1 Responsibility for general measures.

Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests in the dwelling or on the premises. Every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for extermination whenever his or her dwelling is the only one infested, except that where infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain the dwelling in a rodent-proof or reasonably insect-proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in any rooming house, extermination shall be the responsibility of the operator.

309.2 Protection against rodents.

309.2.1 No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, unless every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling, roof, window, exterior door and basement hatchway is free from openings large enough to permit the entry of rodents. 

309.2.2 No person shall occupy as owner occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, unless every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement or cellar which may permit the entry of rodents shall be supplied with a protective device which will effectively prevent the entry of rodents.

309.3 Protection against insects. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained any receptacle or pool, whether natural or artificial, containing water in such condition that insects breeding therein may become a menace to the public health.

M. Sections 602.3, entitled “Heat Supply,” and 602.4, entitled “Occupiable Working Space.” Insert “September 1st to June 1st.”

N. Section 701.1 is hereby revised to read as follows:

701.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter together with the applicable provisions of the International Fire Code published by the International Code Council and as adopted from time to time as part of the PA Uniform Construction Code, shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to maintenance of structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided.

O. Add subsections to Section 301.3, entitled “Vacant Structures,” to read as follows:

301.3.1 Vacant structures. All vacant structures and portions thereof shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition, with required windows and entry doors as provided in this Code, so as not to cause a Blighting Influence or adversely affect the public health or safety.

301.3.2 Windows and doors. The owner of a vacant building that is a Blighting Influence, as defined in this Code, shall secure all spaces designed as windows with glass or plexiglass windows that have frames and glazing, and all entryways with doors which open. Sealing such a property with boards or masonry or other materials that are not glass/plexiglass windows with frames and glazing, or entry doors, shall not constitute good repair or an acceptable property condition and shall be a violation of this Code.

P. Amend Section 403.5 entitled “Clothes Dryer Exhaust” to read:

Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted in accordance with the manufacturer's instruction, but under no circumstances shall they be exhausted inside of a structure without approved dust and lint interception.

(Ord. 3749 § 3, 2016; Ord. 3735 § 1, 2015; Ord. 3727 § 1, 2014; Ord. 3676 § 1, 2010)


1721.30 Weeds and high grass prohibited.

A. Removal of Weeds and High Grass Required. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 10 inches high. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. “Weeds” shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided, however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.

B. High Grass Notices. Written notice of the violation of this section shall be given in the manner set forth in MMC 1721.14(B) and (C) except that only five days shall be permitted to correct the violation and except that, where service by hand delivery or certified mail has not been made within five days, notice shall be deemed to have been made by posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises. If the persons responsible fail to take corrective action to eliminate the violation(s), no additional notices shall be required for continuing uncorrected violations of the same provision on the same premises during the calendar year.

C. Remedies for Grass and Weed Violations. Whenever any person permits grass, weeds or other objectionable vegetation to remain upon premises in violation of this section and fails to have same removed within five days, after notice is given, the city is hereby authorized to cause the same to be removed by the city or a contractor hired by the city on a biweekly basis if reasonably required without further notice. The cost of such remedial action and all expenses incidental thereto together with a penalty of 10 percent of the costs may be collected from the owner or other person responsible for the premises in any manner permitted by law. In addition, a municipal lien or claim in the amount of the costs, related expenses, and penalties may be filed against the premises which were in violation. In addition, the city may pursue any and all other lawful remedies for the violation including prosecution of the offense. (Ord. 3676 § 1, 2010)


1721.31 Removal of snow and obstructions from sidewalks.

A. Snow, Ice and Debris to be Removed from Sidewalks. Owners of and persons responsible for premises located in the city on which are located sidewalks adjacent to public streets shall keep the sidewalks free and clear of snow and ice and from debris that poses a hazard to pedestrians between the daytime hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.

B. Snow/Ice Removal Notices. Written notice of the violation of this section shall be given in the manner set forth in MMC 1721.14(B) and (C) except that only three days shall be permitted to correct the violation and except that, where service by hand delivery or certified mail has not been made within three days, notice shall be deemed to have been made by posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises. If the persons responsible fail to take corrective action to eliminate the violation(s), no additional notices shall be required for continuing uncorrected violations of the same provision upon the same premises during the calendar year.

C. Remedies for Snow/Ice Removal Violations. If persons responsible fail to remove snow and ice or debris from sidewalks in accordance with the requirements of this section, the city is hereby authorized to and may take action to remove the snow or ice or debris with city personnel or a contractor hired by the city as often as reasonably required, without further notice, in order to keep the sidewalk reasonably safe for pedestrian use. The cost of such remedial action and all expenses incidental thereto together with a penalty of 10 percent of the costs and expenses shall be collectible from the owner or other persons responsible in any manner permitted by law. In addition, the city may file a municipal lien or claim against the premises in the amount of the unpaid costs, related expenses including reasonable legal fees and penalty and may pursue any and all other remedies permitted by law to correct the violation including prosecution of the offense.

D. For the reason that failure to remove ice and snow poses a public health and safety hazard if uncorrected in a short period of time, citations may be filed every five days the violations continue without correction or abatement. No appeal shall be provided from the notice of violation. Persons responsible shall have the opportunity to be heard in any court proceeding instituted for imposition of a penalty for violation. (Ord. 3676 § 1, 2010)


1721.32 Refuse and garbage accumulations prohibited.

A. Accumulations of Uncollected Garbage and Refuse. No accumulation of garbage, refuse or rubbish which causes a nuisance or health and safety hazard shall be permitted in any front or side yard area except as permitted for collection in accordance with Article 931 MMC.

B. Refuse and Garbage Removal Notices. Written notice of the violation of this section shall be given in the manner set forth in MMC 1721.14(B) and (C) except that only three days shall be permitted to correct the violation and except that, where service by hand delivery or certified mail has not been made within three days, notice shall be deemed to have been made by posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises. If the persons responsible fail to take corrective action to eliminate the violation(s), no additional notices shall be required for continuing uncorrected violations of the same provision upon the same premises for the calendar year.

C. Remedies for Refuse and Garbage Removal Violations. If persons responsible fail to have the refuse and garbage properly removed in accordance with the requirements of this section, the city is hereby authorized to and may take action to remove the refuse and garbage with city personnel or a contractor hired by the city as often as reasonably required, without further notice. The cost of such remedial action and all expenses incidental thereto together with a penalty of 10 percent of the costs and expenses shall be collectible from the owner or other persons responsible in any manner permitted by law. In addition, the city may file a municipal lien or claim against the premises in the amount of the unpaid costs, related expenses including reasonable legal fees and penalty and may pursue any and all other remedies permitted by law to correct the violation including prosecution of the offense.

D. For the reason that failure to remove refuse and garbage poses a unique public health and safety hazard if uncorrected in a short period of time, citations may be filed every five days the violations continue without correction or abatement. No appeal shall be provided from the notice of violation. Persons responsible shall have the opportunity to be heard in any court proceeding instituted for imposition of a penalty for violation. (Ord. 3676 § 1, 2010)


1721.33 Standard of maintenance and mandatory compliance for public sidewalks.

A. All public sidewalks in the City of Meadville shall be maintained in accord with such standards as are, from time to time, promulgated by the city manager and approved by city council. Copies of current sidewalk standards shall be on file and available to the public in the office of the city manager or his designee.

B. Upon determining that a sidewalk does not comply with the standards promulgated in accord with subsection (A) of this section, the code official or his designee is hereby authorized to issue orders complying with the notice requirements in this code to the owners of properties upon which or adjacent to which said sidewalks exist requiring that such sidewalks be repaired or replaced in a manner which causes said sidewalks to comply with such standards.

C. If the property owner fails or refuses to take action to correct the sidewalk condition in accordance with an order issued pursuant to this section, the city is hereby authorized to cause the same to be repaired by the city or a contractor hired by the city as necessary to bring it into compliance with the standards promulgated in accordance with subsection (A) of this section. The cost of such remedial action and all expenses incidental thereto together with a penalty of 10 percent of the costs may be collected from the owner or other person responsible for the premises in any manner permitted by law. In addition, a municipal lien or claim in the amount of the costs, related expenses, and penalties may be filed against the premises which were in violation. In addition, the city may pursue any and all other lawful remedies for the violation, including prosecution of the offense in accordance with the procedures pursuant to MMC 1721.13. (Ord. 3718 § 1, 2013)


1721.34 Roof water running over or dripping on sidewalk prohibited.

Repealed by Ord. 3749. (Ord. 3718 § 1, 2013)


PART 19 THE ROOMING HOUSE AND BED AND BREAKFAST CODE

Articles:

1901    Policy, Scope and Conflict

1903    Definitions

1905    Enforcement, Hearings, Orders and Penalty

1907    Rooming Houses and Bed and Breakfast Residences – Licenses

1909    Repealed

1911    Repealed

1913    Repealed

1915    Repealed

1917    Repealed

1919    Rooming Houses and Bed and Breakfast General Standards

1921    Repealed


Article 1901 POLICY, SCOPE AND CONFLICT

Sections:

1901.01    Short title.

1901.02    Statement of policy.

1901.03    Scope and application.

1901.04    Mixed use.

1901.05    Conflict.


1901.01 Short title.

This code shall be known and cited as the rooming house and bed and breakfast code, hereinafter the “code.” (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 101, 1960)


1901.02 Statement of policy.

The general purpose of this code is to promote the health, safety and general welfare by requiring that rooming houses and bed and breakfasts that offer shelter to visitors, transient guests and other residents provide a minimum level of sanitation, security and safety. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 102, 1960)


1901.03 Scope and application.

The provisions of this code shall apply to all rooming houses, rooming units and bed and breakfasts located within the city, whether now used or vacant. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 103, 1960)


1901.04 Mixed use.

(A) Whenever any dwelling contains both dwelling units and rooming units, the rooming units shall comply with the applicable requirements of this code for rooming units. Whenever one or more rooming units in a dwelling containing both dwelling units and rooming units are let to three or more persons who are not husband and wife, son or daughter, parent or grandparent, or sister or brother of the operator, the part of the dwelling so used shall also comply with the applicable requirements of this code for rooming houses.

(B) Whenever any building or structure is occupied in part as a rooming unit and in part for industrial or commercial purposes, that part of the building or structure occupied as a rooming unit shall comply with the applicable requirements of this code. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 105, 1960)


1901.05 Conflict.

In any case where a provision of this code is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code of the city, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 1201, 1960)


Article 1903 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

1903.01    Definitions generally.

1903.02    Basement.

1903.03    Bed and breakfast.

1903.04    Board.

1903.05    Cellar.

1903.06    Dwelling.

1903.07    Dwelling unit.

1903.08    Habitable space.

1903.09    Health officer.

1903.10    Hearing board.

1903.11    Occupant.

1903.12    Operator.

1903.13    Owner.

1903.14    Person.

1903.15    Premises.

1903.16    Rooming unit.

1903.17    Rooming house.

1903.18    Rubbish.


1903.01 Definitions generally.

The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this code. The singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular. Whenever the words “dwelling,” “dwelling unit,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit” or “premises” are used in this code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.” The term “occupied,” whenever used in this code, shall be construed as though followed by the words “or intended or designed to be occupied.” (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 104, 1960)


1903.02 Basement.

“Basement” means a portion of the building partly underground, but having less than half its clear height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 104, 1960)


1903.03 Bed and breakfast.

“Bed and breakfast” means a converted, existing, residential, detached dwelling which is the principal residence of the operator of the bed and breakfast establishment and which contains separate guest rooms for temporary use as sleeping quarters for guests for compensation and where meals may be provided by the owner-occupant. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 3244 § 1, 1990)


1903.04 Board.

“Board” means the board of health of the City of Meadville, Pennsylvania. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 104, 1960) 


1903.05 Cellar.

“Cellar” means a portion of the building partly underground, having half or more than half its clear height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 104, 1960) 


1903.06 Dwelling.

“Dwelling” means a building containing one or more dwelling units. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 104, 1960. Formerly 1903.07)


1903.07 Dwelling unit.

“Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms arranged for the use of one or more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, with cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 104, 1960. Formerly 1903.08) 


1903.08 Habitable space.

“Habitable space” means space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. (Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.) (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 104, 1960. Formerly 1903.11)


1903.09 Health officer.

“Health officer” means the legally designated health officer of the city or his authorized representative. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 104, 1960. Formerly 1903.12) 


1903.10 Hearing board.

“Hearing board” means the board of health of the city. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 104, 1960. Formerly 1903.13) 


1903.11 Occupant.

“Occupant” means any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 104, 1960. Formerly 1903.15) 


1903.12 Operator.

“Operator” means any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 104, 1960. Formerly 1903.17)


1903.13 Owner.

“Owner” means any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 104, 1960. Formerly 1903.19)


1903.14 Person.

“Person” means an individual, corporation, partnership, any other group acting as a unit. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 104, 1960. Formerly 1903.20) 


1903.15 Premises.

“Premises” means the ground, yard, lawn or court, or the private way, walk, alley or approach used or intended to be used in connection with a dwelling. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 104, 1960. Formerly 1903.22) 


1903.16 Rooming unit.

“Rooming unit” means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living or sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 104, 1960. Formerly 1903.23)


1903.17 Rooming house.

“Rooming house” means any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator. A rooming house is differentiated from a motel or hotel in that in a motel or hotel, the owner/operator provides clean sheets and towels, has access to rooms and cleans the rooms, rents out rooms for short stays only and advertises as a place for travelers and lodgers. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 104, 1960. Formerly 1903.24) 


1903.18 Rubbish.

“Rubbish” means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, and includes the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 104, 1960. Formerly 1903.25) 


Article 1905 ENFORCEMENT, HEARINGS, ORDERS AND PENALTY

Sections:

1905.01    Enforcement – Responsibility of health officer.

1905.02    Delegation of power or duty by health officer.

1905.03    Rules and regulations by board of health.

1905.04    Right of entry and inspection of dwellings.

1905.05    Hearing – Procedure – Decision or order by board.

1905.06    Emergency orders – Action by health officer without prior notice.

1905.07    Noncompliance with orders – Remedy or prosecution.

1905.08    Violation notice – Contents and service.

1905.09    Penalty.


1905.01 Enforcement – Responsibility of health officer.

The health officer shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this code. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 201, 1960) 


1905.02 Delegation of power or duty by health officer.

The health officer may delegate to any other properly qualified officer or employee of the board of health any power or duty vested to him by this code, except that the health officer may not delegate his power or duty to issue regulations pursuant to MMC 1905.03. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 202, 1960) 


1905.03 Rules and regulations by board of health.

(A) The board of health is hereby authorized to make, adopt and issue such written rules and regulations setting forth such standards, conditions and other specifications as they deem advisable for the proper interpretation and enforcement of the provisions of this code, with approval of council. The rules and regulations may include but shall not be limited to matters respecting: 

(1) Required facilities, utilities and fixtures, illumination, ventilation, heating, structural condition, good repair and sanitary maintenance of rooming houses and bed and breakfasts. 

(2) The sanitary condition and maintenance of rooming houses and bed and breakfasts.

(3) The occupancy of rooming houses and bed and breakfasts.

(4) The elimination and prevention of infestation in rooming houses and bed and breakfasts.

(5) The conditions under which a license for the operation of a rooming house or bed and breakfast may be granted.

(6) The records to be kept by rooming house and bed and breakfast operators.

(B) The rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this code or with any other ordinance or law of the city, state or federal government. 

(C) The rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of this code, and the penalty for their violation shall be the same as the penalty for the violation of the provisions of this code.

(D) The board of health shall, 30 days prior to the issuance of any rules and regulations, with the approval of council, cause to have printed and advertised in accordance with the Third Class City Code such rules and regulations, and shall file a copy of the proposed rules and regulations readily accessible to the public in the office of the city clerk. 

(E) A copy of all rules and regulations issued by the board of health shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 204, 1960. Formerly 1905.04) 


1905.04 Right of entry and inspection of dwellings.

Subject to the limitations of the Constitutions of the United States and of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Third Class City Code, and in order to carry out the purpose and provisions of this code, the health officer or any other officer or employee of the board, upon showing proper identification of office, may enter, examine, survey and inspect any rooming house, rooming unit, bed and breakfast and premises at all reasonable times and, in an emergency, at any time. The owner, operator or occupant of every rooming house, bed and breakfast, rooming unit and premises shall give the health officer or his agent free access for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 205, 1960. Formerly 1905.05) 


1905.05 Hearing – Procedure – Decision or order by board.

(A) Any person aggrieved by a violation notice may request and shall be granted a hearing in the manner provided in this section. The person requesting a hearing shall, within 10 days from the day the notice was served, file in the office of the city clerk a petition for a hearing on forms provided by the board of health. The secretary of the board of health shall immediately refer the petition to the hearing board, which shall set a time and place for the hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. The hearing shall be held before the board not more than 10 days from the day the petition was filed, except that upon application of the petitioner or upon its own motion, the board may delay the time of the hearing for not more than 40 days from the day the petition for a hearing was filed if there is good and sufficient reason for delay. The petitioner shall have the right to appear at the hearing in person or to be represented by an attorney or by any other person. 

(B) After the hearing, the board shall sustain, modify or revoke the notice of the health officer. If the board sustains or modifies the notice it shall be deemed to be an order. If the board finds that by reason of the hearing it is not possible for the petitioner to comply with the order within the time specified in the original notice of the health officer, the board may extend the time for compliance.

(C) Any notice served pursuant to MMC 1905.08 will automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the secretary of the board of health within 10 days from the day the notice was served. 

(D) After a hearing in the case of any notice suspending any license required by this code or by any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, when such notice has been sustained by the board of health, the license shall be deemed to have been revoked. Any such license which has been suspended by a notice shall be deemed to be automatically revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed in the office of the secretary of the board of health within 10 days after such notice is served. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2516 § 1, 1961; Ord. 2491 § 209, 1960. Formerly 1905.09) 


1905.06 Emergency orders – Action by health officer without prior notice.

(A) Whenever the health officer determines that an emergency exists which necessitates immediate action to protect the public health, safety or welfare, he shall, without prior notice, issue a written order reciting the existence of the emergency and requiring whatever action he deems advisable to meet the emergency. 

(B) Notwithstanding the provisions of MMC 1905.05 and 1905.08, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the board of health shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon his findings as to whether the provisions of this code and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the board of health shall continue such order in effect, or modify or revoke it. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 210, 1960. Formerly 1905.10) 


1905.07 Noncompliance with orders – Remedy or prosecution.

(A) In the event of the failure to comply with an order issued pursuant to any section of this code, the board of health may institute appropriate actions or proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation of the order, or they may cause the order to be carried out at the expense of the city. The city may recover the amount of the expense by action of assumpsit or, where appropriate, in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923, P.L. 207, or any amendments or reenactments thereof. 

(B) Any person failing to comply with an order issued pursuant to any section of this code may also be prosecuted for a violation of this code in accordance with MMC 1905.09. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 211, 1960. Formerly 1905.11)


1905.08 Violation notice – Contents and service.

(A) Whenever the health officer determines that there has been a violation of any provision of this code or of any rule or regulation issued thereunder, he shall give notice of the alleged violation in the manner provided in this section to the person or persons responsible for compliance under this code. The notice shall be in accordance with notice requirements of the Meadville property maintenance code.

(B) Service of the notice shall be made in accordance with the notice service requirements of the Meadville property maintenance code. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 208, 1960) 


1905.09 Penalty.

Whoever violates any provision of this code or any rule or regulation adopted by the health officer pursuant to the authority granted by this code shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $1,000 and costs, and in default of payment of the fine and costs shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days. Each day’s failure to comply with any such provision or any rule or regulation shall constitute a separate violation. The unauthorized removal of notices or orders posted in accordance with MMC 1905.08 shall constitute a violation of this code. The provisions for penalties contained in this section are in addition to any other remedies provided by this code. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 101, 1960. Formerly 1905.99) 


Article 1907 ROOMING HOUSES AND BED AND BREAKFAST RESIDENCES – LICENSES

Sections:

1907.01    License required.

1907.02    Applications.

1907.03    Licenses.

1907.04    Failure of operator to obtain license.

1907.05    License denial – Hearing and decision by board.

1907.06    License revocation or suspension.


1907.01 License required.

No person shall operate a rooming house or bed and breakfast or shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any room in any rooming house or bed and breakfast without a license issued by the health officer or board of health. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 3244, 1990)


1907.02 Applications.

(A) Application for a license shall be made by the owner/operator to the health officer on forms furnished by the board of health. Such application shall include: 

(1) The name and address of the operators and owners of the business and property; 

(2) The location of the rooming house or bed and breakfast including the street and number of each entrance; 

(3) The number of rooms occupied or available for occupancy and the number of persons who may be accommodated in accordance with the provisions of this code and with the regulations issued thereunder; and 

(4) Such other information as the health officer may by rule or regulation require. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 3244, 1990)


1907.03 Licenses.

(A) A license shall be issued by the health officer to the operator upon reasonable proof: 

(1) That the rooming house or bed and breakfast complies with the applicable provisions of this code and with the regulations issued hereunder; and 

(2) That there has been compliance with the provisions of the fire code, building code, Meadville property maintenance code, zoning code and all other applicable codes.

(B) An annual license fee shall be paid before a license may be issued. 

(C) Each license shall expire at the end of the calendar year in which it is issued and shall be renewed annually upon satisfactory proof that compliance with the applicable regulations is being maintained and upon payment of the license fee. 

(D) The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place.

(E) No transfer of a license shall be made without the written approval of the health officer. 

(F) The operator shall promptly notify the health officer of any transfer of the rooming house or bed and breakfast to a new owner.

(G) The operator shall maintain a list of occupants or guests at all times. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 3244, 1990)


1907.04 Failure of operator to obtain license.

Any person who operates a rooming house or bed and breakfast without a current, valid license issued by the health officer, or who violates any other regulations governing the rooming house or bed and breakfast, shall immediately cease operation of the rooming house or bed and breakfast residence and no person may occupy any room or guest unit therein. The operator shall be subject to summary proceedings and penalty in accordance with MMC 1905.09. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 3244, 1990)


1907.05 License denial – Hearing and decision by board.

Any person whose application for a license has been denied for the reason that the rooming house or bed and breakfast does not comply with the applicable provisions of this code or the rules and regulations issued hereunder shall be notified promptly of the denial and shall, upon request, be granted a hearing before the board of health under the procedure provided by MMC 1905.05. If the board does not sustain the denial of the license, the health officer shall issue the license forthwith. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 3244, 1990)


1907.06 License revocation or suspension.

(A) Whenever the health officer determines that conditions exist in the operation of a rooming house or bed and breakfast which is in violation of this code or of any regulation issued hereunder, he shall give notice to the operator under the procedure provided by MMC 1905.08. The operator shall, upon request, be granted a hearing before the board of health under the procedure provided by MMC 1905.05. If the board sustains the notice of the health officer, or if a request for a hearing is not made within 10 days from the day the notice was served, the health officer shall revoke the license if the operator does not comply with the order of the health officer within the period prescribed in the order.

(B) If the health officer determines that an emergency exists which necessitates immediate action to protect the public health, safety or welfare, he may direct that a service of notice under this section shall constitute a suspension of the license until the suspension is lifted by action of the board or by compliance with the notice or order of the health officer, or until the license is revoked by failure to comply with the order of the health officer. 

(C) Notwithstanding the provisions of MMC 1905.08 and 1905.05, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the board of health shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon his findings as to whether the provisions of this code and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the board of health shall continue such order in effect, or modify or revoke it.

(D) When a license has been suspended or revoked, the operator shall immediately cease operation of the rooming house or bed and breakfast, and no person may occupy any room or guest unit therein. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 3244 § 5, 1990)


Article 1909 DWELLINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION

(Repealed by Ord. 3697)


Article 1911 STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS

(Repealed by Ord. 3697)


Article 1913 UTILITIES AND FIXTURES

(Repealed by Ord. 3697)


Article 1915 HABITABLE ROOMS

(Repealed by Ord. 3697)


Article 1917 RODENT AND PEST CONTROL

(Repealed by Ord. 3697)


Article 1919 ROOMING HOUSES AND BED AND BREAKFAST GENERAL STANDARDS

Sections:

1919.01    Maintenance of rooming houses.

1919.02    Maintenance of rooming houses by operator.

1919.03    Occupancy and letting of rooming units.

1919.04    Fire safety standards of rooming houses.

1919.05    Water closets, lavatory basins and bathtubs or showers in rooming houses.

1919.06    Occupancy of cellars prohibited.

1919.07    Occupancy of basement.

1919.08    Standards for bed and breakfast residences.


1919.01 Maintenance of rooming houses.

Every owner and every operator, where any part of a dwelling is used as a rooming house, shall keep the dwelling and premises, including all fences, enclosures and appurtenances, in compliance with the Meadville property maintenance code. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 901, 1960) 


1919.02 Maintenance of rooming houses by operator.

The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings, and for the maintenance of a sanitary condition in every part of the rooming house. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 905, 1960. Formerly 1919.05) 


1919.03 Occupancy and letting of rooming units.

No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any vacant rooming unit, unless it is clean, sanitary, in good maintenance and repair and fit for human occupancy. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2491 § 906, 1960. Formerly 1919.06)


1919.04 Fire safety standards of rooming houses.

Fire safety standards and regulations for all rooming houses in the city shall be in accordance with and shall conform to the fire prevention code of the city. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2615 § 6, 1965. Formerly 1919.07)


1919.05 Water closets, lavatory basins and bathtubs or showers in rooming houses.

None of the flush water closets, lavatory basins, bathtubs or shower facilities for use by occupants of the rooming house shall be located in a basement or cellar except by written approval of the health officer. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012)


1919.06 Occupancy of cellars prohibited.

No cellar shall be occupied as a habitable room. This section shall not be construed to prohibit workrooms, playrooms or other recreation rooms in cellars. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012)


1919.07 Occupancy of basement.

(A) No basement shall be occupied as a habitable room unless there is compliance with the following requirements:

(1) The floors and walls shall be impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and protected against dampness. The floors shall be constructed of material which is easy to keep in a clean and sanitary condition. 

(2) Each room shall be adequately lighted and ventilated and shall have a safe and unobstructed means of egress. 

(3) The ceiling height shall be at least seven feet. 

(4) There shall be appurtenant to every habitable room a water closet room conforming in design and materials to the laws of the Commonwealth and the ordinances of the city. 

(5) The health officer has issued a written license indicating that all the conditions prescribed by this housing code and the rules and regulations issued thereunder have been complied with, and the basement has been found fit for human habitation. The license shall be kept at all times readily accessible in the basement. 

(B) In the event the license required by this section is denied, a hearing may be requested in accordance with MMC 1905.05. Any person who occupies or lets for occupancy a basement without a license shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with MMC 1905.09.

(C) This section shall not be construed to prohibit workrooms, playrooms or other recreation rooms in a basement, provided there is compliance with subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012)


1919.08 Standards for bed and breakfast residences.

(A) A bed and breakfast must be occupied by and be the principal residence of the owner(s) and/or operator(s). 

(B) There shall be no more than 10 guest bedrooms and no more than four guests per bedroom, and each bedroom must meet the occupancy requirements of the Meadville property maintenance code.

(C) For every two guest bedrooms, there shall be provided a full bathroom facility including a lavatory, water closet and bath, shower or bath/shower combination. 

(D) Use by guests shall be temporary only and shall not exceed 14 consecutive days. 

(E) Guest rooms shall not have separate cooking facilities.

(F) The premises shall be inspected by city inspectors prior to the commencement of the use and each year thereafter and shall conform to the Meadville property maintenance code and this code as a condition of renewal of the owner’s license. 

(G) The bed and breakfast and the dwelling in which the bed and breakfast is operated shall meet the Meadville property maintenance code and all applicable fire safety standards and requirements set forth in city codes.

(H) For the purposes of serving food, bed and breakfasts shall conform to Pennsylvania law and local ordinances governing retail food facilities.

(I) A bed and breakfast may cater occasional on-site events or activities for no more than 40 persons at a time, including, without limitation, wedding rehearsal parties, business meetings, small office parties, and similar events or activities. A bed and breakfast shall not cater or prepare foods for consumption for any off-site event or activity. A bed and breakfast that serves meals other than breakfast, or caters on-site events or activities as described in this article shall be subject to licensing as a retail food facility and all applicable rules and regulations of the Meadville board of health. All necessary licenses or permits issued by county, state or federal agencies shall be presented to the board and required licenses, certificates, or permits shall be a condition for approval.

(J) The owner/operator of any bed and breakfast shall, at all times, maintain the guestrooms, bathroom facilities, residence and premises generally in a clean and sanitary and safe condition, in good maintenance and repair and in compliance with the Meadville property maintenance code, in addition to the requirements of this code. (Ord. 3697 § 2, 2012; Ord. 3244 § 3, 1990) 


Article 1921 FACILITIES AND SERVICES

(Repealed by Ord. 3697)


Ordinance Table

Link to ordinances passed but not yet codified

	Number	Passage Date	Subject

	3	7/3/1866	Disorderly conduct and disturbing the peace (713)

	49	9/7/1870	Disorderly conduct and disturbing the peace; weapons (713, 749)

	80	7/15/1874	Circuses and menageries (305)

	95	4/21/1875	Datum line for surveys and grades (901)

	144	12/29/1875	Numbering buildings (1717)

	145	1/22/1876	Police magistrate (151)

	148	3/9/1876	Street base lines (901)

	183	9/19/1878	Watercourses (917)

	185	10/3/1878	Watercourses (917)

	Unkn.	4/21/1880	Police magistrate (151)

	210	8/4/1880	Disorderly conduct and disturbing the peace (713)

	287	12/15/1887	Disorderly conduct and disturbing the peace (713)

	293	1/4/1888	Police magistrate (151)

	381	10/18/1894	Poles (Repealed by 3466)

	455	4/2/1868	Official seal (103)

	882	6/25/1908	Sewer and water connections (911)

	889	9/19/1908	Numbering buildings (1717)

	937	3/24/1901	Poles (Repealed by 3466)

	1027	1/18/1913	Curfew (709)

	1124	2/11/1914	Disorderly conduct and disturbing the peace (713)

	1131	3/23/1914	City market (933)

	1132	4/1/1914	Parks and public property (935)

	1191	3/29/1915	Street excavations (Repealed by 3466)

	1230	10/30/1916	Parks and public property (935)

	1231	2/23/1916	Signs and awnings (1713)

	1256	10/30/1916	Parks and public property (935)

	1376	5/13/1918	Weapons and explosives (749)

	1382	5/27/1918	Gambling (729)

	1397	12/23/1918	Gambling (729)

	1510	11/15/1921	Board of health (Repealed by 3666)

	1582	7/23/1923	Building lines (1715)

	1603	4/8/1924	Building lines (1715)

	1604	4/8/1924	Building lines (1715)

	1605	4/8/1924	Building lines (1715)

	1648	2/24/1925	Building lines (1715)

	1650	2/24/1925	Building lines (1715)

	1651	4/14/1925	Building lines (1715)

	1652	4/28/1925	Building lines (1715)

	1653	4/28/1925	Building lines (1715)

	1654	4/28/1925	Building lines (1715)

	1662	7/14/1925	City flags and colors (103)

	1678	10/13/1925	Building lines (1715)

	1679	10/13/1925	Building lines (1715)

	1682	11/10/1925	Building lines (1715)

	1683	11/10/1925	Building lines (1715)

	1698	4/16/1926	Building lines (1715)

	1699	4/16/1926	Building lines (1715)

	1700	4/16/1926	Building lines (1715)

	1717	8/13/1926	Pedestrian regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	1757	5/24/1927	Circuses and menageries (305)

	1777	2/28/1928	Disorderly houses (717)

	1788	2/28/1928	Gambling (729)

	1798	10/29/1928	Transient retail merchants (317)

	1859	7/9/1929	Handbills and samples (733)

	1945	9/9/1930	Weapons and explosives (749)

	2045	12/13/1938	Curfew (709)

	2055	10/17/1939	Bicycles (Repealed by 3610)

	2066	4/23/1940	Peddlers, hucksters, and solicitors (313)

	2154	12/26/1945	Licensing for vehicles for transportation (321)

	2161	5/28/1946	False fire alarms (725)

	2213	12/28/1948	City market (933)

	2242	12/13/1949	Police pension fund (163)

	2249	10/10/1950	Parking authority (Not codified)

	2306	6/19/1952	City officers and employees (147)

	2307	7/8/1952	Police pension fund (163)

	2343	11/10/1953	Abandoned refrigerators (Repealed by 3676)

	2361	5/25/1954	City employee retirement and pension fund (165)

	2362	5/25/1954	Firemen’s pension fund (161)

	2365	10/12/1954	Vacant lots (Repealed by 3608)

	2368	1954	Tax levy (Special)

	2370	12/28/1954	Mercantile license tax (Repealed by 3452)

	2373	1/11/1955	Signs and awnings (1713)

	2377	5/24/1955	Council powers regarding sale of real estate (111)

	2380	7/26/1955	Building lines (1715)

	2458	12/30/1958	Mercantile license tax (Repealed by 3452)

	2459	12/30/1958	Earned income tax (341)

	2460	 2/30/1958	Juke box and mechanical amusement device tax (353)

	2461	12/30/1958	Per capita tax (357)

	2464	3/10/1959	Building lines (1715)

	2485	4/12/1960	City officers and employees (147)

	2491	8/23/1960	Housing code (1901, 1903, 1905, 1919)

	2508	1/10/1961	Minors and liquor control (737)

	2516	6/27/1961	Housing code (1905)

	2527	12/26/1961	Building lines (1715)

	2542	2/20/1962	City officers and employees (147)

	2544	4/24/1962	Swimming pools (Repealed by 3608)

	2550	6/26/1962	City officers and employees (147)

	2551	7/10/1962	Refuse storage, collection and disposal (Repealed by 3711)

	2552	7/10/1962	Refuse storage, collection and disposal (Repealed by 3711)

	2562	2/27/1962	Sanitary sewer rentals (913)

	2593	5/11/1964	Police magistrate (151)

	2615	3/23/1965	Housing code (1919)

	2623	11/19/1965	Parking authority agreement (Not codified)

	2624	11/23/1965	Subdivision regulations (1351, 1353, 1355, 1357, 1359, 1361, 1363)

	2659	3/28/1967	Housing code (Repealed by 3697)

	2662	5/23/1967	Parking authority agreement (Not codified)

	2672	12/26/1967	Juke box and mechanical amusement device tax (353)

	2673	12/26/1967	Earned income and mercantile license tax (341)

	2675	12/26/1967	Per capita tax (357)

	2683	2/10/1968	City administration and departments (121, 123, 131, 135, 137, 139, 143, 145, 173)

	2697	12/23/1968	Signs and awnings (1713)

	2705	5/13/1969	Street improvement proceedings (107)

	2706	5/13/1969	Housing code (Repealed by 3697)

	2716	10/14/1969	Parking authority agreement (Not codified)

	2727	12/30/1969	Occupational privilege tax (Repealed by 3648)

	2729	12/30/1969	Sanitary sewer rentals (913)

	2732	2/24/1970	Firemen’s pension fund (161)

	2736	6/9/1970	Subdivision regulations (1365)

	2737	6/9/1970	Real estate registry (105)

	2742	7/7/1970	Disorderly conduct and disturbing the peace (713)

	2743	8/4/1970	Parades and public assemblages (741)

	2744	8/4/1970	Sanitary regulations (Repealed by 3608)

	2745	8/4/1970	City employee retirement and pension fund (165)

	2746	8/4/1970	Street excavations (Repealed by 3466)

	2747	8/4/1970	Sidewalk construction and repair (905)

	2748	8/4/1970	Sewer and water connections (911)

	2749	8/4/1970	City officers and employees (147)

	2750	8/4/1970	Police pension fund (163)

	2751	8/4/1970	City officers and employees (147)

	2757	1970	Grading and paving (Special)

	2759	1971	Funds transfer (Special)

	2760	1971	Funds appropriations (Special)

	2761	1970	Tax levy (Special)

	2762	1971	Organize municipal authority (Special)

	2762-A	1971	Funds transfer (Special)

	2763	1/26/1971	Market authority (Not codified)

	2764	1971	Amends budget (Special)

	2765	1971	Amends water department budget (Special)

	2766	1971	Tax levy (Special)

	2767	1971	Funds transfer (Special)

	2768	1971	City treasurer’s salary (Special)

	2769	1971	Amends Ord. 1188, water and light plant rates (Special)

	2770	1971	Amends Ord. 2562, sanitary sewer rates (Special)

	2771	1971	Amends electrical code (Special)

	2772	1971	Amends zoning code (Special)

	2773	1971	Amends zoning code (Special)

	2774	1971	Funds transfer (Special)

	2775	5/11/1971	Department of purchasing (145)

	2776-A	1971	Amends Ord. 2727, occupational privilege tax (Special)

	2777	1971	Street vacation (Special)

	2779	1971	Repeals certain ordinances (Repealer)

	2780	7/6/1971	Meadville area recreation authority (Not codified)

	2781	1971	Grading, paving, and curbing (Special)

	2790	1971	Alley vacation (Special)

	2791	1971	Funds appropriations (Special)

	2792	1971	Funds appropriations (Special)

	2793	1971	Fixes sanitary and sewer rentals (Special)

	2795	1972	Funds transfer (Special)

	2796	2/22/1972	Firemen’s pension fund (161)

	2797	3/14/1972	Housing code (Repealed by 3697)

	2799	1972	Alley vacation (Special)

	2802	1972	Serial coupon bonds (Special)

	2803	1972	Increases bonding indebtedness of the city (Special)

	2804	1972	Capital improvements to the water system (Special)

	2805	1972	Capital improvements to the sewer system (Special)

	2806	1972	Authorizes bridge construction and maintenance (Special)

	2807	1972	Grading and paving (Special)

	2808	1972	Grading, paving and drainage (Special)

	2809	1972	Grading, paving and drainage (Special)

	2812	1972	Alley vacation (Special)

	2813	1972	General fund budget (Special)

	2814	1972	Water department budget (Special)

	2815	1972	Tax levy (Special)

	2816	1973	Funds transfer (Special)

	2817	1/9/1973	Per capita tax (357)

	2818	1973	Purchase agreement (Special)

	2819	1973	City treasurer’s salary (Special)

	2820	1973	Alley vacation (Special)

	2821	1973	Authorizes articles of agreement (Special)

	2821-A	4/12/1973	Police pension fund (163)

	2822	1973	Street vacation (Special)

	2823	1973	Purchase agreement (Special)

	2824	1973	Grading, paving, and drainage (Special)

	2825	1973	Street vacation (Special)

	2826	1973	Grading, paving, and drainage (Special)

	2827	 7/10/1973	Occupational privilege tax (Repealed by 3648)

	2828	7/24/1973	Traffic and parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2829	1973	Funds transfer (Special)

	2829-A	1973	Paving of certain sidewalks (Special)

	2830	1973	Sinking fund No. 2 (Special)

	2831	10/23/1973	Trees on sidewalks (909)

	2833	1973	Street and alley vacation (Special)

	2834	1973	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2835	1973	Self-liquidating debt (Special)

	2836	1973	Non-electoral indebtedness (Special)

	2838	1973	Water system for construction contracts (Special)

	2839	1973	Street vacation (Special)

	2840	1973	General fund budget (Special)

	2841	1973	Water department budget (Special)

	2842	1973	Tax levy (Special)

	2843	1974	Funds transfer (Special)

	2844	1974	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2845	1974	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2846	1974	Treasurer’s bond (Special)

	2849	3/12/1974	Sanitary regulations (Repealed by 3608)

	2850	3/12/1974	Refuse storage, collection and disposal (Repealed by 3711)

	2851	1974	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2853	1974	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2854	5/23/1974	Water regulations and rates (915)

	2856	1974	Street vacation (Special)

	2858	1974	Grading and paving (Special)

	2859	1974	Grading, paving, and drainage (Special)

	2861	1974	Alley vacation (Special)

	2862	1974	Paving of certain sidewalks (Special)

	2863	9/24/1974	Weapons and explosives (749)

	2864	1974	Joint municipal authority (Special)

	2865	1974	General fund budget (Special)

	2866	1974	Tax levy (Special)

	2867	1974	Water department budget (Special)

	2868	1974	Construction of Meadville Rec-Complex (Special)

	2869	1974	Guarantee agreement (Special)

	2870	1974	Funds transfer (Special)

	2871	1/28/1975	Police pension fund (163)

	2872	1975	Traffic and parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2873	1975	Establishes annual salary and benefits (Special)

	2874	4/29/1975	Department of personnel (143)

	2875	4/29/1975	Personnel board (173)

	2876	 4/29/1975	Personnel board (173)

	2877	1975	Streets added for liquid fuels (Special)

	2880	7/8/1975	Water regulations and rates (915)

	2881	1975	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2885	1975	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2887	12/9/1975	City manager (123)

	2889	12/23/1975	Mercantile license tax (Repealed by 3452)

	2890	1975	General fund budget (Special)

	2891	1975	Tax levy (Special)

	2892	1975	Funds appropriations (Special)

	2893	12/30/1975	Refuse storage, collection and disposal (Repealed by 3711)

	2894	1975	Funds transfer (Special)

	2895	1976	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2896	1976	Street vacation (Special)

	2898	5/18/1976	Weapons and explosives (749)

	2900	5/18/1976	Occupational privilege tax (Repealed by 3648)

	2901	6/8/1976	Zoning regulations (Repealed by 3384)

	2903	8/24/1976	Street and sidewalk code (745)

	2905	1976	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2907	1976	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2908	1976	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2909	1976	General fund budget (Special)

	2910	1976	Water department budget (Special)

	2911	1976	Tax levy (Special)

	2912	1977	General fund budget (Special)

	2913	1977	Creates a recreation authority (Special)

	2914	1977	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2915	1/25/1977	Pet code (721)

	2916	1977	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2917	1977	Alley vacation (Special)

	2918	1977	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2919	4/4/1977	Memorial tree fund (178)

	2920	1977	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2921	1977	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2922	1977	Borrowing (Special)

	2923	1977	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2925	1977	Flood plain management (Not codified)

	2926	1977	Street vacation (Special)

	2927	8/23/1977	Subdivision regulations (1351, 1353)

	2930	1977	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2932	1977	Authorizes grading, paving, drainage (Special)

	2934	1977	Street vacation (Special)

	2935	1977	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2936	1977	Prohibits the use of motor vehicles in Shady Brook Park (Not codified)

	2938	11/9/1977	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2939	1977	Funds appropriations (Special)

	2940	1977	Tax levy (Special)

	2941	1977	Water department budget (Special)

	2943	1978	Tax enactment upon transfer (Special)

	2945	1978	Funds transfer (Special)

	2947	3/28/1978	Department of finance (137)

	2950	1978	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2951	1978	Street vacation (Special)

	2953	1978	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2954	1978	Street vacation (Special)

	2955	8/22/1978	Department of police (139)

	2956	1978	Street vacation (Special)

	2957	1978	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2958	1978	Street name change (Special)

	2961	11/21/1978	Zoning regulations (Repealed by 3384)

	2962	11/21/1978	Snow and ice emergency provisions (Repealed by 3610)

	2963	1978	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2964	1978	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2965	1978	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2966	1978	General fund budget (Special)

	2967	1978	Water department budget (Special)

	2968	1978	Tax levy (Special)

	2969	1979	Funds transfer (Special)

	2970	1979	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2971	1979	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2972	2/27/1979	City employee prescription drug reimbursement account (179)

	2973	3/13/1979	Meadville area recreation authority (Not codified)

	2974	 3/13/1979	Earned income tax (341)

	2975	4/24/1979	City boards and commissions (178)

	2977	1979	Street vacation (Special)

	2978	1979	Borrowing (Special)

	2979	1979	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2980	1979	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2982	7/24/1979	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2983	1979	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2984	1979	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2985	1979	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2987	1979	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2989	1979	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2990	1979	General fund budget (Special)

	2991	1979	Water department budget (Special)

	2992	1979	Tax levy (Special)

	2993	1979	Approves project borrowing (Special)

	2994	12/27/1979	Accident and sickness disability plan (180)

	2995	1980	Funds transfer (Special)

	2996	1980	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	2999	1980	Street vacation (Special)

	3000	1980	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3001	5/27/1980	Weapons and explosives (749)

	3003	1980	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3004	9/22/1980	Water regulations and rates (915)

	3005	1980	General fund budget (Special)

	3006	1980	Water department budget (Special)

	3007	1980	Tax levy (Special)

	3008	1981	Funds transfer (Special)

	3009	3/26/1981	City employee prescription drug reimbursement account (179)

	3010	4/14/1981	School bus loading zones (Repealed by 3610)

	3011	1981	Water department improvements (Special)

	3013	1981	Authorizes paving (Special)

	3014	1981	General fund budget (Special)

	3015	1981	Water department budget (Special)

	3016	1981	Tax levy (Special)

	3018	1982	Funds transfer (Special)

	3019	1982	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3020	1982	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3021	1982	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3022	1982	Not passed

	3023	1982	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3024	2/23/1982	VASCAR system (139)

	3025	3/9/1982	Snow and ice emergency provisions (Repealed by 3610)

	3026	1982	Dedication (Special)

	3028	1982	Street vacation (Special)

	3030	1982	Paving (Special)

	3031	1982	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3044	12/2/1982	Water regulations and rates (915)

	3045	1982	Water department budget (Special)

	3046	1982	General fund budget (Special)

	3047	1982	Tax levy (Special)

	3049	1983	Funds transfer (Special)

	3050	1983	Capital improvements project (Special)

	3051	1983	Condemning and taking of lots (Special)

	3052	6/14/1983	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3053	1983	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3054	8/24/1983	Operation of motor vehicles in city parks, property (750)

	3055	1983	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3056	1983	Condemning and taking of lots (Special)

	3058	1983	Water department budget (Special)

	3059	1983	Not passed

	3060	1983	Tax levy (Special)

	3061	1983	Wastewater treatment budget (Special)

	3062	1983	Funds appropriations (Special)

	3063	1983	Funds appropriations (Special)

	3064	12/27/1983	Juke box and mechanical amusement device tax (353)

	3065	1984	Funds transfer (Special)

	3066	1984	Funds transfer (Special)

	3067	1984	Funds transfer (Special)

	3068	1/24/1984	Planning commission; zoning (173)

	3069	1984	Establishes amount of fidelity bond given by treasurer (Special)

	3070	1984	Capital improvements project (Special)

	3071	5/8/1984	False fire alarms (725)

	3072	1984	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3074	1984	Real estate tax levy (Special)

	3075	1984	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3076	1984	Not passed

	3077	1984	Not passed

	3078	1984	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3080	1984	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3081	9/25/1984	Sanitary sewer rentals (913)

	3082	10/23/1984	Zoning regulations (Repealed by 3384)

	3083	1984	Not passed

	3084	1984	Tax levy (Special)

	3085	1984	Water department budget (Special)

	3086	1984	Funds appropriations (Special)

	3087	1984	Capital improvement program (Special)

	3088	1984	General fund budget (Special)

	3089	1984	Airport department budget (Special)

	3090	1985	Funds transfer (Special)

	3091	1985	Funds transfer (Special)

	3092	1985	Funds transfer (Special)

	3093	1985	Funds transfer (Special)

	3095	1985	Authorizes the borrowing of money (Special)

	3096	4/23/1985	Parking regulations (Not codified)

	3098	6/11/1985	Economic revitalization tax assistance plan (Repealed by 3568)

	3099	7/9/1985	Parks and public property (935)

	3100	1985	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3102	1985	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3104	1985	Condemning and taking of certain portions of lands (Special)

	3105	1985	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3106	1985	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3107	1985	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3108	1985	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3109	1985	Rights of cable television system (Special)

	3110	1985	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3111	1985	Tax levy (Special)

	3112	1985	Water department budget (Special)

	3113	1985	Wastewater treatment budget (Special)

	3114	1985	Capital improvement program (Special)

	3115	1985	General fund budget (Special)

	3116	1985	Airport department budget (Special)

	3118	1986	Funds transfer (Special)

	3119	1986	Funds transfer (Special)

	3120	1986	Funds transfer (Special)

	3121	1986	Funds transfer (Special)

	3123	12/30/1985	Zoning regulations (Repealed by 3384)

	3124	1986	Capital improvement debts (Special)

	3125	1986	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3128	1986	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3130	1986	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3131	9/23/1986	Weight limits for travel bridges (Repealed by 3610)

	3132	9/23/1986	Sanitary regulations (Repealed by 3608)

	3133	1986	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3135	1986	Tax levy (Special)

	3136	1986	Water department budget (Special)

	3137	1986	Wastewater treatment department budget (Special)

	3138	1986	Capital improvement program (Special)

	3139	1986	General fund budget (Special)

	3140	1986	Airport department budget (Special)

	3142	1987	Closes certain intersection (Special)

	3143	1987	Funds transfer (Special)

	3144	1987	Funds transfer (Special)

	3145	1987	Funds transfer (Special)

	3146	1987	Funds transfer (Special)

	3148	1987	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3150	2/24/1987	City employee retirement and pension fund (Repealed by 3438)

	3151	1987	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3152	1987	Not passed

	3153	4/28/1987	Bicycle regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3154	1987	Approves capital improvements project (Special)

	3156	6/23/1987	Realty transfer tax (360)

	3157	1987	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3159	1987	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3160	1987	Tax levy (Special)

	3161	1987	Water department budget (Special)

	3162	1987	Wastewater treatment department budget (Special)

	3163	1987	Funds appropriations (Special)

	3164	1987	General fund budget (Special)

	3165	1987	Airport department budget (Special)

	3167	1988	Funds transfer (Special)

	3168	1988	Funds transfer (Special)

	3169	1988	Funds transfer (Special)

	3170	1988	Funds transfer (Special)

	3172	1988	Alley vacation (Special)

	3173	3/8/1988	City employee retirement and pension fund (165)

	3174	3/8/1988	Firemen’s pension fund (161)

	3175	1988	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3176	3/22/1988	Business licenses and taxes (309, 313, 317, 321, 353)

	3177	3/22/1988	Sanitary regulations; signs and awnings (1713)

	3178	1988	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3179	1988	Not passed

	3181	1988	Bicentennial celebration program of events (Special)

	3184	1988	Approves capital improvements project (Special)

	3185	1988	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3186	1988	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3187	9/13/1988	Construction of curb cuts (908)

	3188	1988	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3189	1988	Water department budget (Special)

	3190	1988	Wastewater treatment department budget (Special)

	3191	1988	Capital improvements program (Special)

	3192	1988	General fund budget (Special)

	3193	1988	Airport department budget (Special)

	3194	1989	Tax levy (Special)

	3195	1989	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3196	1989	Funds transfer (Special)

	3197	1989	Funds transfer (Special)

	3198	1989	Funds transfer (Special)

	3199	1989	Funds transfer (Special)

	3200	1989	Approves capital improvement projects (Special)

	3201	1989	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3202	1989	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3203	1989	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3204	1989	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3205	8/8/1989	Vacant lots (Repealed by 3608)

	3208	1989	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3209	8/8/1989	Street and sidewalk code (745)

	3210	8/8/1989	Notices and orders (108)

	3211	8/22/1989	Police pension fund (163)

	3212	8/22/1989	Firemen’s pension fund (161)

	3213	8/22/1989	City employee retirement and pension fund (165)

	3217	1989	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3218	1989	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3219	1989	Tax levy (Special)

	3220	1989	General fund budget (Special)

	3221	1989	Water department budget (Special)

	3222	1989	Wastewater treatment budget (Special)

	3223	1989	Capital improvement program (Special)

	3224	1989	Airport department budget (Special)

	3225	12/21/1989	Street and sidewalk code (745)

	3226	1989	Sewer system capital improvement program budget (Special)

	3227	1989	Liquid fuels program budget (Special)

	3228	1989	Park improvement program (Special)

	3229	1990	Funds transfer (Special)

	3230	1990	Funds transfer (Special)

	3231	1990	Funds transfer (Special)

	3232	1990	Funds transfer (Special)

	3234	1990	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3239	1990	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3240	 4/26/1990	Council powers regarding sale of real estate (111)

	3241	1990	Authorizes acquisition of real estate (Special)

	3242	1990	Incurring non-electoral debt (Special)

	3243	7/12/1990	Zoning regulations (Repealed by 3384)

	3244	7/12/1990	Housing code (1903, 1907, 1919)

	3245	6/28/1990	Recyclable materials (Repealed by 3711)

	3246	1990	Amends Article 3242 (Not codified)

	3247	1990	Alley vacation (Special)

	3249	1990	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3250	1990	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3251	1990	Funds appropriations (Special)

	3252	1990	Alley vacation (Special)

	3253	1990	Funds appropriations (Special)

	3254	1990	Funds appropriations (Special)

	3256	1990	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3257	1990	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3258	1990	Tax levy (Special)

	3259	1990	Funds appropriations (Special)

	3260	1990	Water department budget (Special)

	3261	1990	Wastewater treatment department budget (Special)

	3262	1990	Capital improvement program (Special)

	3263	1990	Airport department budget (Special)

	3264	1990	Liquid fuels program budget (Special)

	3265	12/27/1990	City council (111)

	3266	1/8/1991	Refuse storage, collection and disposal (Repealed by 3711)

	3268	1991	Funds transfer (Special)

	3269	1991	Funds transfer (Special)

	3270	1991	Funds transfer (Special)

	3271	1991	Funds transfer (Special)

	3272	2/12/1991	Meadville area water authority (Not codified)

	3273	1991	Capital improvement project (Special)

	3274	4/9/1991	Department of fire (141)

	3275	1991	Funds appropriations (Special)

	3276	1991	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3277	7/23/1991	Parking regulations; plumbing code (1707)

	3279	7/9/1991	Building code (Repealed by 3607)

	3280	7/9/1991	Mechanical code (Repealed by 3607)

	3281	7/9/1991	Electrical code (Repealed by 3607)

	3282	7/9/1991	Property maintenance code (Repealed by 3608)

	3283	7/9/1991	Fire prevention code (Repealed by 3607)

	3284	7/9/1991	Building codes (Repealed by 3607)

	3285	7/9/1991	Refuse storage, collection and disposal; recyclable materials (Repealed by 3711)

	3286	1991	Repeals §§ 1111.08 and 1111.09; sanitary regulations (Repealer)

	3287	7/9/1991	Public eating and drinking places (1119)

	3288	9/24/1991	Zoning regulations (Repealed by 3384)

	3289	1991	Sale of real estate (Special)

	3290	1991	Park name change (Special)

	3291	1991	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3292	1991	Street vacation (Special)

	3293	11/12/1991	Department of public works – City engineer (133)

	3296	1991	Authorizes quit claim (Special)

	3297	1991	Tax levy (Special)

	3298	1991	Funds appropriations (Special)

	3299	1991	Water department budget (Special)

	3300	1991	Wastewater treatment department budget (Special)

	3301	1991	Funds appropriations (Special)

	3302	1991	Capital improvement program (Special)

	3303	1991	Funds appropriations (Special)

	3304	12/31/1991	Sanitary sewer rentals (913)

	3305	1992	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3306	1992	Sale of city water system to area water authority (Special)

	3307	1992	Funds transfer (Special)

	3308	1992	Funds transfer (Special)

	3309	1992	Funds transfer (Special)

	3310	1992	Funds transfer (Special)

	3312	1992	Land acquisition (Special)

	3313	1992	Sale of city-owned property (Special)

	3314	1992	Abandoned

	3315	1992	Street vacation (Special)

	3316	1992	Abandoned

	3319	1992	Street vacation (Special)

	3320	1992	Water authority agreement (Special)

	3321	1992	Sale agreement (Special)

	3323	1992	Tax increment fund (Special)

	3324	1992	Funds appropriations (Special)

	3325	1992	Authorizes incurrence of lease rental debt (Special)

	3326	12/22/1992	Juke box and mechanical amusement device tax (353)

	3327	1992	Tax levy (Special)

	3328	1992	General fund budget (Special)

	3329	1992	Wastewater treatment department budget (Special)

	3330	1992	Airport department budget (Special)

	3331	1992	Capital improvement program budget (Special)

	3332	1992	Liquid fuel program budget (Special)

	3333	12/22/1992	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3334	1993	Funds transfer (Special)

	3335	1993	Funds transfer (Special)

	3336	1993	Funds transfer (Special)

	3337	3/11/1993	Disposition of insurance covering fire-damaged structures (Repealed by 3413)

	3338	4/13/1993	Trees on sidewalks (909)

	3339	1993	Drug task force agreement (Special)

	3340	1993	Local government investment program (Special)

	3341	6/11/1993	City employee retirement and pension fund (165)

	3342	1993	Baldwin Street lien forgiveness (Special)

	3343	1993	Funds transfer (Special)

	3344	 6/8/1993	Economic revitalization tax assistance plan (Repealed by 3568)

	3345	1993	R.D.A. loan (Special)

	3346	1993	Academy loan (Special)

	3347	8/26/1993	Flood plain ordinance (Repealed by 3706)

	3348	1993	Funds transfer (Special)

	3349	1993	CIP loan (Special)

	3350	1993	Adopts codified ordinances (101)

	3351	12/21/1993	1994 tax levy (Special)

	3352	21/21/1993	Adopts 1994 general fund budget (Special)

	3353	12/21/1993	Adopts 1994 wastewater treatment department budget (Special)

	3354	12/21/1993	Adopts 1994 airport department budget (Special)

	3355	12/21/1993	Adopts 1994 capital improvement program budget (Special)

	3356	12/21/1993	Adopts 1994 liquid fuels program budget (Special)

	3357	12/21/1993	Sanitary sewer rentals (913)

	3358	12/21/1993	Funds appropriations (Special)

	3359	12/21/1993	Refuse storage, collection and disposal (Repealed by 3711)

	3360	12/21/1993	Funds appropriations (Special)

	3361	3/17/1994	TIF bonds issuance (Special)

	3362	3/17/1994	Parking revenue bonds issuance (Special)

	3363	2/22/1994	Funds transfer (Special)

	3364	2/22/1994	Funds transfer (Special)

	3365	2/22/1994	Funds transfer (Special)

	3366	3/8/1994	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3367	3/8/1994	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3368	3/8/1994	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3369	3/3/1994	Funds appropriations (Special)

	3370	3/17/1994	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3371	6/9/1994	Street vacation (Special)

	3372	6/9/1994	Sale of city-owned real estate (Special)

	3373	7/7/1994	Refuse storage, collection and disposal (Repealed by 3711)

	3374	7/7/1994	Sanitary sewer rentals (913)

	3375	9/1/1994	Plumbing code (Repealed by 3607)

	3376	9/1/1994	Building code (Repealed by 3607)

	3377	9/1/1994	Mechanical code (Repealed by 3607)

	3378	9/1/1994	Electrical code (Repealed by 3607)

	3379	9/1/1994	Property maintenance code (Repealed by 3608)

	3380	9/1/1994	Fire prevention code (Repealed by 3607)

	3381	8/25/1994	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3382	9/27/1994	Property acquisition (Special)

	3383	9/29/1994	Joint municipal rail authority agreement (Special)

	3384	11/22/1994	Repeals and replaces zoning code (1301, 1302, 1303, 1304, 1305, 1306, 1307, 1308, 1309, 1310, 1311, 1312)

	3385	12/13/1994	1995 tax levy (Special)

	3386	12/13/1994	Sanitary sewer rentals (913)

	3387	12/13/1994	Adopts 1995 budget (Special)

	3388	12/13/1994	Amends Ord. 3383, joint municipal rail authority agreement (Special)

	3389	12/29/1994	Property acquisition (Special)

	3390	1/24/1995	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3391	1/24/1995	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3392	1/24/1995	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3393	2/14/1995	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3394	3/2/1995	Funds transfer (Special)

	3395	4/11/1995	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3396	3/28/1995	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3397	3/28/1995	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3398	3/28/1995	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3399	4/25/1995	Funds appropriations (Special)

	3400	4/26/1995	Municipal sewer authority (Not codified)

	3401	4/26/1995	Sale of city sanitary sewage collection, transportation, treatment and disposal system (Special)

	3402	6/13/1995	Beautification committee (178)

	3403	6/13/1995	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3404	7/11/1995	Sanitary sewer rentals (913)

	3405	7/25/1995	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3406	1995	Failed

	3407	1995	Tabled

	3408	8/22/1995	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3409	8/22/1995	Sale of city-owned real estate (Special)

	3410	8/22/1995	Sale of city-owned real estate (Special)

	3411	8/31/1995	Property acquisition (Special)

	3412	9/12/1995	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3413	9/26/1995	Repeals and replaces provisions relating to fire-damaged structures (1505)

	3414	1995	Laid over

	3415	1995	Laid over

	3416	11/14/1995	Alley vacation (Special)

	3417	11/14/1995	Sale of city-owned real estate (Special)

	3418	11/14/1995	Sale of city-owned real estate (Special)

	3419	10/24/1995	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3420	11/28/1995	Sanitary sewer rentals (913)

	3421	11/28/1995	1996 tax levy (Special)

	3422	11/28/1995	Adopts 1996 budget (Special)

	3423	12/1/1995	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3424	12/14/1995	Sanitary sewer rentals (913)

	3425	1995	Failed

	3426	1995	Failed

	3427	2/13/1996	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3428	2/27/1996	Funds transfer (Special)

	3429	2/27/1996	Participation in Pennsylvania local government investment trust (Special)

	3430	3/12/1996	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3431	3/12/1996	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3432	4/23/1996	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3433	4/23/1996	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3434	4/23/1996	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3435	5/14/1996	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3436	5/14/1996	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3437	5/14/1996	Street vacation (Special)

	3438	5/28/1996	Police pension fund (163)

	3439	5/28/1996	Firemen’s pension fund (161)

	3440	5/28/1996	City employee retirement and pension fund (165)

	3441	6/25/1996	Department of finance (137)

	3442	7/3/1996	Agreements and easements with Wal-mart Stores, Inc. (Special)

	3443	7/9/1996	Drug task force agreement (Special)

	3444	8/8/1996	Intergovernmental agreement (Special)

	3445	8/27/1996	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3446	10/22/1996	Sanitary sewer rentals (913)

	3447	10/22/1996	Refuse storage, collection and disposal (Repealed by 3711)

	3448	11/26/1996	Police pension fund (163)

	3449	12/10/1996	City council (111)

	3450	12/17/1996	1997 tax levy (Special)

	3451	12/17/1996	Refuse storage, collection and disposal (Repealed by 3711)

	3452	12/17/1996	Repeals provisions relating to mercantile license tax (Repealer)

	3453	12/17/1996	Adopts 1997 budget (Special)

	3454	1/28/1997	City employee retirement and pension fund (165)

	3455	1/28/1997	Streets added to municipal mileage (Not codified)

	3456	2/11/1997	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3457	2/11/1997	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3458	2/11/1997	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3459	2/11/1997	Snow and ice emergency provisions (Repealed by 3610)

	3460	2/11/1997	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3461	2/25/1997	Sale of city-owned real estate (Special)

	3462	2/25/1997	Funds transfer (Special)

	3463	4/8/1997	Sale of city-owned real estate (Special)

	3464	4/8/1997	Sale of city-owned real estate (Special)

	3465	4/8/1997	Sale of city-owned real estate (Special)

	3466	4/8/1997	Excavation, use, occupancy of streets (903)

	3467	4/8/1997	Street vacation (Special)

	3468	4/8/1997	Alley vacation (Special)

	3469	4/8/1997	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3470	4/8/1997	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3471	4/8/1997	Alley vacation (Special)

	3472	4/8/1997	Alley vacation (Special)

	3473	5/13/1997	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3474	6/10/1997	Police pension fund (163)

	3475	6/10/1997	Firemen’s pension fund (161)

	3476	6/24/1997	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3477	6/24/1997	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3478	6/24/1997	Property acquisition (Special)

	3479	8/26/1997	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3480	9/19/1997	City indebtedness/guaranty agreement (Special)

	3481	10/14/1997	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3482	12/23/1997	1998 tax levy (Special)

	3483	12/23/1997	Adopts 1998 budget (Special)

	3484	1/13/1998	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3485	1/13/1998	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3486	1/5/1998	Funds transfer (Special)

	3487	1/27/1998	Council meetings (111)

	3488	1/27/1998	Firemen’s pension fund (161)

	3489	1/27/1998	City employee retirement and pension fund; repeals § 4 of Ord. 3454 (165)

	3490	1/27/1998	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3491	1/27/1998	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3492	1/27/1998	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3493	1/27/1998	School bus loading zones (Repealed by 3610)

	3494	2/10/1998	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3495	3/10/1998	Amends zoning map (Special)

	3496	3/24/1998	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3497	3/24/1998	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3498	4/14/1998	Department of fire (141)

	3499	7/14/1998	Economic revitalization tax assistance plan (Repealed by 3568)

	3500	7/28/1998	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3501	7/28/1998	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3502	7/28/1998	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3503	7/28/1998	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3504	7/28/1998	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3505	7/28/1998	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3506	7/28/1998	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3507	7/28/1998	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3508	8/11/1998	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3509	8/11/1998	Police pension fund (163)

	3510	8/11/1998	Street vacation (Special)

	3511	10/13/1998	Joint environmental advisory council (153)

	3512	10/27/1998	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3513	10/27/1998	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3514	12/8/1998	Sewage pretreatment regulations (912)

	3515	12/8/1998	City employee retirement and pension fund (165)

	3516	12/8/1998	Alley vacation (Special)

	3517	12/8/1998	1999 tax levy (Special)

	3518	12/8/1998	Adopts 1999 budget (Special)

	3519	1/26/1999	Declaration of intent to develop rules and regulations for local taxpayers’ bill of rights (Special)

	3520	2/23/1999	Alley vacation (Special)

	3521	2/23/1999	Funds transfer (Special)

	3522	3/9/1999	Sale of city-owned real estate (Repealed by 3526)

	3523	3/9/1999	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3524	5/11/1999	Street vacation (Special)

	3525	5/11/1999	Alley vacation (Special)

	3526	7/13/1999	Repeals Ord. 3522 (Repealer)

	3527	7/27/1999	Skates, skateboards, and similar devices (Repealed by 3610)

	3528	7/27/1999	Zoning regulations (1315)

	3529	7/27/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3530	7/27/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3531	7/27/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3532	7/27/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3533	7/27/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3534	7/27/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3535	7/27/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3536	7/27/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3537	7/27/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3538	7/27/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3539	7/27/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3540	7/27/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3541	7/27/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3542	7/27/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3543	7/27/1999	Authorized investment of public funds (109)

	3544	9/14/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3545	9/14/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3546	11/9/1999	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3547	11/9/1999	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3548	11/9/1999	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3549	11/23/1999	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3550	12/14/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3551	12/14/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3552	12/22/1999	Refuse storage, collection and disposal (Repealed by 3711)

	3553	12/22/1999	2000 tax levy (Special)

	3554	12/22/1999	Adopts 2000 budget (Special)

	3555	12/22/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3556	12/22/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3557	12/22/1999	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3558	12/22/1999	Alley vacation (Special)

	3559	2/8/2000	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3560	2/8/2000	Sale of city-owned real estate (Special)

	3561	3/14/2000	Funds transfer (Special)

	3562	4/11/2000	Firemen’s pension fund (161)

	3563	5/23/2000	Participation in INVEST program (Special)

	3564	6/13/2000	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3565	6/13/2000	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3566	6/13/2000	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3567	8/8/2000	Police pension fund (163)

	3568	11/14/2000	Repeals provisions relating to economic revitalization tax assistance plan (Repealer)

	3569	11/14/2000	Traffic regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3570	11/14/2000	Parking regulations (Repealed by 3610)

	3571	11/14/2000	Authorizes participation in the French Creek council of governments (155)

	3572	12/12/2000	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3573	12/19/2000	2001 tax levy (Special)

	3574	12/19/2000	Adopts 2001 budget (Special)

	3575	1/9/2001	Dedication acceptance (Special)

	3576	2/27/2001	Funds transfer (Special)

	3577	2/27/2001	Amends § 521.02, on-street parking (Repealed by 3610)

	3578	4/24/2001	Adds §§ 1306.13, 1306.14, 1306.15, and 1306.16; amends §§ 1302.02, 1303.10, 1303.12, 1304.01, 1304.06, 1304.08, 1305.01, 1305.03, 1305.05, 1305.10, 1306.01, 1306.07, 1306.08, 1306.09, 1307.01, 1308.01, 1308.02, 1309.04, 1310.03, zoning (1302, 1303, 1304, 1305, 1306, 1307, 1308, 1309, 1310)

	3579	11/27/2001	Amends § 503.04, one-way streets (Repealed by 3610)

	3580	11/27/2001	Amends § 503.08, stop intersections (Repealed by 3610)

	3581	11/27/2001	Amends § 503.08, stop intersections (Repealed by 3610)

	3582	12/11/2001	Amends Art. 101, Meadville Municipal Code (101)

	3583	12/11/2001	2002 tax levy (Special)

	3584	12/11/2001	Adopts 2002 budget (Special)

	3585	2/6/2002	Adds provisions amending city pension plans (Repealed by 3655)

	3586	3/26/2002	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3587	3/26/2002	Amends § 503.06, left turns prohibited (Repealed by 3610)

	3588	4/23/2002	Funds transfer (Special)

	3589	4/3/2002	Street vacation (Special)

	3590	8/27/2002	Tax increment fund (Special)

	3591	9/24/2002	Amends § 505.08, limited parking times (Repealed by 3610)

	3592	9/24/2002	Amends § 505.04, prohibited parking (Repealed by 3610)

	3593	12/17/2002	2003 tax levy (Special)

	3594	12/17/2002	Adopts 2003 budget (Special)

	3595	2/25/2003	Amends § 505.04, prohibited parking (Repealed by 3610)

	3596	3/5/2003	Authorizes incurrence of lease rental debt (Special)

	3597	4/2/2003	Amends § 503.04, one-way streets (Repealed by 3610)

	3598	7/22/2003	Amends § 161.24, firemen’s pension fund vesting (161)

	3599	12/16/2003	Repeals § 165.13, city employees retirement and pension fund (Repealer)

	3600	12/16/2003	2004 tax levy (Special)

	3601	12/16/2003	Adopts 2004 budget (Special)

	3602	1/27/2004	Amends § 163.01, police pension fund (163)

	3603	1/21/2004	Amends Art. 161, firemen’s pension fund window retirement benefit (Expired)

	3604	2/24/2004	Amends §§ 931.01, 931.02, 931.04, 931.05 and 931.09; repeals § 931.06, refuse storage, collection and disposal (Repealed by 3711)

	3605	2/18/2004	Amends § 163.02(B), police pension fund (163)

	3606	3/17/2004	Adds Art. 361, Meadville Junior High School tax assistance plan (361)

	3607	4/21/2004	Repeals and replaces Art. 1701, uniform construction code; repeals Arts. 1503, 1703, 1705, §§ 1707.01 through 1707.04 and Art. 1709 (1701)

	3608	5/19/2004	Repeals and replaces Art. 1721, property maintenance code; repeals Arts. 1111, 1115 and 1711 (1721)

	3609	8/24/2004	Amends zoning map (Special)

	3610	11/24/2004	Repeals and replaces Part 5, traffic code (521, 525)

	3611	12/30/2004	Reenacts Art. 349; adds § 349.15; amends §§ 349.02(D), 349.03 and 349.04, emergency and municipal services tax (Repealed by 3648)

	3612	12/30/2004	2005 tax levy (Special)

	3613	12/30/2004	Adopts 2005 budget (Special)

	3614	1/26/2005	Reserved parking lot rental rates (Not codified)

	3615	3/23/2005	Amends § 1119.03, public eating and drinking places (1119)

	3616	3/23/2005	Amends §§ 521.99(A)(1) and (A)(3) and 525.99(A)(1) and (A)(3), traffic fines (521, 525)

	3617	4/20/2005	Funds transfer (Special)

	3618	4/20/2005	Adds § 1306.07; amends §§ 1302.2, 1303.01, 1303.03, 1303.05, 1303.08, 1303.10, 1304.01, 1304.03, 1304.05, 1304.07, 1305.04, 1305.08, 1305.10, 1306.01, 1306.05, 1306.09, 1307.01, 1308.02, 1309.01(B), 1309.04 and 1310.03, zoning (1302, 1303, 1304, 1305, 1306, 1307, 1308, 1309, 1310)

	3619	4/20/2005	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3620	5/18/2005	Guaranty agreement (Special)

	3621	6/22/2005	Amends § 1306.16, landscaping (1306)

	3622	8/17/2005	Alley vacation (Special)

	3623	8/17/2005	Alley vacation (Special)

	3624	8/17/2005	Street vacation (Special)

	3625	8/24/2005	Street vacation (Special)

	3626	8/24/2005	Street vacation (Special)

	3627	9/28/2005	Alley vacation (Special)

	3628	12/7/2005	Adds Title 7, Arts. 941 through 955, stormwater management (941, 943, 945, 953, 955, 957, 959, 961, 963)

	3629	12/7/2005	Adds Art. 325, sexually oriented business regulations (325)

	3630	12/21/2005	Amends § 163.22, police pension fund window retirement benefit (Expired)

	3631	12/21/2005	2006 tax levy (Special)

	3632	12/21/2005	Adopts 2006 budget (Special)

	3633	2/15/2006	Adds § 165.03(H); amends §§ 165.04(C), (D), (E) and (F) and 165.17(E), city employees’ retirement and pension fund (165)

	3634	3/22/2006	Amends § 178.02(A), beautification committee (178)

	3635	3/22/2006	Funds transfer (Special)

	3636	4/26/2006	Adds § 161.25, firemen’s pension fund (161)

	3637	4/26/2006	Adds § 163.37; amends § 163.01, police pension fund (163)

	3638	9/20/2006	Adds §§ 1503.07, 1503.08 and 1503.09, fire prevention code (1503)

	3639	12/20/2006	2007 tax levy (Special)

	3640	12/20/2006	Adopts 2007 budget (Special)

	3641	12/20/2006	Cable franchise agreement (Special)

	3642	4/18/2007	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3643	4/25/2007	Amends § 161.18(C)(1), fireman’s pension fund (161)

	3644	4/25/2007	Funds transfer (Special)

	3645	6/8/2007	Substitutes “development manager” for “director of public works” in Article 31; amends § 931.09, refuse storage, collection and disposal (Repealed by 3711)

	3646	10/24/2007	Amends § 111.01, council meetings (111)

	3647	10/24/2007	Amends § 530.01, bridge weight limits (Repealed by 3663)

	3648	12/19/2007	Repeals and replaces Article 349, local services tax (349)

	3649	12/19/2007	2008 tax levy (Special)

	3650	12/19/2007	Adopts 2008 budget (Special)

	3651	3/26/2008	Amends Article 741, parade, public assemblage, and Diamond Park gazebo permits (741)

	3652	3/26/2008	Funds transfer (Special)

	3653	4/23/2008	Amends § 749.06, weapons and explosives permit issuance decision (749)

	3654	5/7/2008	Adds Article 362, local economic revitalization tax assistance code (362)

	3655	12/17/2008	Repeals and replaces §§ 160.01, 160.02, 160.03, 160.04, 16.05, 160.06, 160.07, 160.08, 160.09, 160.10, 160.11 and 160.12, applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code (160)

	3656	12/17/2008	Adds § 165.04(G), city employees retirement and pension fund contributions, refunds and determination of continuous service (165)

	3657	12/17/2008	Adds § 161.26; amends § 161.14; repeals and replaces § 161.02(C), firemen’s pension fund (161)

	3658	12/17/2008	Adds §§ 163.14(D) and (E) and 163.37 [163.38], police pension fund (163)

	3659	12/3/2008	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3660	12/17/2008	2009 tax levy (Special)

	3661	12/17/2008	Adopts 2009 budget (Special)

	3662	1/7/2009	Establishes parking lot rental rates (Special)

	3663	2/18/2009	Repeals and replaces Articles 501, 503, 505, 507, 518, 519, 526, 530 and 531; repeals Article 529, traffic code (501, 503, 505, 507, 518, 519, 526, 530, 531)

	3664	3/25/2009	Funds transfer (Special)

	3665	4/22/2009	Alley vacation (Special)

	3666	5/27/2009	Repeals and replaces Article 1103, board of health (1103)

	3667	7/1/2009	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3668	7/22/2009	Adds §§ 521.02A, 521.02B, 525.02A and 525.02B; amends §§ 503.04, 503.08, 505.04, 505.07, 521.05, 521.99, 525.01, 525.07, 525.10, 525.11 and 525.99, traffic code (503, 505, 521, 525)

	3669	12/16/2009	Adds § 178.06, Shippen Fountain fund (178)

	3670	12/16/2009	Amends §§ 521.02A and 525.02A(B), parking meter rates (521, 525)

	3671	12/16/2009	2010 tax levy (Special)

	3672	12/16/2009	Adopts 2010 budget (Special)

	3673	1/6/2010	Adds § 505.14, on-street residential permit parking (505)

	3674	1/6/2010	Amends § 505.04, parking prohibited at all times (505)

	3675	3/24/2010	Funds transfer (Special)

	3676	9/22/2010	Amends Article 1721, property maintenance code; repeals Article 705 and § 745.10 (1721)

	3677	10/6/2010	Adds Article 991, municipal energy aggregation program (991)

	3678	9/22/2010	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3679	10/27/2010	Adds new § 1304.07; amends §§ 1304.05 and 1304.06; renumbers previous §§ 1304.07 through 1304.10 to be §§ 1304.08 through 1304.11, zoning (1304)

	3680	11/10/2010	Amends § 931.09, solid waste collection and disposal rates (Repealed by 3711)

	3681	12/15/2010	2011 tax levy (Special)

	3682	12/15/2010	Adopts 2011 budget (Special)

	3683	2/2/2011	Reserved parking lot rental rates (Special)

	3684	2/16/2011	Amends §§ 503.03, 503.04, 503.07, 503.08, 505.04, 505.07, 505.08, 505.09, 519.01, 525.01 and 525.02A, traffic code (503, 505, 519, 525)

	3685	2/23/2011	City treasurer’s salary (Special)

	3686	4/27/2011	Funds transfer (Special)

	3687	4/6/2011	Amends Part 9, Title 7, stormwater management (941, 943, 945, 947, 949, 951, 953, 955, 957, 959, 961, 963)

	3688	4/6/2011	Amends § 163.14(C)(2), police pension fund (163)

	3689	5/18/2011	Amends §§ 903.01 and 903.12(C), street excavations (903)

	3690	6/22/2011	Amends Article 1119, retail food facility safety code (1119)

	3691	6/22/2011	Amends Article 1707, plumber licensing code (1707)

	3692	11/16/2011	Earned income and net profits tax (341)

	3693	12/21/2011	Adds § 160.13, pensions (160)

	3694	12/21/2011	2012 tax levy (Special)

	3695	12/21/2011	Adopts 2012 budget (Special)

	3696	2/15/2012	Alley vacation (Special)

	3697	2/15/2012	Amends Part 19, rooming house and bed and breakfast code (1901, 1903, 1905, 1907, 1919)

	3698	4/18/2012	Amends Article 912, sewer and water connections (912)

	3699	4/18/2012	Funds transfer (Special)

	3700	5/16/2012	Adds §§ 160.14 and 160.15, pensions (160)

	3701	6/6/2012	Amends §§ 362.02(A) and (B) and 362.07(A), local economic revitalization tax assistance code (362)

	3702	6/27/2012	Adds Part 13, Title 5, floodplain management regulations (1370, 1371, 1372, 1373, 1374, 1375, 1376, 1377)

	3703	6/6/2012	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3704	6/27/2012	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3705	8/1/2012	Street vacation (Special)

	3706	8/1/2012	Adds §§ 1305.12(C), 1306.09(I), 1306.17, 1307.02(E) and 1309.04(E); amends §§ 1302.02, 1303.02, 1303.03(D), 1303.06, 1303.08, 1303.09, 1303.10, 1303.11, 1303.12, 1304.02, 1304.04, 1305.02, 1305.06, 1305.10, 1305.11, 1306.08, 1307.02(C) and 1309.01(B), (E) and (G); repeals and replaces § 1306.15; repeals §§ 1306.07(B) and 1306.11, zoning (1302, 1303, 1304, 1305, 1306, 1307, 1309)

	3707	10/3/2012	Stormwater management program and user fee (965)

	3708	11/20/2012	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3709	12/19/2012	2013 tax levy (Special)

	3710	12/19/2012	Adopts 2013 budget (Special)

	3711	12/19/2012	Repeals and replaces Article 931; repeals Article 932, refuse storage, collection and disposal (931)

	3712	2/20/2013	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3713	3/6/2013	Adds § 161.27; amends § 161.02(A), firemen’s pension fund (161)

	3714	4/17/2013	Funds transfer (Special)

	3715	5/15/2013	Street vacation (Special)

	3716	8/7/2013	Adds § 521.16; amends §§ 503.03, 503.05, 503.08, 505.04, 505.07, 521.15 and 530.01, traffic code (503, 505, 521, 530)

	3717	8/7/2013	Amends Article 745, streets and sidewalks (745)

	3718	8/7/2013	Adds §§ 1721.33 and 1721.34, property maintenance code (1721)

	3719	11/20/2013	Adds § 1306.18, airport district overlay (1306)

	3720	12/18/2013	2014 tax levy (Special)

	3721	12/18/2013	Adopts 2014 budget (Special)

	3722	12/18/2013	Amends Ord. 3707, stormwater management program and user fee (965)

	3723	2/5/2014	Amends Article 1119, retail food facility safety code (1119)

	3724	5/7/2014	Funds transfer (Special)

	3725	5/21/2014	Shopping carts (751)

	3726	5/21/2014	Street vacation (Special)

	3727	6/4/2014	Amends §§ 1721.15 and 1721.20, property maintenance code (1721)

	3728	6/4/2014	Adds § 165.18, city employees’ retirement and pension fund (165)

	3729	9/17/2014	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3730	10/15/2014	Adds § 165.18 [165.19], city employees’ retirement and pension fund (165)

	3731	12/3/2014	Amends §§ 521.13 and 525.03, traffic code (521, 525)

	3732	12/17/2014	2015 tax levy (Special)

	3733	12/17/2014	Adopts 2015 budget (Special)

	3734	1/7/2015	Adds §§ 931.09(D) and (E) and 931.10(D), refuse storage, collection and disposal (931)

	3735	1/7/2015	Amends Article 1721, property maintenance code (1721)

	3736	3/4/15	Appropriation and transfer of funds (Special)

	3737	4/15/15	Street vacation (Special)

	3738	5/20/15	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3739	6/17/15	Amends § 931.12(A)(3)(A), refuse storage, collection and disposal (931)

	3740	7/15/15	Street vacation (Special)

	3741	8/5/2015	Adds §§ 160.13 and 160.14 [160.16 and 160.17]; repeals and replaces §§ 160.04(b) and 160.05(a), pension code (160)

	3742	9/16/15	Improvement of deteriorating real property or areas tax exemption (363)

	3743	10/7/15	Rezone (Special)

	3744	12/16/15	Amends § 1304.03, zoning (1304)

	3745	12/16/15	2016 tax levy (Special)

	3746	12/16/15	Adopts 2016 budget (Special)

	3747	4/16/16	Funds transfer (Special)

	3748	6/15/16	Amends Art. 903, §§ 903.01, 903.02, 903.04, 903.06, 903.07, 903.08, 903.09(B) and (D), 903.11(E) and (F), 903.12(B), (C), (F) and (I), 903.13, 903.14(A) and (B), 903.16, 903.17, 903.18(A), 903.20(A) and (C) and 903.99, street excavations (903)

	3749	6/15/16	Amends §§ 1721.14(D), 1721.15(A) and (D) and 1721.20(E), (K) and (P); repeals § 1721.34, property maintenance code (1721)

	3750	6/15/16	Amends § 931.06(B), refuse storage, collection and disposal (931)

	3751	8/10/16	Amends §§ 1372.02(b)(2)(i) and (c)(2)(i), 1373.01(e), 1373.02(d)(2) and 1373.04(d), floodplain management regulations (1372, 1373)

	3752	9/21/16	Adds § 1306.19; amends § 1302.02, zoning (1302, 1306)

	3753	9/21/16	Street vacation (Special)

	3754	10/19/16	Adds § 163.39, police pension fund (163)

	3755	12/21/16	2017 tax levy (Special)

	3756	12/21/16	Adopts 2017 budget; adds solid waste collection and disposal fee, refuse storage, collection and disposal (931)

	3757	3/1/17	Funds transfer (Special)

	3758	3/15/17	Repeals § 165.06, city employees’ retirement and pension fund (Repealer)

	3759	3/1/17	Authorizes incurrence of lease rental debt (Special)

	3760	4/5/17	Amends Ord. 3759, incurrence of lease rental debt (Special)

	3761	7/19/17	General obligation bonds issuance (Special)

	3762	8/2/17	Adds §§ 1304.03, 1306.20 and 1309.01(J); amends §§ 1303.10 and 1309.03(B); renumbers previous §§ 1304.03 through 1304.11 to be §§ 1304.04 through 1304.12, zoning (1303, 1304, 1306, 1309)

	3763	8/2/17	Adds § 947.01(E)(7); amends §§ 947.01(B) and (H), riparian buffer requirements (947)

	3764	9/6/17	Adds 1306.01(C); amends § 1302.02, zoning (1302, 1306)

	3765	10/4/17	Adds Art. 1507, outdoor burning (1507)

	3766	11/1/17	Damage of police department property (755)

	3767	12/20/17	2018 tax levy (Special)

	3768	12/20/17	Adopts 2018 budget (Special)

	3769	2/7/18	Amends §§ 503.05 and 505.04, one-way streets and parking (503, 505)

	3770	4/4/18	Amends § 362.08, local economic revitalization tax assistance (362)

	3771	5/2/18	Adds Art. 1504, commercial fire inspection program (1504)


Ordinances Pending Codification

The following ordinances have not been codified yet. Click on the ordinance number to view the changes.

(No uncodified ordinances at this time.)

 -->



-----------------------------

The Meadville Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 3771, passed May 2, 2018.

Disclaimer: The City Clerk's Office has the official version of the Meadville Municipal Code. Users should contact the City Clerk's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://www.cityofmeadville.org/ City Telephone: (814) 724-6000

Code Publishing Company