Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)],
the codification of a complete body of ordinances and resolutions for the
Borough of Monaca, County of Beaver, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by
General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 245,
together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as a single ordinance of the Borough of Monaca, which shall be
known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Borough of Monaca,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of
the prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued
in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by
the Borough Council of the Borough of Monaca, and it is the intention of
said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
A. All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent
nature adopted by the Borough of Monaca and in force on the date of
the adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby
repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as
hereinafter provided.
B. The following are specifically repealed:
(1) The 1975 Code.
(2) The following ordinances:
(a) Ordinance No. 664, Watercourses, adopted 11-12-1975.
(b) Ordinance No. 665, Mobile homes, adopted 11-12-1975.
(c) Ordinance No. 669, Business, adopted 11-12-1975.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
(d) Ordinance No. 679, Brush, grass and weeds, adopted
11-12-1975.
(e) Ordinance No. 680, Animals, adopted 11-12-1975.
(f) Ordinance No. 681, Bicycles, adopted 11-12-1975.
(g) Ordinance No. 682, Playing ball in street, adopted 11-12-1975.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to December 12, 1995.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
§ 1-3 MONACA CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances and resolutions of a general and permanent nature adopted
subsequent to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of
this ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon
being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances
and resolutions shall be temporarily placed in the Code until printed
supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance regarding zoning and land use.
S. Any ordinance regarding firearms, bows and arrows and other
weapons.
T. Any ordinance regarding vehicles and traffic.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Borough for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
B. Nomenclature. The following nomenclature changes are hereby made
throughout the entire Code:
(1) The term "Town Council" is hereby amended to read "Borough
Council."
(2) The term "Justice of the Peace" is hereby amended to read "District
Justice."
(3) References to the Department of Environmental Resources are
hereby amended to refer to the Department of Environmental
Protection
C. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, the changes and revisions of a substantive
nature as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are made to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Borough Council, and it is
the intent of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed have
been previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes
and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of
the Code specified in § 1-15.1
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6C, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Borough offices.
§ 1-6 MONACA CODE § 1-8
1:6
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Borough Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Borough
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to
the effective date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances or resolutions
are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered. It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the Borough Council that this ordinance and the Code would have
been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause, sentence,
subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof had not been included
therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after September 11, 1996.
§ 1-13 MONACA CODE § 1-15
1:8
ARTICLE II
Code Enforcement
[Adopted 10-12-1981 by Ord. No. 729]
§ 1-16. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Code Enforcement
Ordinance of the Municipality."
§ 1-17. Creation of Office of Code Enforcement.
There is hereby created by the Council of the municipality an office of the
municipality to be known as the "Office of Code Enforcement." Said office
shall have the responsibility for administering and enforcing the provisions
of this article and of those other codes and/or ordinances of the municipality
and this Code which designate said Office of Code Enforcement as their
official administration and enforcement agency.
§ 1-18. Appointment of Code Enforcement Officer.
There shall be appointed by the Council of the municipality a Code
Enforcement Officer, who shall be in charge of the Office of Code
Enforcement of the municipality. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
supervise such other employees or assistants as shall be necessary for
the administration and execution of the responsibilities of said Officer, as
appointed and approved by the Council of the municipality. Said Code
Enforcement Officer and other personnel may consist of employees directly
hired and compensated by the municipality.
§ 1-19. Relief from personal liability.
The Code Enforcement Officer or other officials or employees shall not,
while acting for the municipality, render themselves liable personally
because of any act or omission as required or permitted in the discharge
of their official duties. Any suit instituted against such Code Enforcement
Officer, official or employee, because of any act performed by him in the
lawful discharge of his duties, shall be defended by the Solicitor of the
municipality; and in no case will said officer, official or employee be liable
for costs in any action, suit or proceeding.
§ 1-20. Official record.
An official record shall be kept of all business and activities of the Office
of Code Enforcement, and all such records shall be open to the public
for inspection at all appropriate times, except that no individual, owner,
operator, occupant or other person shall be subjected to unwarranted
invasion of privacy, and except that all evidence or information obtained
in the course of any inspection shall be considered privileged information
and shall be kept confidential. Such evidence or information shall not
be disclosed except as may be necessary, in the judgment of the Code
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:9
Enforcement Officer, for the proper and effective administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article and shall not otherwise be
made public without the consent of the owner, occupant, operator or other
person in charge of the unit, structure or premises inspected.
§ 1-21. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce and administer all of the
provisions of this article and this Code which establish the Office of Code
Enforcement as their official administration and enforcement agency.
§ 1-22. Duties of Code Enforcement Officer.
The duties of the Code Enforcement Officer shall include:
§ 1-23. Right of entry.
A. The receipt of applications.
B. The issuance of permits, notices, certificates and orders.
C. The making of inspections to determine conformance with this Code
and the undertaking of systematic inspection programs.
D. The undertaking of research and investigations.
E. The recommendation of appropriate administrative rules for review and
adoption by the Borough Council.
F. The keeping of records.
G. The issuance of written annual reports.
H. Such other activities as may be required.
A. In the discharge of his duties, the Code Enforcement Officer or his
authorized representative, upon showing proper identification where
requested, is hereby authorized to enter and inspect, between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., any structure or premises in the
municipality to enforce the provisions of this article and of this Code.
The assistance and cooperation of all other municipal officials,
including the Police and Fire Departments, shall be available to the
Code Enforcement Officer to assist in the performance of his duties and
in securing right of entry.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer and the owner, operator or occupant or
other person in charge of any structure or premises subject to the
provisions of this article may agree to an inspection by appointment at a
mutually convenient time.
C. The owner, operator or occupant or other person in charge of any
structure or premises shall give the Code Enforcement Officer entry
§ 1-20 MONACA CODE § 1-23
1:10
§ 1-24. Permit required.
An application for a permit shall be required in accordance with the
provisions of this Code which the Office of Code Enforcement has the
responsibility to administer. Said application shall be submitted in such
form as may to prescribed and shall be accompanied by any required fee.2
§ 1-25. Procedures.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this Code or of any rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereof, he shall proceed as follows:
and free access thereto and to every part of the structure or to the
premises surrounding the structure.
D. If any owner, operator or occupant or other person in charge fails or
refuses to permit entry and free access to the structure or premises
under his control or to any part thereof with respect to any authorized
inspection, the Code Enforcement Officer may, upon a showing that
probable cause exists for the inspection, file a complaint and may
petition for and obtain an order directing compliance with the
inspection requirements of this article from a court of competent
jurisdiction. Any person who refuses to comply with such an order
issued pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to such penalties as
may be authorized by law for violation of a court order.
A. Serve notice in writing of the alleged violation, which shall be given by
the Code Enforcement Officer or his authorized representative. Said
notice shall be served personally to the responsible owner, occupant,
operator or other person in charge or served by registered mail with a
return receipt requested; or where such responsible person in charge
cannot be found, service may be made by posting a notice in or about
the structure or premises or by publishing such notice in a newspaper
of general circulation for a period of three consecutive days or served
by any other method authorized under the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
B. Said notice shall include a statement of the reasons why the notice is
being issued, the sections of the Code and/or ordinances which have
been violated and the remedial actions required.
C. Said notice shall allow a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days, for the
initiation and correction of the violation alleged or of the remedial
actions required except where emergency conditions exist which
require immediate corrective action.
2. Editor's Note: Former Section 3.2, Certificates, was deleted 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822.
§ 1-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-25
1:11
§ 1-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person who fails to correct a violation or who fails to institute a
remedial action as ordered by the Code Enforcement Officer or who violates
a provision or fails to comply with any requirements of this Code, unless
otherwise provided, shall be subject, for each violation, to a fine of not
more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, to imprisonment not exceeding 30 days. Each day's
failure to comply with any such provision or requirement or any such order
shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the Solicitor representing the Borough from
initiating and he is hereby authorized to initiate appropriate actions or
proceedings at law or in equity to effect the purposes of this Code.
§ 1-27. Appointment and terms of Board of Appeals.
There is hereby established a Board of Appeals, appointed by the Council
of the municipality, consisting of not less than three members nor more
than five members, who shall serve without compensation but may be
reimbursed for necessary and reasonable expenses. Their terms of office
shall be for three years, except for those first appointed, so fixed that the
term of office of at least one member shall expire each year. Appointments
to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term.
§ 1-28. Powers of the Board of Appeals.3
The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties:
D. Said notice shall contain a statement indicating that the notice will
become an order if no request and approval for an extension of time is
made to the Code Enforcement Officer or if no petition for an appeal or
hearing is requested before the Board of Appeals within 15 days from
the receipt of said notice.
E. The Code Enforcement Officer may grant a request for a reasonable
extension of time where he has evidence to believe that the responsible
person is attempting to remove the alleged violation. However, no such
extension of time may exceed a period of 90 days unless authorized by
the Board of Appeals upon appeal of the responsible owner, operator,
occupant or other person in charge.
A. Interpretation. On appeal from a determination of the Code
Enforcement Officer or on request of any municipal official, the Board
of Appeals shall decide any questions involving the interpretation of any
provision of this article or of this Code.
3. Editor's Note: Former Section 4.3, regarding dangerous and unsafe conditions, was
deleted 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 882.
§ 1-25 MONACA CODE § 1-28
1:12
§ 1-29. Requests for appeals or variances.
Any person requesting a variance or aggrieved by a decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer or by any other employee or official charged with the
administration and enforcement of this article and of this Code may take an
appeal to the Board of Appeals. All appeals shall be made in writing, stating
the grounds upon which the appeal is based and shall be transmitted to the
Office of Code Enforcement. An appeal must be taken within 15 days of the
action or of the receipt of written notice of any decision or ruling which is
being appealed.
§ 1-30. Appeals and variance procedure.
§ 1-31. Appeals from decision of Board of Appeals.
Any person or persons aggrieved by a final order or decision of the Board of
Appeals may appeal such order or decision, within 30 days, to the Court of
Common Pleas in accordance with, as far as practicable, the Rules of Civil
Procedure of the Supreme Court regarding appeals from administrative
agencies.
§ 1-32. Reports by Board of Appeals.
The Board of Appeals shall report to the Council of the municipality
periodically, at intervals of not later than 12 months. The report shall
summarize all applications and appeals made to it since the last report
B. Variances. The Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the strict
application of this Code. Such variance may be granted only in those
cases which would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship
and where the public health and safety shall not be jeopardized.
C. Decide appeals. The Board of Appeals shall hear all appeals made to it
and, depending on its findings, shall decide whether such appeals shall
be granted.
A. Public hearing. The Board of Appeals shall meet and conduct a hearing
within 30 days of the receipt of an appeal or a request for a variance. All
hearings shall be public, and all persons whose interest may be affected
shall be given an opportunity to be heard. A record shall be kept of all
evidence and testimony presented at the hearing.
B. Decision of the Board. All decisions of the Board shall be in writing, and
a copy of each decision shall be sent to the applicant and to the Code
Enforcement Officer. The Board of Appeals shall also retain in its files a
copy of each decision, which files shall be available for inspection by the
public. Each decision shall set forth fully the reasons for the decision of
the Board of Appeals and the findings of fact on which the decision was
based. The Board of Appeals shall make an order on its decision, and
the Code Enforcement Officer shall take immediate action to carry out
said order.
§ 1-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-32
1:13
and shall contain a summary of the Board's decision on each case. A
copy of the report shall be filed with the Board of Appeals. The Board of
Appeals may also submit to the Council of the municipality advisory reports
recommending changes and codifications in this article or in those other
applicable codes or ordinances.
§ 1-32 MONACA CODE § 1-32
1:14
Chapter 5
AUDITOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 35.
§ 5-1. Office of Elected Auditor abolished.
The office of Elected Auditor shall be and hereby is abolished in the Borough
of Monaca.
§ 5-2. Appointment of independent auditor.
The Borough Council shall appoint annually a certified public accountant
to audit the financial records of the Borough of Monaca in the manner as
provided by Section 1196 of Act 581 of February 1, 1966, together with such
amendments, if any, as may be made thereto.4
§ 5-3. Compensation.
The compensation of the certified public accountant performing the audit
of the financial accounts of the Borough of Monaca shall be established
annually by the Borough Council of the Borough of Monaca in accordance
with Subdivision (f) of Section 1196 of Act 581 of February 1, 1966.5
Chapter 9
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 225. Zoning — See Ch. 245.
4. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46005(7).
5. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46196(f).
§ 1-32 AUDITOR § 5-3
5:15

ARTICLE I
Business District Authority
[Adopted 12-8-1980 by Ord. No. 726]
§ 9-1. Establishment.
It is the desire of the Council of the Borough of Monaca, Beaver County,
Pennsylvania, and said Council hereby signifies its intention to organize
a Downtown Monaca Business District Authority under the Municipality
Authorities Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended.6
§ 9-2. Designation of District.
The Council of the Borough of Monaca hereby finds and determines that
improvement of the Business District by the creation of the Downtown
Monaca Business District Authority is desirable for the entire Borough
of Monaca and hereby defines said Business District for the purposes
contemplated by this article as the area within the Borough of Monaca
which is presently zoned commercial and/or contains generally commercial
uses.7
§ 9-3. Approval of plans.
It is specified that Borough Council retains the right existing under the Act
to approve any plan of the Authority.
§ 9-4. Name of Authority.
The name of the proposed Authority shall be the "Downtown Monaca
Business District Authority."
§ 9-5. Composition and terms of Board; vacancies. [Amended
7-26-1982 by Ord. No. 726-A]
The Board of the Downtown Monaca Business District Authority shall
consist of nine members. The terms of five members of the Authority
shall be for three years, and four members shall serve for two years. The
Chairman of the Authority shall promptly notify the appointing body of the
municipality concerning vacancies in the Authority, and such vacancy shall
be filled for the unexpired term.
§ 9-6. Articles of Incorporation.
Pursuant to said desire and intention of the Council of the Borough of
Monaca and in conformance with the terms and provisions of said
Municipality Authorities Act of 19458 and its amendments, the proposed
Articles of Incorporation are hereby set forth in full, as follows.9
6. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
8. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 9-1 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 9-7
9:17
§ 9-7. Notice; publication.
The proposed Articles of Incorporation of the Downtown Monaca Business
District Authority shall be executed by and on behalf of the Borough of
Monaca by the President of the Council, Mayor and Borough Secretary of
the Borough of Monaca and filed with the Secretary of the Commonwealth.
The Borough Solicitor is hereby authorized and directed to cause to be
published the notice of the intention to file the Articles of Incorporation with
the Secretary of the Commonwealth as required by the aforementioned Act.
9. Editor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 9-7 MONACA CODE § 9-7
9:18
ARTICLE II
Parking Authority
[Adopted 11-14-1983 by Ord. No. 748]
§ 9-8. Intent. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
It is the desire and intention of the municipal authorities of the Borough of
Monaca to organize an Authority under the Parking Authorities Act of 1947,
approved June 5, 1947, P.L. 458, as amended, for the purpose of exercising
any and all of the powers conferred by said Act. (53 P.S. §§ 341 through
356)10
§ 9-9. Name of Authority.
The name of the proposed Authority is the "Monaca Borough Parking
Authority."
§ 9-10. Definitions.
The following terms whenever used or referred to in this article shall have
the following meanings, except in those instances where the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant to this article.
BOARD — The governing body of the Authority.
BONDS — Includes the notes, bonds and other evidence of indebtedness,
or obligations which the Authority is authorized to issue pursuant to 53 P.S.
§ 345 of the Parking Authorities Act.11[Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
BOROUGH — As defined in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Borough
Code, Act of February 1, 1966, as amended.12
CONSTRUCTION — Includes acquisition and construction, and the term "to
construct" shall mean and include to acquire and to construct, all in such
manner as may be deemed desirable.
FACILITY or FACILITIES — Lot or lots, buildings and structures above, at
or below the surface of the earth, including equipment, entrances, exits,
fencing and all other accessories necessary or desirable for the safety and
convenience of the parking of vehicles.
FEDERAL AGENCY — Includes the United States of America, the President
of the United States of America and any department or corporation agency
or instrumentality heretofore or hereafter created, designated or
established by the United States of America.
10.Editor's Note: Former 53 P.S. §§ 341 through 356 were repealed 6-19-2001 by P.L. 287, No.
22. See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5501 et seq.
11.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5505.
12.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46202.
§ 9-8 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 9-10
9:19
IMPROVEMENT — Includes extension, enlargement and improvement, and
the term "to improve" shall mean and include to extend, to enlarge and to
improve, all in such manner as may be deemed desirable.
MUNICIPALITY — Any county, city, town, borough or township of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PERSONS — Includes natural persons.
PROJECT — Any structure, facility or undertaking which the Authority is
authorized to acquire, construct, improve, maintain or operate under the
provisions of this article.
§ 9-11. Articles of Incorporation.
The proposed Articles of Incorporation of said Authority are as follows.13
§ 9-12. Authority.14
The Articles of Incorporation of said Authority in substantially the form set
forth in § 9-11 of this article shall be executed on behalf of the Borough
of Monaca by the President of Council and the Mayor of the Borough of
Monaca under its Municipal Seal, attested by the Secretary of the Borough;
and such officers are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to do all
things necessary and appropriate to effect and establish said Authority in
conformity with the Parking Authorities Act of 1947, as amended by the Act
of 1951.15
§ 9-13. Powers and duties. [Added 4-9-1984 by Ord. No. 689-M]
A. The Borough hereby confers by its powers unto the Monaca Parking
Authority the complete power to regulate, maintain the manner of
parking in, set the parking fees for, enforce penalties for violations of
and collect the fines assessed against any owner of any vehicle in any
official metered parking lot situate in the Borough of Monaca and in any
two-hour parking zone.
B. In all other respects, the Monaca Parking Authority shall have the same
powers as the Borough of Monaca has pursuant to this article.
C. The Monaca Parking Authority shall exercise the powers conferred
hereunder in any manner it deems to be fit and proper according to the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
13.Editor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation are on file in the Borough offices.
14.Editor's Note: Former Section 5, setting forth specific names of members, is on file in the
Borough offices.
15.Editor's Note: Former 53 P.S. §§ 341 through 356 were repealed 6-19-2001 by P.L. 287, No.
22. See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5501 et seq.
§ 9-10 MONACA CODE § 9-13
9:20
Chapter 13
COUNCIL BYLAWS
§ 13-1. Meeting day and time.
The regular meetings of the Council of the Borough of Monaca shall be held
on the second Monday of each month, at 7:30 p.m., in the Council chambers
of the Municipal Building.
§ 13-2. Special meetings.
Special meeting of the Council may be called and held as provided by the
Borough Code16 and any other law governing the subject.
§ 13-3. Election of officers; terms, vacancies.
§ 13-4. President of Council.
The President of the Council, in addition to exercising his authority to
preside over the meetings of the Council and to perform the other specific
powers and duties vested in him by law or ordinance, shall be required to
authenticate, with his signature, all actions taken by the Council.
A. At its biennial organization meeting, as provided in the Borough Code,
Council shall elect one of its members as President and one as Vice
President. The Mayor shall preside over the organization of the Council
until the election of the President. The election of these officers shall
proceed as follows: A roll call of the members present shall be made
with each member, as his name is called, naming his choice for the
office of President. The person named by a majority of the members
present shall be declared elected as President. If no person shall
receive a majority of votes, a second roll call shall be made, and if no
person shall then receive a majority of votes, a third roll call shall be
held, at which only the two persons receiving the highest number of
votes at the second roll call would be eligible for votes. However, if at
any time a tie vote for only two candidates exists, the Mayor shall cast
the tie-breaking vote. As soon as the President is declared elected, the
same procedure shall be followed to elect the Vice President.
B. The President and the Vice President shall each serve an indefinite term
at the pleasure of the Council, and at any regular meeting of the Council
or at any special meeting called for the purpose, the Council may, on
motion, declare a vacancy in either or both offices.
C. In case of a vacancy, from any cause, in the office of President or Vice
President of the Council, the Council shall, within 30 days after the
occurrence of the vacancy, proceed to fill the vacancy by following the
procedure prescribed in Subsection A of this section.
16.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46001 et seq.
§ 9-13 COUNCIL BYLAWS § 13-5
13:21
§ 13-5. Appointment of committee members.
§ 13-6. Parliamentary authority.
The Council hereby adopts, as its parliamentary authority, the volume
entitled "Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised, 1970 Edition," which shall
govern all matters within the purview of that volume, except that conflicting
provisions in the Borough Code or other applicable statutes of Pennsylvania
or in these bylaws or in the Rules of Order of the Council of the Borough
of Monaca shall supersede the provisions of the parliamentary authority on
the same subject matter.
§ 13-7. Amendments; repeal; notice.
These bylaws, wholly or in part, may be amended or repealed by an
affirmative vote of 2/3 of all the members of the Borough Council, following
advance notice to each member at least 28 days before the meeting at which
action on the amendment or repeal is to be taken. The notice shall state the
extent and precise nature of the repeal or amendment that is proposed. If
notice is given at a regular, special or adjourned meeting of the Council,
held at least 28 days before the meeting at which action on the repeal or
amendment is to be taken, special or individual notice shall be required to
be given only to those members not in attendance at the earlier meeting and
present at the time notice was given.
§ 13-8. Rules.
A. At the organization meeting of the Council or within 10 days afterward,
the President of the Council shall appoint the members of all the
standing committees of the Council. Each standing committee shall be
composed of at least three members of the Council, and the individual
first named to a committee by the President shall be the chairman of
that committee. Standing committees shall serve at the pleasure of the
President of the Council.
B. The President of the Council, ex officio, shall be a member of each
standing committee, and the Borough Manager, ex officio, shall be a
member of the committee dealing generally with matters of finance. Ex
officio members shall be entitled to participate in all discussions at the
meetings of the committees of which they are members, but they shall
not vote as committee members.
C. The Borough Secretary shall serve as secretary of each standing
committee.
A. Rule 1. The parliamentary authority for the Borough Council, as
adopted by the bylaws of the Council, being Robert's Rules of Order
Newly Revised, shall govern procedure in the meetings of the Council,
except where otherwise provided in the law, in the bylaws of the
Council, and in these rules.
§ 13-5 MONACA CODE § 13-8
13:22
B. Rule 2. The order of business at regular meetings of the Council shall be
as follows:
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll call
Visitors
Communications
Minutes
Fiscal and contractual
Ordinances
Standing committee
New business
Visitors
Adjournment
C. Rule 3. The order of business at special or adjourned meetings shall
follow that for regular meetings but omitting all items of business not
pertinent to the special or adjourned meetings.
D. Rule 4. The President of the Council shall have complete charge over all
meetings of the Council, and his rulings, in all matters of parliamentary
procedure, shall be binding upon all members of the Council, unless
overruled on appeal.
E. Rule 5. In the absence of the President of the Council, the Vice
President of the Council shall conduct the meeting; and in the absence
of both the President and the Vice President, the members in
attendance at the meeting shall choose a President Pro Tempore to
preside.
F. Rule 6. The President shall call the meeting to order at the time fixed
for the meeting; but if no quorum is present, he shall delay the call to
order until there shall be a quorum present. But if the absence of a
quorum shall continue until 30 minutes after the time fixed for the
meeting, the President shall declare the meeting adjourned for lack of a
quorum.
G. Rule 7. In the deliberation of the Council, no member shall speak for
longer than five minutes at any one time nor at any one meeting may a
members speak more than twice on the same subject. No member may
speak a second time on the same subject until all other members
desiring to speak on the subject have had an opportunity to do so.
H. Rule 8.
(1) When a question is put to the members for vote, each member shall
be required to vote, except when he shall be required to abstain
because of a special personal financial interest in the matter before
§ 13-8 COUNCIL BYLAWS § 13-8
13:23
the Council. When a member shall abstain for cause, he shall state
the reason for his abstention, and an abstention shall be considered
as a "no" vote, where the nature of the question shall be such that
only an "aye" or "no" note is called for.
(2) The President of the Council shall be required to vote on every
question put to the members of the Council and may abstain only as
provided in Subsection H(1) of this section. In a roll-call vote, the
name of the President shall be called last.
(3) When a member's interest in a matter before the Council shall be
an interest common to other Council members, he shall not be
deemed to have a special interest such as would preclude or
prohibit him from voting. In such matters he shall vote, and if he is
a candidate for an office in the Council, he shall have the right to
vote for himself or for another person, as he chooses.
I. Rule 9. The Borough Manager shall prepare and complete the agenda
for each meeting of the Council at least 24 hours in advance of the
meeting and shall have copies available in his office throughout the day
of the meeting. Persons desiring to come before the Council at the point
in the order of business entitled "Visitors" shall inform the Secretary of
their desire to do so and of the subject matter of their visit in time for
the Secretary to list them on the agenda. The Secretary shall make
every effort to arrange the agenda to avoid duplication of effort in these
matters by assigning one or more individuals to act as spokesmen for
groups of individuals. Persons not on the agenda may address the
Council with special permission of the Council.
J. Rule 10. Elected and appointed Borough officials required to be present
at the Council meetings to give reports and not members of the Council
shall be permitted to leave the meeting at the conclusion of their
respective reports, unless the Council shall specifically request that
they remain for a longer time.
K. Rule 11. Any of these rules may be suspended or waived at any specific
meeting of the Council, except where such suspension or waiver would
be contrary to the law or to the bylaws of the Council. Suspension or
waiver shall not be permitted except upon an affirmative vote of 2/3 of
the members of the Council.
L. Rule 12. These rules, wholly or in part, may be amended or repealed by
majority vote in any meeting of the Council, provided that each member
of the Council shall be given advance notice of the intent to amend or
repeal at least 28 days prior to the meeting at which action on the
amendment or repeal is to be taken. The notice shall state the extent
and precise nature of the repeal or amendment that is proposed. If
notice is given at a regular, special or adjourned meeting of the Council,
held at least 28 days before the meeting at which action on the repeal
or amendment is to be taken, special or individual notice shall be
§ 13-8 MONACA CODE § 13-8
13:24
Chapter 16
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127. Conduct at fires — See Ch. 129.
required to be given only to those members not in attendance at the
earlier meeting and present at the time notice was given.
M. Rule 13. Any member of the Council attending a Council meeting in the
Borough of Monaca under the influence of alcohol or unprescribed
drugs will be prohibited/removed from the Council chambers.
N. Rule 14. No foul language is to be used by any member of the Council to
another member or to the public. The Council shall be fair and honest
and conduct itself at all times as ladies and gentlemen.
O. Rule 15. Shorts, cutoffs, blue jeans, sweatshirts and sandals are
prohibited from being worn to any regular or special meeting of the
Council. Proper attire must be worn as established by the Council.
§ 13-8 COUNCIL BYLAWS § 13-8
13:25

ARTICLE I
Extended Duties of Volunteers
[Adopted 3-11-1997 by Res. No. 4-97]
§ 16-1. Allowable duties and participation.
The Monaca Borough Volunteer Fire Departments and their membership
are authorized by the Borough Council to perform the following duties in
addition to the normal fire-fighting and rescue duties:
A. Participation in drills, practices, training sessions and pre-fire planning
activities authorized by the Fire Chiefs and supervised by a qualified
instructor.
B. Participation in community celebrations, ceremonial observances and
public ceremonial funeral observances for Monaca Borough volunteer
fire fighters killed in the line of duty where such attendance is deemed
appropriate and authorized in writing by the Fire Chiefs.
C. Performing duties necessary to prepare the fire station for use as a
polling place for the primary and general elections. This is extended to
include like services performed at other municipal or school district
buildings for said elections.
D. Preparation for and responsible participation in parades, provided that
attendance has the prior written approval of the Fire Department and
written notice is provided to the municipality prior to the event.
E. Any public service functions performed for the welfare of the
community as long as these activities are responsibility supervised and
are sanctioned by the Fire Department and written notice is provided to
the municipality prior to the function.
F. Any and all public safety activities undertaken by Fire Department
members to render care to the injured, prevent loss of life, provide
comfort and security to victims and limit or prevent damage to or loss of
property as circumstances may dictate.
G. Rendering assistance to police officers where such aid is specifically
requested or is done without request to protect our citizens from
imminent danger.
H. Participation in fire prevention inspections, post-fire investigations,
bomb threat searches, evacuation drills and organized searches for
missing persons.
I. Participating in public programs to promote health and safety, to enlist
new members, solicit community support or conduct fund-raising
activities so long as the activity is specifically sanctioned by the Fire
Department with written notice to the municipality prior to the activity
or event.
§ 16-1 COUNCIL BYLAWS § 16-1
13:27
J. Safety and responsibility performing maintenance and remodeling work
on the Fire Department vehicles, buildings, grounds or equipment.
K. Performing such other duties necessary for the efficient operation of
the volunteer services as may, from time to time, be assigned by the
Monaca Borough Council or the officers of the Fire Departments.
§ 16-1 MONACA CODE § 16-1
13:28
ARTICLE II
Insurance Reimbursement
[Adopted 3-13-2007 by Ord. No. 900]
§ 16-2. Legislative authority; creation of volunteer fire departments.
§ 16-3. Intent.
The Borough desires to provide for reimbursement to the various fire
departments for any and all costs and/or expenses incurred by the
departments which may be obtainable by the departments by submitting
claims only to the individual property owners' insurance carriers.
§ 16-4. Findings.
It is the finding of the Council of the Borough of Monaca that individual
property owners may maintain insurance coverage within their own
casualty insurance policies, homeowners' policies and/or other applicable
policies that would provide reimbursement to the fire departments for
firefighting and other services rendered to the individual property owners'
properties in response to emergency service requests.
§ 16-5. Reimbursement research and application to and acceptance
from insurance carriers authorized.
The fire departments are hereby authorized and directed, by and through
its officers and authorized representatives, to ascertain what insurance
coverage may be applicable and available under any given circumstance,
and to take all necessary and affirmative steps to apply for and receive
reimbursement from any insurance carriers where a property owner is
or may be insured to reimburse the fire departments for any cost and/
or expense incurred for services, supplies and/or equipment used for or
provided to the property owner by the fire departments.
§ 16-6. Bills from departments to property owners prohibited;
exceptions.
Under no circumstances shall any property owner ever receive a bill from
the fire departments for fire protection or other services provided by the
fire departments except in cases of false alarms and fires intentionally set
by the property owner.
A. Section 1202 of the Borough Code,17 as amended, authorizes the
Borough Council to provide fire protection within the Borough.
B. The Borough previously created the various volunteer fire departments
presently operating in the Borough.
17.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46202.
§ 16-2 COUNCIL BYLAWS § 16-7
13:29
§ 16-7. Reimbursement only for costs and expenses incurred.
This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose to
compensate and/or reimburse the Borough of Monaca from insurance
proceeds only for the costs and/or expenses incurred while providing
services pursuant to their duties for the fire departments.
§ 16-7 MONACA CODE § 16-7
13:30
Chapter 18
HEALTH, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fee schedule — See Ch. A256.
§ 18-1. Health Officer.
A. Establishment. The administration of the health laws and ordinances of
the Borough of Monaca and, where applicable, the health laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be enforced by the Monaca
Borough Board of Health and, when instructed to do so, through a
Health Officer who shall be appointed by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Monaca.
B. Experience/certification. The Health Officer shall have some experience
or training in public health work in accordance with the rules and
regulations established by the Advisory Health Board of the State
Department of Health and shall not enter upon the performance of his/
her/its duties until certified to do so by the State Department of Health.
C. Remuneration. The Health Officer shall receive remuneration for
services rendered in accordance with a schedule adopted from time to
time by the Board of Health and ratified by resolution of the Borough
Council of the Borough of Monaca.
D. Oath. The Health Officer shall take and subscribe to the oath prescribed
for Borough Council members, together with such loyalty oath as is
prescribed and required by law.
E. Term. The Health Officer shall serve for a period until such time that a
successor is appointed.
F. Powers. The Health Officer shall have:
(1) The same power and exercise the same authority as is prescribed
for the Board of Health and shall have the power and authority of a
policeman in the performance of his/her/its duties.
(2) Pursuant to an order of the Board of Health, the power to enter at
any time upon any premises in the Borough of Monaca upon which
there is suspected to be any infectious or contagious disease or
nuisance detrimental to public health for the purpose of examining
and abating the same.
G. Duties. The Health Officer shall have the following duties:
(1) Perform all duties as are vested in local health officers by state laws
and regulations.
§ 16-7 HEALTH, BOARD OF § 18-1
18:31
§ 18-2. Permit fees.
Each person or business entity at the time of submission of an application
shall pay a permitting fee which shall be in accordance with a schedule
adopted from time to time by resolution by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Monaca.18
Chapter 24
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS
(2) Attend all stated and special meetings of the Board of Health.
(3) Attend, when requested, stated or special meetings of the Borough
Council of the Borough of Monaca.
(4) At all times be ready and available for the prompt performance of
official duties.
(5) Make sanitary inspections.
(6) Execute the orders of the Board of Health in pursuance of the
Board's lawful powers.
(7) Execute orders of the Board of Health directing the removal or
abatement of any nuisance or a menace to public health.
(8) Before the commencement of the fiscal year, submit an estimate of
the probable expenditures for the ensuing year.
(9) In the month of January of each year, submit a written report of the
appropriations and expenditures of the preceding year, together
with such other information on subjects relative to the sanitary
conditions or requirements of the Borough as the Board of Health
and Borough Council of the Borough of Monaca deem necessary.
(10) Cooperate with the County of Beaver, State Department of Health
and any other city, borough or township in the enforcement and
administration of its health laws.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. A256, Fee Schedule.
§ 18-1 MONACA CODE § 18-2
18:32
ARTICLE I
Upper Beaver Valley Council of Governments
[Adopted 11-14-2006 by Ord. No. 89419]
§ 24-1. Membership.
The Borough of Monaca joins and is a member of the Upper Beaver Valley
Council of Governments.
§ 24-2. Conditions of agreement; term.
§ 24-3. Purpose and objectives.
The Upper Beaver Valley Council of Governments shall assist the member
municipalities individually or collectively to execute their governmental
responsibilities in as efficient and responsible a manner as possible; further,
the Upper Beaver Valley Council of Governments shall undertake such other
projects related to municipal governments as the Board of Directors may
direct, subject to the provisions of § 24-2.
§ 24-4. Manner and extent of financing.
The Upper Beaver Valley Council of Governments is financed by annual dues
paid by member municipalities and by funds obtained by the organization
from public or private sources.
§ 24-5. Organizational structure.
A. No action taken by the Upper Beaver Valley Council of Governments
which creates a legal obligation, whether it be contractual, financial or
otherwise upon a member municipality shall be binding upon a member
municipality affected unless and until its municipal legislative body
ordains, resolves or otherwise enacts the actions recommended by the
Upper Beaver Valley Council of Governments, according to procedure
set forth in the appropriate municipal code and laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. This Agreement stands in perpetuity.
A. The Upper Beaver Valley Council of Governments is the agent for the
Borough of Monaca in matters pertaining to this agreement;
B. A legislative officer of each municipality will be a representative of the
Upper Beaver Valley Council of Governments;
C. There shall also be appointed an alternate from among the legislative
body of that municipality to represent the Borough of Monaca fully in
the representative’s absence; and
19.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. I, Mid Beaver Valley Council of
Goverments, adopted 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 819.
§ 24-1 HEALTH, BOARD OF § 24-5
18:33
§ 24-6. Acquisition, management and disposal of property.
The real or personal property necessary to implement this agreement will
be acquired, managed and disposed of by the Upper Beaver Valley Council
of Governments, in accordance with the bylaws of the Council of
Governments and any laws or contracts which apply.
§ 24-6.1. Bylaws approved.
The bylaws of the Upper Beaver Valley Council of Governments, attached
and made a part hereof, and marked as Exhibit A,20 are hereby approved.
D. The officers of the Upper Beaver Valley Council of Governments are
authorized to act as they deem necessary, in accordance with its
bylaws.
20.Editor’s Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 24-5 MONACA CODE § 24-6.1
18:34
ARTICLE II
Local Government Investment Trust
[Adopted 12-19-1988 by Ord. No. 782]
§ 24-7. Election to join.
This governmental unit shall join with other local governmental units in
accordance with the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act21 by becoming
a settler of the Pennsylvania Local Governmental Investment Trust and
entering into the Declaration of Trust, which is adopted by reference with
the same effect as if it has been set out verbatim in this section, and a copy
of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this article
was adopted.22
§ 24-8. Authorization to purchase shares.
This governmental unit is authorized to purchase shares in the Trust from
time to time with available funds and to redeem some or all of those shares
from time to time as funds are needed for other purposes. There actions are
to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose, pursuant to general
or specific instructions by the governing body of this governmental unit.
§ 24-9. Custody of funds.
The trustees of the Trust are designated as having official custody of this
governmental unit's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in
the Trust.
§ 24-10. Specific rules and regulations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,23 the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 24-7.
B. This governmental unit's participation in the Trust shall be terminable
at any time by ordinance.
C. The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this governmental unit's funds in obligations which
are otherwise legal investments, as part of a pooled arrangement with
other local governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other
advantages of pooled investments; and the powers and scope of
authority delegated are set forth in the Declaration of Trust referred to
in § 24-7.
21.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
22.Editor's Note: The Declaration of Trust is on file in the Borough offices.
23.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 24-7 HEALTH, BOARD OF § 24-10
18:35
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
funds of this governmental unit except through the purchase of shares
in the Trust.
E. The Trust shall be managed by a board of trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and the bylaws provided for therein.
F. Shares may be repurchased and redeemed from time to time as this
governmental unit may determine to be necessary or appropriate to
meet its cash investment requirements.
G. The Trust shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of
group insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for its
employees.
§ 24-10 MONACA CODE § 24-10
18:36
ARTICLE III
Pennsylvania Municipal Health Insurance Cooperative
[Adopted 12-27-2016 by Ord. No. 952]
§ 24-11. Incorporation of caption and preamble.
The caption and preamble of this article set forth above are incorporated
herein by reference.24
§ 24-12. Approval of agreement.
This political subdivision hereby approves entering into the agreement, a
copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference (and
which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this article
was enacted), with the intent and effect that this political subdivision shall
be bound by the agreement.25
§ 24-13. Execution of agreement.
The President or Vice-President of the governing body, acting alone or
together with the Secretary or Assistant Secretary, is hereby authorized
and directed on behalf of the political subdivision, i) to execute and deliver
the agreement, and ii) to execute and deliver such additional instruments,
and to take such further actions, as may be necessary or appropriate to
carry forth the agreement and the transactions to be effected under the
agreement, including payment to the PMHIC of such amounts as are due by
the political subdivision pursuant to the agreement.
§ 24-14. Ratification of prior actions.
All actions of any officer, agent or other representative of this political
subdivision heretofore taken in the pursuit of the establishment of the
PMHIC, and/or the political subdivision's participation therein, are hereby
ratified and approved in all respects.
§ 24-15. Authorization of other actions.
The governing body of the political subdivision is hereby authorized to take
such other action as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the
purposes of this article and of the agreement.
§ 24-16. Findings.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act26, the
following matters are specifically found and determined:
24.Editor's Note: This refers to the caption and preamble of the original ordinance; said
caption and preamble to Ord. No. 952 are on file in the Borough offices.
25.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
26.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 24-11 HEALTH, BOARD OF § 24-16
18:37
§ 24-17. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any section, sentence,
clause or part or provision hereof shall be held to be illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the
court shall not affect the remaining sections, clauses, parts or provisions of
this article. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the political subdivision
that such article would have been enacted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part or provision had not been
included herein.
§ 24-18. Effect on prior proceedings.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any
cause of action existing prior to the enactment of this article.
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the agreement.
B. This political subdivision shall participate in the PMHIC for an initial
term of three years from the date that it first elected to purchase
benefits through PMHIC. Thereafter, termination of the agreement
shall be as further set forth therein.
C. The purpose and objectives of the agreement are as set forth in the
preamble of this article and in the agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing the agreement are that:
(1) No borrowing will be required by the political subdivision;
(2) Funds to implement the political subdivision's obligations under
the agreement same shall come from normal and usual budgeted
amounts for such matters; and
(3) Other provisions governing the manner and extent of the financing
of the PMHIC shall be as set forth in the agreement.
E. The PMHIC shall be managed by its Board of Directors pursuant to the
terms of the agreement.
F. All property, real or personal, of the PMHIC shall be acquired,
managed, licensed or disposed of by the PMHIC in accordance with the
terms of the agreement.
G. The PMHIC created by the agreement shall be empowered to enter into
contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits
pursuant to the terms of the agreement.
§ 24-16 MONACA CODE § 24-18
18:38
Chapter 35
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Council bylaws — See Ch. 13.
Retirement plan — See Ch. 58.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 63.
Animal Control Officer — See Ch. 88.
Taxation — See Ch. 213.
§ 24-18 HEALTH, BOARD OF § 24-18
18:39

ARTICLE I
Borough Manager
[Adopted 11-12-1975 as Ch. I, Part 2, of the 1975 Code]
§ 35-1. Creation.
The office of Borough Manager is hereby created by the Borough of
Monaca, subject to the right of the Borough, by ordinance, at any time to
abolish such office.
§ 35-2. Qualifications. [Amended 6-9-2004 by Ord. No. 874]
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to his actual experience in
or his knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of the office
as herein outlined. The Manager need not be a resident of the Borough of
Monaca but as soon as practical thereafter, at a time set by Council, he shall
become and during his tenure as Manager shall remain a resident of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Manager shall be 21 years or older
and may be of either the male or female sex.
§ 35-3. Word usage.
The word "he" as used in this article shall at all times be construed as if also
reading "she," and the words "his" or "him" in this article shall at all times
also be construed as if reading "her."
§ 35-4. Bond.
Before entering upon his duties, the Borough Manager shall give a bond
to the Borough with a bonding company as surety, to be approved by the
Council, in the sum of $10,000, conditioned for the faithful performance of
his duties. The premium for said bond shall be paid by the Borough. The
bond of the Borough Manager in the above amount may be included in and
the Manager may be bonded under and covered by such other bond as he
may be required to furnish to the Borough in any other municipal office
which he may hold.
§ 35-5. Compensation. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 831]
The Borough Manager shall receive such compensation as may be agreed
upon between the Borough Manager and the Town Council of the Borough
of Monaca.
§ 35-6. Appointment. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 831]
The Monaca Borough Council shall by the affirmative vote of not less
than six members elect one person to fill the office of Borough Manager,
which person shall serve at the will and pleasure of Council subject to the
provisions of § 35-7 of the Code of the Borough of Monaca.
§ 35-1 HEALTH, BOARD OF § 35-7
18:41
§ 35-7. Removal. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 831]
The Borough Council may remove from office or suspend the powers of the
person serving as Borough Manager by the affirmative vote of not less than
six members of the Council.
§ 35-8. Powers and duties.
The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Borough, and
he shall be responsible to the Council as a whole for the proper and efficient
administration of the affairs of the Borough. His powers and duties shall
include all Borough business that is not by statute vested specifically in
some other Borough officer or which by ordinance or resolution is removed
from the Borough Manager's powers and duties and vested in some other
Borough officer. The below given list shall be construed as a general
guideline of the extent of the Borough Manager's powers and duties and not
as a specific designation of such powers and duties. The mention of some
power or duty in this list shall not be construed as to deny the Borough
Council the right to remove the same from the list by resolution, and the
omission of some power or duty from this list shall not be construed as
denying Borough Council the right to add the same to this list by resolution.
A. He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all municipal
departments, except that he shall not exercise any supervision or
authority over the Police Department that is vested in the Mayor other
than such duties as may be delegated by the Mayor subject to recall at
any time.
B. He shall make recommendations regarding the hiring, discharge,
suspension or dismissal of all Borough employees to the Borough
Council which shall have the power to hire, discharge, suspend or
dismiss said employees. Employees covered by the civil service
provisions of the Borough Code, however, shall be hired, discharged,
suspended or dismissed in accordance with said provisions. [Amended
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 831]
C. He shall prepare and submit to the Council before the close of the fiscal
year or on such alternate date as the Council shall determine a budget
for the next fiscal year and an explanatory budget message. In
preparing the budget, the Manager or an officer designated by him
shall obtain from the head of each department, agency, board or officer
estimates of revenues and expenditures and other supporting data as
he requires. The Manager shall review such estimates and may revise
them before submitting the budget to the Council.
D. He shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after its
adoption by the Council.
E. He shall hold such other municipal offices or head one or more of the
municipal departments as the Council may from time to time direct.
§ 35-7 MONACA CODE § 35-8
18:42
§ 35-9. (Reserved)27
F. He shall attend all meetings of the Borough Council and of its
committees, with the right to take part in the discussion, but with no
power of vote.
G. He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Council and
conduct the business of the Council at each meeting within the scope of
such agenda subject to the right of the Council President to take charge
of any portion of the agenda as the Council President deems proper and
subject to the right of the Council President to authorize deviation from
the business listed on the agenda.
H. He shall keep the Council informed as to the conduct of Borough affairs,
submit periodic reports on the condition of the Borough finances and
such other reports as the Council shall request and shall make such
recommendations to the Council as he deems necessary.
I. He shall submit to the Council, as soon as possible after the close of the
fiscal year, a complete report on the financial and administrative
activities of the Borough for the preceding year.
J. He may employ experts and consultants to perform work and to advise
in connection with any of the functions of the Borough, provided that
this shall not be done without specific approval of the Council if the cost
of such expert and/or consultants exceeds such cost as the Council from
time to time shall set by resolution.
K. He shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and he
shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same,
except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed upon some other
Borough officer by statute.
L. He shall see that all money owed the Borough is promptly paid and that
proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all the
Borough's claims.
M. He shall be the purchasing officer of the Borough, and he shall
purchase, in accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code, all
supplies and equipment for the various agencies, boards, departments
and other offices of the Borough. He shall keep an account of all
purchases and shall, from time to time or when directed by the Council,
make a full written report thereof.
N. He shall investigate all legitimate complaints concerning Borough
affairs, problems and personnel and, when appropriate, take corrective
action. He shall keep a record of all complaints investigated and the
action, if any, taken on the same.
O. He shall prepare and bring to the attention of the Borough Council
plans for the improvement of the Borough of Monaca.
§ 35-8 HEALTH, BOARD OF § 35-10
18:43
§ 35-10. Disability or absence.
If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the Borough, he shall
designate one qualified member of his staff who shall perform the duties
of the Manager during his absence or disability. The person so designated
shall not perform these duties for a period longer than two weeks without
the approval of the Council.
27.Editor's Note: Former § 35-9, Limitation on Council's powers, was repealed 7-8-1997 by
Ord. No. 831.
§ 35-10 MONACA CODE § 35-10
18:44
ARTICLE II
Delinquent Tax Collector
[Adopted 12-28-2000 by Ord. No. 850]
§ 35-11. Tax Collector appointed as real estate tax collector.
The duly elected Tax Collector of the Borough of Monaca is hereby
appointed as the tax collector for collection of Borough real estate taxes.
§ 35-12. Collection of delinquent real estate taxes.
The Delinquent Tax Collector is authorized to collect delinquent real estate
taxes from January 1 through the third Monday in April of the subsequent
year in which said real estate taxes are due.
§ 35-11 HEALTH, BOARD OF § 35-12
18:45

ARTICLE III
Neighborhood Services Officer
[Adopted 3-27-2012 by Ord. No. 92628]
§ 35-13. Position created; terms of employment.
There is hereby created in the Borough of Monaca the position of
Neighborhood Services Officer, who shall be appointed by Council and
shall serve in such capacity under terms and conditions which the Council
determines, from time to time, to be reasonable and in the best interests of
the Borough of Monaca.
§ 35-14. Duties and functions; authority.
A. At the election of Council, the person appointed may serve as an
employee of the Borough or as an independent contractor and at wage
or salary or for an amount, as the case may be, that Council determines
to be reasonable and in the best interests of the Borough.
B. At Council's election, the position may be designated as either full-time
or part-time.
A. The Neighborhood Services Officer shall carry out all the duties and
perform all functions required of the Animal Control Officer, Code
Enforcement Officer and Property Maintenance Code Officer, and shall
have the authority to act on behalf of the Borough of Monaca, when
lawfully carrying out those duties and performing those functions, as
set forth in any statute or regulation or any ordinance of the Borough of
Monaca, relating to those positions.
B. The Neighborhood Services Officer shall carry out all the duties and
perform all the functions required of the Rental Inspection Officer, and
shall have the authority to act on behalf of the Borough of Monaca when
lawfully carrying out those duties and performing those functions, but
only when the appointed Rental Inspection Officer is unable to carry out
the duties and perform those functions required of that position by any
statute or regulation, or any ordinance of the Borough of Monaca.
C. Whenever any statute, regulation or provision of any ordinance refers
to Animal Control Officer, Code Enforcement Officer and Property
Maintenance Code Officer, the same shall mean Neighborhood Services
Officer.
D. The title "Rental Inspection Officer" shall remain intact; however, as
provided hereinbefore, the Neighborhood Services Officer shall be and
is authorized to act in his or her stead.
28.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 3-27-2012.
§ 35-13 HEALTH, BOARD OF § 35-15
18:47
§ 35-15. Reporting.
The Neighborhood Services Officer shall report to the Borough Manager
and Council as directed from time to time by Council.
§ 35-16. Coordination with Neighborhood Services Department.
A. The Neighborhood Services Officer shall confer from time to time and
coordinate work efforts with the members of the Neighborhood
Services Department.
B. There is hereby created in the Borough of Monaca the Neighborhood
Services Department, the membership of which shall consist of the
Borough Manager, Neighborhood Services Officer, Fire Marshall,
Rental Inspection Officer, Monaca Police Department Abandoned
Vehicle Officer, Building Inspector, Health Officer and Zoning Officer.
Said Department shall coordinate efforts with the goal of improving the
quality of life and economic vitality of the community by investigating
and responding to concerns and complaints relating to violations of or
noncompliance with the various codes of the Borough of Monaca.
§ 35-15 MONACA CODE § 35-16
18:48
Chapter 42
(RESERVED)
Chapter 46
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Vacant Property Review Committee — See Ch.
71.
Building construction — See Ch. 92.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
210.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
§ 46-1. Established; composition.
A Borough Planning Commission, composed of five members, is hereby
established in and for the Borough of Monaca. The members of said
Commission shall be appointed as provided by law, and the Commission may
exercise all powers and shall perform all duties vested by law in borough
planning agencies and by other ordinances of the Borough in the Borough
Planning Commission, provided that the Borough Planning Commission of
the Borough of Monaca, as now constituted, shall serve as the Planning
Commission hereby created, and nothing herein shall change the tenure of
any member of said Planning Commission hereby created, but all vacancies
in the membership of such existing Planning Commission, regardless of the
circumstances thereof, shall be filled in conformity with the law governing
borough planning agencies in effect at the time of the occurrence of such
vacancy.
Chapter 50
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Retirement — See Ch. 58. Warrantless arrests — See Ch. 231.
§ 35-16 (RESERVED) § 46-1
42:49

ARTICLE I
Organization
§ 50-1. Organization.
§ 50-2. Probationary provisions.
A. The Police Department shall consist of probationers, patrolmen and, at
the option of the Council, one or more of the following officers:
Sergeant and Chief.
B. A probationer shall be a person chosen by the Council from a list
submitted by the Civil Service Board of Monaca as having passed the
required examination and who shall thereupon serve a certain trial
period as a patrolman.
C. A patrolman shall be a person who has served a trial period as a
probationer without removal by action of the Council prior to the
termination of such probationary period.
D. A Sergeant shall be a person who has served not less than three years
as a patrolman and shall be chosen by the Council from a list submitted
by the Civil Service Board of Monaca from those who have passed the
required examination for Sergeant.29
E. A Chief shall be a person who is chosen by the Council, but who need
not have served as a patrolman or Sergeant, but who passed the
required examination given by the Monaca Civil Service Board, and
who must, prior to being confirmed by the Council in the office of Chief,
serve a trial or probationary period as Chief. The person serving a
probationary period as Chief automatically shall become Chief at the
expiration of the probationary period unless first removed from such
office by the Council. [Added 9-8-1980 by Ord. No. 655-A]
A. The Police Department shall consist of probationers, patrolmen, and at
the option of the Council, one or more of the following officers:
Corporal, Sergeant, and Chief. [Amended 1-8-2019 by Ord. No. 963]
B. The probationary period of a person chosen from applicants for the
office of Chief shall be not less than six months or more than one year.
C. A person who has served the required trial or probationary period
without removal by the Council shall, without need of formal action by
the Council, become confirmed in such office.
D. A Sergeant shall be a person who has served not less than five years as
a patrolman and shall be chosen by the Council from a list submitted by
the Civil Service Board of Monaca from those who have passed the
29.Editor's Note: Original Section 91, Subsections 4 and 5, regarding the position of
Lieutenant and Captain, was repealed 9-8-1980 by Ord. No. 655-A.
§ 50-1 PLANNING COMMISSION § 50-2
46:51
§ 50-3. Duties.
§ 50-4. Compensation.
required examination for Sergeant. [Amended 1-8-2019 by Ord. No.
963]
E. A Chief shall be a person who is chosen by the Council, but who need
not have served as a patrolman, Corporal or Sergeant, but who passed
the required examination given by the Monaca Civil Service Board, and
who must, prior to being confirmed by the Council in the office of Chief,
serve a trial or probationary period as Chief. The person serving a
probationary period as Chief automatically shall become Chief at the
expiration of the probationary period unless first removed from such
office by the Council. [Amended 1-8-2019 by Ord. No. 963]
F. The Council may, at the option of a majority of quorum of the Council,
suspend the removal of a person on probation and authorize such
person to be heard at the next regular meeting of the Council; and
subsequent to such hearing, the Council shall vote again on the
question of such removal.
G. A Corporal shall be a person who has served not less than three years as
a patrolman and shall be chosen by the Council from a list submitted by
the Civil Service Board of Monaca from those who have passed the
required examination for Corporal. [Added 1-8-2019 by Ord. No.
963]
A. All members of the police force shall perform such duties as may be
required of them by those of higher rank.
B. All members of the police force shall perform their duties in the place
where and in the manner which is directed by the Mayor of the Borough
of Monaca.
C. It shall be the official duty of all members of the police force to conduct
themselves in as courteous a manner as is compatible with efficient
performance, and willful discourtesy in the performance of duties shall
be construed as neglect or violation of an official duty.
A. Members of the police force shall receive compensation as is from time
to time negotiated by contract between the police force and the Council
of the Borough of Monaca.
B. An applicant for the office of Chief shall, prior to beginning his
probationary period and through negotiations with the Council for the
Borough of Monaca, determine whether he shall be subject to the
provisions of the various contracts negotiated between the police force
and the Council of the Borough of Monaca or shall negotiate separately
with the Council of the Borough of Monaca.
§ 50-2 MONACA CODE § 50-4
46:52
C. Each member of the police force shall become entitled to such
retirement benefits as are in force at the time of his retirement.30
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 58, Retirement.
§ 50-4 PLANNING COMMISSION § 50-4
46:53
Chapter 54
RECREATION BOARD
§ 50-4 MONACA CODE § 50-4
54:54
ARTICLE I
Terminology and Purpose
§ 54-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 54-2. Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter are established with the intent of providing
recreation facilities for residents of Monaca and their guests and to provide
inducements to the youth such as may tend to divert their leisure time into
healthful and wholesome activities planned to achieve increased vitality,
physical coordination and mental alertness.
§ 54-3. Construction.
The provisions of this chapter shall be construed so as to most effectively
accomplish the intent set forth in § 54-2 of this chapter.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, wheresoever used
in this chapter, shall have such meaning as set forth herein:
BOARD — Those persons chosen under the provisions of Article II of
this chapter, whose term has not expired.
BODY — Any association, corporation or group other than an individual.
COUNCIL — The Borough Council of Monaca.
EMPLOYEES — Those individuals hired by the Board.
MONACA — The Borough of Monaca, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
PERSONS — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
SCHOOL — The Monaca School District Board.
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and neuter.
§ 54-1 RECREATION BOARD § 54-3
54:55

ARTICLE II
Establishment of Board
[Amended 12-8-1986 by Ord. No. 769; 6-8-1992 by Ord. No. 769-A]
§ 54-4. Authority; membership. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
The grounds, equipment, employees, plans, programs, rules and general
maintenance shall come under the control and supervision of the Board,
which shall be composed of nine members who shall be appointed by the
Council.
§ 54-5. New appointments; terms; tenure. [Amended 9-10-1996 by
Ord. No. 822]
Whenever a vacancy has occurred by reason of the expiration of the term
of any member, the Council shall appoint a person for membership on the
Board for a term of five years from the date of the expiration of the prior
term to succeed the member whose term has expired. Nothing herein shall
be construed so as to prohibit the Council from reappointing any member of
the Recreation Board whose term expires.
§ 54-6. Composition of Board.
§ 54-7. Action by majority vote.
The decision of the majority of the Board shall be the decision of the Board.
A. The Recreation Board shall be composed of nine members, seven of
whom shall be appointed and serve at large, one of whom shall also be a
member of the School Board and one of whom shall also be a member of
the Council. The School Board shall send to the Council its nomination
for its seat on the Recreation Board not less than 30 nor more than 90
days prior to the expiration of the term of the School Board member
whose term expires that year. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
B. Notwithstanding § 54-5 of this chapter, any person who was appointed
as the School Board representative member or the Borough Council
representative member, whose term on the School Board or Council
expires before his or her term on the Recreation Board expires, shall
forfeit his or her right to serve as a member of the Recreation Board,
whereupon a member of the School Board or the Borough Council, as
the case may be, shall be appointed by the Borough Council to serve the
balance of the unexpired term of the person whose membership was
forfeited.
§ 54-4 RECREATION BOARD § 54-7
54:57

ARTICLE III
Powers and Duties
§ 54-8. Officers of Board.
The Board shall elect its own chairman, secretary and other officers as seem
appropriate for terms of one year.
§ 54-9. Committees.
The Board shall select, from citizens of Monaca, such committees as it
deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter and shall
delegate to said committees such powers and duties as seems proper to the
Board.
§ 54-10. Paid employees.
The Board shall choose such paid employees as to it seems wise to carry out
the provisions of this chapter. All employees of the Board shall be subject to
the control of the Board.
§ 54-11. Funds; acceptance of grants, gifts and donations.
The Board shall receive and spend, for the purpose of carrying out the
provisions of this chapter, all moneys allocated for such purpose by the
Borough Council of Monaca. The Board may accept any grant, gift or
donation whether it is of services, money, realty or personalty and may use
the same as specified by the donor to such extent as does not create a
violation of any Borough ordinance.
§ 54-12. Contractual powers.
The Board shall have no authority to enter into any contract binding the
Council, Monaca, the school or subdivision thereof. Any and all contracts
and obligations made by or entered into by the Board shall be deemed
as being made without having the Council, Monaca, the school or any
subdivision thereof a party thereto except if it is by written document
specifically stating so and officially executed by the Council, Monaca, the
school or subdivision thereof.
§ 54-13. Audit of accounts.
The accounts of the Board shall be audited annually, and copies of said audit
signed by the auditors shall be delivered to each body who contributed since
the last audit to the funds controlled by the Board.
§ 54-14. Rules and regulations.
The Board may make such rules and regulations as seem proper for the
purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter. Any rule or regulation
of the Board which violates any law or Monaca ordinance shall be invalid to
§ 54-8 RECREATION BOARD § 54-14
54:59
the extent of such violation. The Board may recommend to the Council such
fines and penalties as seem necessary to enforce said rules, regulations and
provisions.
§ 54-15. Custody and control of equipment.
The Board shall maintain custody and control of all equipment purchased
from funds controlled by the Board.
§ 54-14 MONACA CODE § 54-15
54:60
Chapter 57
RESIDENTIAL REVITALIZATION PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 152.
§ 57-1. Title.
The name of this chapter shall be the "Residential Revitalization Program
Adoption Ordinance."
§ 57-2. Legislative authority.
This chapter is adopted and enacted pursuant to the authority granted to
the Borough of Monaca by all relevant state and federal laws, including,
but not limited to, the following: The general authority granted by the
Constitution of Pennsylvania to make and adopt all such ordinances, bylaws,
rules and regulations as may be deemed expedient or necessary for the
proper management of the Borough of Monaca and the Urban
Redevelopment Law.31
§ 57-3. Findings.
The Borough Council recognizes that:
§ 57-4. Program adopted.
The Borough Council adopts the countywide Residential Revitalization
Program and adopts the following as the key components of the program:
A. The Beaver Initiative for Growth has coordinated a countywide program
model for residential revitalization and the reduction of residential
blight, and that this program will include several communities
throughout Beaver County working cooperatively to develop and share
best practices for blight reduction.
B. The problem of residential blight is of serious concern in the Borough of
Monaca, and that the amelioration of blighted properties will make our
neighborhoods more attractive, safer and more valuable places to live
and invest.
C. This activity requires centralized coordination and project
management.
A. A Residential Revitalization Program Manager will be provided by the
countywide program team in order to properly coordinate this activity.
31.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1701 et seq.
§ 54-15 RECREATION BOARD § 57-4
54:61
§ 57-5. Acquisition of properties; Blight Review Committee
established.
The Borough Council recognizes that a variety of blight reduction strategies
will be employed, including the acquisition of some properties. For the
properties that will be acquired, several acquisition methods exist,
including: negotiated sale, donation, lien foreclosure and acquisition
through eminent domain using the spot condemnation process in the Urban
Redevelopment Law.33 In order to use this tool, a Blight Review Committee
(BRC) is hereby created pursuant to the Urban Redevelopment Law. For the
purposes of this program, the BRC is established as follows:
B. The Borough of Monaca will appoint a primary liaison to the countywide
effort who will report to the chairman of the Blight Reduction
Committee for the Borough of Monaca and coordinate with the Program
Manager.
C. A revitalization action plan (RAP) will be created in cooperation with
the countywide program group that identifies and prioritizes blighted
and abandoned properties and suggests possible actions to address
blight.
D. A strategic process of acquiring properties so that they can be
rehabilitated and returned to the tax rolls. This will be done in
partnership with other program partners and is a key goal of the
program. As such, several methods are contemplated as possible
courses of action, including: donation, private market sales, tax sales,
foreclosure sheriff sales and spot condemnation as described in the
Urban Redevelopment Law.32
E. A review of municipal ordinances addressing issues of nuisance
properties will be completed, comparing the ordinances of the Borough
of Monaca to suggested best practices, and a set of recommendations
will be presented.
F. Specific program strategies as devised by the countywide program
team shall be available for use by the Borough of Monaca, including,
but not limited to, establishing a Land Bank program, establishing a
side yard buying program for adjoining homeowners, establishing a
community green space program and the centralized marketing and
outreach to well-qualified developers.
G. A partnership with Community Revitalization of Beaver County, a
nonprofit organization established to lead and coordinate this program,
as well as act as a nonprofit housing developer and resources broker for
homeowners.
A. The membership of the BRC will be made up of the following:
32.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1701 et seq.
33.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1701 et seq.
§ 57-4 MONACA CODE § 57-5
54:62
Chapter 58
RETIREMENT PLAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 63. Social security — See Ch. 67.
§ 58-1. Election to join.
Monaca Borough, being a member municipality of the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement System, hereby elects to change its member benefits
in that System as authorized by the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Law, as amended,34 and does hereby agree to be bound by all the
requirements and provisions of said Act and the law, as the case may be,
and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise, placed upon member
municipalities by said amendment, as the case may be. All references
hereafter shall be based on benefits negotiated between the Board and the
municipality under the provisions of Article IV of the Act.35
§ 58-2. Mandatory membership.
Membership in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System shall be
mandatory for all permanent, municipal employees of the Borough.
(1) A representative appointed by the Council President of the
Borough of Monaca;
(2) A member of the Council of the Borough of Monaca;
(3) A representative appointed by the Planning Commission of the
Borough of Monaca;
(4) A representative appointed by the Beaver County Planning
Commission;
(5) A representative appointed by the Beaver County Housing
Authority;
(6) A representative appointed by the Redevelopment Authority of
Beaver County; and
(7) A representative appointed by the Community Revitalization of
Beaver County.
B. A quorum of four will be required for a BRC meeting, and all votes will
be of a majority present for that meeting.
34.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq.
35.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 881.401 et seq.
§ 57-5 RETIREMENT PLAN § 58-2
58:63
Membership for elected officials and employees hired on a temporary or
seasonal basis is prohibited, as is membership for individuals paid only on a
fee basis.
§ 58-3. Prior service.
Credit for prior service for original members is granted for each year or
partial year thereof that the member was employed by the Borough from
original date of hire. Benefits provided to members in the agreement dated
June 10, 1991,36 shall accrue based on all credited service granted and
earned in accordance with this section.
§ 58-4. Payment.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this chapter and
the agreement between the System and Monaca Borough shall be made
by the Borough in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Law and Act 205 of 1984, the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act.37
§ 58-5. Benefits.
As part of this chapter, the Borough agrees that the System shall provide
the benefits set forth in the agreement between the Board and Monaca
Borough, dated June 10, 1991. The passage and adoption of this chapter
by Monaca Borough is an official acceptance of said agreement and the
financial obligations resulting from the administration of said benefit
package. Monaca Borough hereby assumes all liability for any
unfundedness created or which may be created due to the acceptance of the
benefit structure outlined in the above-referenced agreement.
§ 58-6. Authorization; repeal of prior provisions.
Monaca Borough intends this chapter to be the complete authorization
of the Borough plan, and therefore, specifically repeals the previous
agreement and Ordinance Number 631.
§ 58-7. Filing of copies.
A duly certified copy of this chapter and the referenced agreement shall
be filed with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Membership for the municipal employees
of Monaca Borough in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System shall
be effective the first day of January 1972, with the revised plan structure
reflected in the agreement dated June 10, 1991, effective the first day of
January 1991.
Chapter 63
36.Editor's Note: The agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
37.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 58-2 MONACA CODE § 58-7
58:64
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 35.
Retirement plan — See Ch. 58.
Social security — See Ch. 67.
§ 58-7 RETIREMENT PLAN § 58-7
58:65

ARTICLE I
Council
[Adopted 3-14-1988 by Ord. No. 611-B; amended in its entirety
12-12-2001 by Ord. No. 86038]
§ 63-1. Compensation.
Members of the Council of the Borough of Monaca shall be paid a salary of
$2,400 a year, in equal monthly installments.
38.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of the first Monday of January
2002.
§ 63-1 RETIREMENT PLAN § 63-1
58:67

ARTICLE II
Mayor
[Adopted 3-14-1988 by Ord. No. 676-B; amended in its entirety
12-12-2001 by Ord. No. 86039]
§ 63-2. Compensation.
The Mayor of the Borough of Monaca shall be paid a salary of $2,412 a year,
in equal monthly installments.
39.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of the first Monday of January
2002.
§ 63-2 RETIREMENT PLAN § 63-2
58:69

ARTICLE III
Real Estate Tax Collector
[Adopted 2-14-2017 by Ord. No. 95340]
§ 63-3. Compensation.
The salary to be paid to the elected Real Estate Tax Collector of the Borough
of Monaca for the collection of real estate property taxes levied by the said
Borough as are collected by him/her shall be $18,250 per annum for the
four-year term, beginning January 1, 2018, with $17,000 paid from general
tax receipts and $1,250 paid from fire tax receipts. The salary shall be paid
in bimonthly installments from January through December of each year.
40.Editor’s Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. III, Tax Collector, adopted
12-12-2000 by Ord. No. 848, and provided for an effective date of 1-1-2018.
§ 63-3 RETIREMENT PLAN § 63-3
58:71
Chapter 67
SOCIAL SECURITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Retirement plan — See Ch. 58. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 63.
§ 67-1. Definitions.
The words and phrases when used in this chapters shall have the meanings
defined in Section 2 of Act No. 491 of the 1951 Session, General Assembly
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.41
§ 67-2. Social security coverage.
All employees of the Borough of Monaca who performed services which
constitute employment, as defined in Section 2 of said Act of Assembly, shall
be covered by this plan.
§ 67-3. Payments into contribution fund.
The Borough of Monaca hereby agrees to pay into the contribution fund
at such time or times as the state agency may, by regulation, prescribe
contributions in the amounts and at the rates specified by the applicable
agreement entered into by the state agency under Section 4 of said Act.
One-half of the necessary funds shall be obtained by deduction from the
wages and salaries of the employees of said Borough. The remainder of
said funds shall be paid by the Borough of Monaca from moneys collected
through its general taxing power.
§ 67-4. Administration; members.
This plan shall be managed and administered by a board consisting of two
members of the Borough Council, two employees of the Borough and the
Mayor. It shall be the duty of this board to collect all moneys necessary for
the operation of said plan and transmit said funds to the contribution fund.
All other matters relative to the operation of the plan shall be managed by
said board.
§ 67-5. Reports to state agency.
Said board will make such reports in such form and containing such
information as the state agency may, from time to time, require and shall
further comply with such provisions as the state agency or the federal
agency may find necessary to assure the correctness and verification of
such reports.
41.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 202 et seq.
§ 63-3 MONACA CODE § 67-6
67:72
§ 67-6. Termination of plan.
The state agency shall have the authority to terminate this plan in its
entirety in the discretion of the state agency, if it determines that there has
been a failure to comply with any provisions contained in said plan. Such
termination shall take effect at the expiration of such notice and on such
conditions as may be provided by regulations of the state agency consistent
with the provisions of the Social Security Act.
§ 67-7. Delinquent payments.
Any delinquent payments due the contribution plan may be withheld at the
request of the state agency from any other moneys payable to the Borough
of Monaca by any department or agency of the commonwealth.
§ 67-8. Amendments.
This plan may be amended by the board at any time to comply with any
rules or regulations made by the state agency. No other amendment shall
be made except by action of the Borough Council of the Borough of Monaca.
Chapter 71
VACANT PROPERTY REVIEW COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 46.
§ 71-1. Establishment; membership.
The Vacant Property Review Committee, composed of five members, is
hereby established in and for the Borough of Monaca. The members of
the Committee shall be made up of at least one member of the governing
body, a representative of the appropriate Planning Commission and a
representative to be designated by the Chief Executive Officer of the
Borough. The Vacant Property Review Committee may exercise all powers
and shall perform all duties vested by Act No. 1978-94 of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.42
42.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1712.1 et seq.
§ 67-6 VACANT PROPERTY REVIEW COMMITTEE § 71-1
71:73
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 76
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 152. Zoning — See Ch. 245.
§ 76-1. Definitions.
The following words, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
hereby ascribed to, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
KNOWLEDGE or KNOWLEDGE OF SUCH NUISANCE — Having knowledge
of the contents and character of the patently offensive sexual conduct or
other content which appears in the motion-picture film, publication or live
theater production or knowledge of the acts of obscenity, assignation or
prostitution which occur in any place.
LIVE THEATER PRODUCTION — Any dramatic, musical or comedic
production performed in the presence of a live audience.
MASSAGE — Any method of treating the superficial soft parts of the human
body, for remedial, hygienic or other purposes, consisting of rubbing,
stroking, kneading or any similar treatment, accomplished by hand or by
the use of any instrument.
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any building or structure or portion thereof located
within the Borough of Monaca which is open to members of the general
public, with or without the payment of a fee, at which massage services are
offered.
MATTER — A motion-picture film, live theater production, publication or all
three.
MODEL STUDIO —
Any place where there is conducted the business of furnishing figure
models, who pose in the nude for the purpose of being observed or
viewed by any person or of being sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured,
photographed or otherwise similarly depicted for persons who pay a
fee or other consideration or compensation or a gratuity for the right
or opportunity so to depict the figure model or for admission to or for
permission to remain upon or as a condition for remaining upon the
place; or
A.
Any place where there is conducted the business of furnishing or
providing or procuring, for a fee or other consideration or
compensation or gratuity, figure models who pose in the nude to be
B.
§ 71-1 MONACA CODE § 76-1
76:74
MOTION-PICTURE FILM — Includes any:
NUDE — Includes:
OBSCENE MATTER — Any matter:
observed or viewed by any person or to be sketched, painted, drawn,
sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted.
Exception. The words "model studio" do not include:
Any studio which is operated by any state college or junior college,
public or private school or any governmental agency wherein the
person, firm, association, partnership or corporation so operating
has met the requirements established by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for the issuance or conferring of and is in fact
authorized thereunder to issue and confer, a diploma or honorary
diploma; or
(1)
Any place where there is conducted the business of furnishing,
providing or procuring figure models solely for any studio
described in Subsection C(1) of this definition.
(2)
C.
A. Film or plate negative;
B. Film or plate positive;
C. Film designed to be projected on a screen for exhibition;
Films, glass slides or transparencies, either in negative or positive
form, designed for exhibition by projection on a screen; or
D.
Videotape or any other medium used to electronically reproduce images
on a screen.
E.
A. Completely without clothing; or
The human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less
than a full opaque covering or the showing of the female breast with
less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top
of the nipple or the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
B.
Which the average adult person, applying contemporary community
standards, would find, when considered as a whole, appeals to the
prurient interest;
A.
Which depicts or describes patently offensive representations or
descriptions of:
(1) Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; or
Masturbation, excretory functions, or exhibition of the genitals or
genital area; and
(2)
B.
The matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political,
educational or scientific value.
C.
§ 76-1 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 76-1
76:75
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
PLACE — Includes but is not limited to any building, structure or space
or any separate part or portion thereof, whether permanent or not, or the
ground itself.
PUBLICATION — Includes any book, magazine, article, pamphlet, writing,
printing, illustration, picture, sound recording or a motion-picture film
which is displayed in an area open to the public, offered for sale or exhibited
in a coin-operated machine.
SALE — A passing of title or right of possession from a seller to a buyer for
valuable consideration and shall include but is not limited to any lease or
rental arrangement or other transaction wherein or whereby any valuable
consideration is received for the use of or the transfer of possession of
obscene matter.
§ 76-2. Films, live theater productions and publications as public
nuisances.
§ 76-3. Massage parlors and model studios as public nuisances.
A. Any and every place in the Borough of Monaca where obscene motionpicture
films or live theater productions are publicly exhibited or
possessed for the purpose of such exhibition and any and every place in
the Borough of Monaca where obscene publications are publicly
disseminated or sold or possessed for the purpose of such
dissemination is a public nuisance.
B. Any and every obscene motion-picture film or live theater production
which is publicly exhibited and any and every obscene publication
which is publicly displayed, disseminated or sold or possessed for such
purpose is a public nuisance per se.
C. From and after service on the place or its manager or acting manager
or person then in charge of such place of a true and correct copy of this
chapter and a true and correct copy of the summons and complaint to
abate a nuisance, all moneys paid thereafter as admission price to such
exhibitions or productions or purchase price of such publications are
also declared to be a public nuisance as personal property used in
conducting and maintaining a declared public nuisance.
A. Every massage parlor or model studio which, as a regular course of
business, is used for the purposes of obscenity, assignation or
prostitution and every such massage parlor or model studio in or upon
which acts of obscenity, assignation or prostitution are held or occur is
a public nuisance which shall be enjoined, abated and prevented.
B. From and after service on the place or its manager or acting manager
or person then in charge of such place of a true and correct copy of this
chapter and a true and correct copy of the summons and complaint to
§ 76-1 MONACA CODE § 76-3
76:76
§ 76-4. Knowledge of nuisance; responsibility of parties; abatement.
§ 76-5. Institution of an action; posting of bond.
§ 76-6. Remedies.
abate a nuisance, all moneys or other valuable consideration paid for
services rendered to customers are also declared to be a public
nuisance as personal property used in conducting and maintaining a
declared public nuisance.
A. Upon and after receiving notice through service of a true and correct
copy of this chapter and a true and correct copy of the summons and
complaint to abate a nuisance or notice by the Borough Solicitor of the
character of the obscene film, production, publication or place, any and
every person who shall own, legally or equitably, lease, maintain,
manage, conduct or operate a place in the Borough of Monaca which is
declared to be a public nuisance as set forth and stated in § 76-2 or
§ 76-3 of this chapter is deemed to be a person who has knowledge of
such nuisance for the purpose of this chapter and may, thereafter, be
responsible for its maintenance and liable therefor.
B. The places and matters declared to be public nuisances under § 76-2 or
§ 76-3 shall be abated as provided for herein.
A. The Borough Solicitor, any member of the Borough Police Department,
the Borough Manager or any citizen of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania residing within the Borough may maintain an action of an
equitable nature in the name of the Borough upon the relation of such
Borough Solicitor or citizen to abate a nuisance.
B. No bond shall be required of the Borough Solicitor, any member of the
Borough of Monaca Police Department or the Borough Manager. If such
action is instituted by a private citizen, a bond shall be required in the
amount of not less than $500 to secure to the defendants the proximate
damages which may be sustained, including attorney's fees, if any court
finds that there were no reasonable grounds for said action.
C. The Borough Solicitor shall have the right to present arguments and
authorities on behalf of either party.
A. Money damages may be recovered:
(1) For compensation for loss or harm suffered in person or property
by the Borough or private citizen flowing from such nuisance; and
(2) As exemplary or punitive damages for the sake of example or to
punish the offender where it is shown that the offender has been
guilty of malice. "Malice" means an intent to do a wrongful act, that
is, an intent to maintain, permit or allow a nuisance to exist.
B. Injunctions.
§ 76-3 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 76-6
76:77
§ 76-7. Costs; collections.
(1) Preliminary and permanent injunctions may be issued to prevent
the further maintenance of a nuisance and to prevent the further
sale or exhibition of obscene motion-picture films, live theater
productions and publications. The procedures for obtaining such
injunctions shall be governed by the rules of civil procedure,
preserving the right of trial by jury upon the application for
permanent injunction.
(2) Upon the application for preliminary injunction, the court shall set
the matter for a hearing no earlier than two days and no later than
five days from the date of service of the summons and complaint.
(3) Upon the trial on the merits of the permanent injunction, if the
court finds a place to be a nuisance, the court may issue an order
closing the place to all uses and purposes for the period of one year.
If the offenders or persons owning, in control of or in charge of
such place certify that the nuisance has been abated and that the
films, productions or publications found to be obscene shall not be
exhibited, sold or otherwise disseminated and, at the discretion of
the court, post a bond in an amount not to exceed the value of the
personal property possessed or contained at such place for the
maintenance of the nuisance, the court may release such person or
persons from the closure order. The release shall remain in effect
for one year or until the nuisance is found to exist at the place
before the expiration of one year. The bond shall be deposited with
the court prior to the release of any closure order and shall be
returned to the person posting said bond, without interest at the
expiration of one year, provided that the nuisance is not maintained
or reestablished within that year.
A. If the existence of the nuisance is established at the trial, a judgment
shall be entered which shall permanently enjoin the defendants and any
other person with notice or knowledge of the action and judgment from
maintaining the nuisance at said place and the defendants from
maintaining such nuisance elsewhere, and the entire expenses of such
abatement action shall be recovered by the plaintiff as part of his costs.
B. Cost of abatement.
(1) The cost of abatement shall include the following:
(a) Investigative costs.
(b) Court costs.
(c) Reasonable attorney's fees arising out of the preparation for
and trial of the case and appeals therefrom and other costs
allowed on appeal.
§ 76-6 MONACA CODE § 76-7
76:78
Chapter 80
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Recreation Board — See Ch. 54.
Allaire Park — See Ch. 157, Art. I.
Warrantless arrests — See Ch. 231.
§ 80-1. Prohibited acts generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to engage in drinking any
alcoholic beverage, including but not limited to wine, malt beer or other
brewed beverages, liquor, whiskey or any combination thereof upon any
of the streets, highways, alleys, designated parks, ball fields, recreational
areas, commons, unoccupied lots of land or in unoccupied buildings within
the Borough of Monaca.
§ 80-2. Permit required in Allaire Park.
This chapter shall be excepted on the premises of Allaire Park. Aforesaid
alcoholic beverages may be consumed at Allaire Park upon those parties
acquiring a permit to do so from the Recreation Director. Said permit shall
be acquired by application as prescribed by the Recreation Board.
(d) Printing costs of trial and appellate briefs and all other papers
filed in such proceeding.
(2) Such cost of abatement may be made a special assessment against
the place or the parcel of land upon which such place is located.
Upon its determination in a civil action, such cost of abatement
shall, by separate legal proceeding, be made a lien against such
property and a personal obligation against any person and shall be
collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary
municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same
penalties and the same procedure and sale in the case of
delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws
applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal
taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment.
C. Upon judgment for the plaintiff in legal proceedings brought pursuant
to this chapter, an accounting shall be made by defendant or defendants
of all moneys or valuable consideration received by them which have
been declared to be a public nuisance under § 76-2 or § 76-3 of this
chapter. Such moneys or their equivalent and any valuable
consideration received shall be forfeited to the General Fund of the
Borough or to the Borough as property of the Borough if any valuable
consideration received is not money.
§ 76-7 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 80-3
80:79
§ 80-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Code Enforcement.
Chapter 84
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 1, Art. II. Fee schedule — See Ch. A256.
§ 84-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 84-2. License required. [Amended 5-9-1983 by Ord. No. 685-C]
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, at any
establishment in the Borough of Monaca, any and all electrical, electronic
and mechanical amusement devices or jukeboxes where the same shall
be available for use and operation by customers and/or patrons of such
A. The following words and terms, for the use of this chapter, shall have
the meanings hereby respectively ascribed thereto:
ELECTRICAL AND/OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES —
Machines or apparatus which uses video displays or readouts or emits
electrical and electronic audio and video signals through the insertion
of a coin or disk for amusement or entertainment purposes.[Amended
5-9-1983by Ord. No. 685-C]
ESTABLISHMENT — Any place within the Borough of Monaca except a
private residence.
JUKEBOX — Any music box, phonograph or similar instrument or
device for the emission of music, operated through the insertion of a
coin or disk.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any mechanical device,
machine or apparatus, other than a jukebox as herein defined, which,
through the insertion of a coin or disk, may be used for the playing of
a game or for amusement or entertainment, but the term "mechanical
amusement device" shall not include any gambling device or in any way
be contrary to law.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
§ 80-3 MONACA CODE § 84-2
80:80
establishment, without first having obtained a license therefor as
hereinafter provided.
§ 84-3. Application. [Amended 7-9-2013 by Ord. No. 932]
Any person, required to obtain a license under this chapter, shall make an
application for such license to the Borough Manager, on a form provided
by the Borough, which application shall set forth the name, residence,
and present and previous occupation of the applicant, place where such
machine or machines are to be used or played, number and kind of
machine(s) or device(s) to be operated and any other information which
may be required in such application. Such application shall be referred to
the Neighborhood Services Officer for investigation and approval; and, after
such approval thereof and if the same shall be approved, a license shall be
issued by the Borough Manager for each separate machine or mechanical
device for the current license period. A similar license shall be required for
each license year or fraction thereof.
§ 84-4. License fee. [Amended 1-12-1981 by Ord. No. 685-A;
2-9-1981 by Ord. No. 685-B; 5-9-1983 by Ord. No. 685-C; 9-10-1996
by Ord. No. 822; 7-9-2013 by Ord. No. 932]
The license year shall be coincident with the calendar year, and the license
fee to he paid by the applicant shall be as follows:
§ 84-5. Transfer of license. [Amended 5-9-1983 by Ord. No. 685-C;
9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
In case any and all electrical, electronic and mechanical amusement devices
or jukeboxes shall be replaced for a portion of a license year for which the
license fee shall have been paid or in case there is a substitution of a similar
device or jukebox for a period of time for which the license fee shall have
been paid, there shall be no additional license fee imposed for such period
for which a fee shall have been paid, but a transfer or substitution fee, as
shall be set from time to time by resolution by the Borough Council, shall
A. For mechanical, electrical and electronic amusement devices, it shall be
$350 for a license year, and $175 for any such device that shall he
installed and licensed after July 1 of any year, excluding bowling
machines, pool tables, jukeboxes, electronic dart boards, trivia
machines, or any other similar amusement device as determined by the
Borough. Said bowling machines, pool tables, jukeboxes, electronic
dart boards, trivia machines or any other similar amusement devices as
determined by the Borough shall be $35 per annum and $17.50 for any
bowling machine, pool tables, jukeboxes, electronic dart boards, trivia
machines, or any other similar amusement devices as determined by
the Borough, installed and licensed after July 1 of any year.
B. Hereafter, the license fee may be set from time to time by resolution of
the Borough Council.
§ 84-2 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 84-5
80:81
be paid to the Borough pursuant to application on forms provided by the
Borough to the original license holder.
§ 84-6. Issuance of certificate or tag.
Upon payment of the license fee herein provided, the Borough shall issue
to the applicant a license certificate or tag setting forth the number of the
license for each machine or device to be so licensed, which certificate or tag
shall be attached to the applicable machine or device or be displayed in a
conspicuous place in the establishment where such machine or device shall
be available for use.
§ 84-7. Gambling prohibited.
Nothing in this chapter shall be in any way construed to authorize, license
or permit any gambling device whatsoever or any mechanism that shall
have been judicially determined to be a gambling device or in any respect
contrary to law, nor shall any device be used or permitted to be used for
gambling purposes.
§ 84-8. Enforcement. [Amended 5-9-1993 by Ord. No. 685-C;
7-9-2013 by Ord. No. 932]
It shall be the duty of the Neighborhood Services Officer to regulate and
supervise the operation of any and all electrical, electronic and mechanical
amusement devices and jukeboxes required to be licensed under this
chapter and regularly to inspect the premises where the same shall be used,
in order to require full compliance with the law and this chapter, so that
same shall not constitute a nuisance or be used in violation of any law.
§ 84-9. Revocation of license. [Amended 5-9-1993 by Ord. No.
685-C]
In the event that any and all electrical, electronic and mechanical
amusement devices or jukeboxes shall be so operated as to constitute a
nuisance or in violation of any law of the commonwealth or ordinance
of the Borough, the license of every mechanical amusement device or
jukebox in such establishment shall be revoked by action of the Borough
Council, without any refund or rebate of any part of a license fee paid for
such mechanical amusement device or jukebox. Furthermore, at least two
months shall elapse before another license may be issued under this chapter
to the person whose license was revoked pursuant to this section.
§ 84-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this ordinance shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Code Enforcement.
Chapter 88
§ 84-5 MONACA CODE § 84-10
88:82
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Nuisances — See Ch. 152.
Animals in Allaire Park — See Ch. 157, Art. I.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
§ 88-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
KEEPER or PERSON — Any person, firm or corporation owning or actually
keeping, having, using or maintaining any of the animals herein referred to.
LARGE ANIMALS — All individual species of the bovine (Bovidae), equine
(Equidae), swine (Suidae), sheep (Ovis) and goat (Capra) families.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm or corporation.
RATPROOF — A state of being constructed so as to effectively prevent entry
of rats.
SANITARY — Any condition of good order and cleanliness, which precludes
the probability of disease transmission.
SMALL ANIMALS — Rabbits, hares, guinea pigs, chinchillas, chickens,
turkeys, geese, ducks, hamsters, pigeons (except homing pigeons), rats,
mice, dogs, cats and other animals ordinarily considered to be household
pets.
§ 88-2. Animal Control Officer. [Added 6-8-1987 by Ord. No. 773]
A. There is hereby created the position of Animal Control Officer, who
shall be appointed by and serve at the will of the Borough Council.
B. The Animal Control Officer shall have the power to:
(1) Enforce the provisions of this chapter and amendments thereto.
(2) Make such rules and regulations, with the consent of the Borough
Council, as he shall deem necessary to carry out the purposes and
provisions of this chapter and amendments thereto.
(3) Determine whether any person is violating any provision of this
chapter and amendments thereto.
(4) Determine whether any person is violating any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant to this chapter.
C. In making a determination, the Animal Control Officer shall consider
the following standards:
§ 84-10 ANIMALS § 88-2
88:83
§ 88-3. Keeping of certain animals prohibited.
Except for farms considered operational at the time of passage of this
chapter, large animals and any other animals not ordinarily considered as
house pets are prohibited within the corporate limits of the Borough of
Monaca. All other animals may be kept under the conditions hereinafter set
forth.
§ 88-4. Number of small animals limited. [Amended 6-8-1987 by
Ord. No. 773]
No person shall keep within the Borough of Monaca a combined total of
more than six small animals; provided, however, that there may be also
maintained in any dwelling unit six puppies or kittens up the the age of
six months. There shall be no commercial intent in the keeping of any fowl
within the Borough.
(1) All animals and animal quarters shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition, maintained with adequate ventilation.
(2) Animal owners, custodians or keepers shall use every reasonable
precaution to assure that the animals are not teased, abused,
mistreated, annoyed, tormented or in any manner made to suffer by
any means.
(3) Animals which are enemies by nature or which are
temperamentally unsuited shall not be quartered together or so
near each other as to cause the animals fear or to be abused,
tormented or annoyed.
(4) Animal owners, custodians or keepers shall maintain the premises
used to house or keep animals so as to eliminate offensive odors or
excessive noise.
(5) Animal owners, custodians or keepers shall not permit any
condition causing disturbance of the peace and quiet of his
neighbors.
(6) Animals must be maintained in quarters so constructed as to
prevent their escape. The animal owner, custodian or keeper
assumes full responsibility for recapturing any animal that escapes
from his premises and shall make adequate provisions and
safeguards to protect the public from the animals.
(7) Every person shall conform to all present and future laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the United States of America,
the ordinances of the Borough of Monaca and the rules and
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto in any way connected
with animals, specifically including anticruelty laws.
§ 88-2 MONACA CODE § 88-5
88:84
§ 88-5. Dwelling requirements; responsibilities.
Persons who keep small animals shall provide facilities for the keeping of
such small animals in quarters as set out herein, which will confine said
small animals within limits not closer than 25 feet to the exterior limits of
any dwelling resided in by anyone other than the animal keeper.
§ 88-6. Game or fighting cocks prohibited.
Game cocks or fighting cocks shall not be kept in the Borough.
§ 88-7. Maintenance of housing; public nuisance.
A. Every keeper of any small animal shall confine the same in a manner to
prevent its running at large, and the area of confinement shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary manner at all times.
B. The area of confinement for an animal shall be of sufficient size to be
conducive to good sanitation practices and provide adequate and
sanitary drainage.
C. Each keeper of small animals shall cause the litter and droppings
therefrom to be collected daily in a container or receptacle of such a
type that, when closed, it is ratproof and flytight and, after each such
collection, shall cause such container or receptacle to be kept closed. At
least twice a week, each such keeper shall cause all litter and droppings
so collected to be disposed of in a way as not to permit the presence of
fly larvae.
D. Every keeper of any small animals shall cause all feed provided therefor
to be stored and kept in a ratproof, flytight building, box, container or
receptacle.
E. The premises shall be subject to inspection by any authorized
representative of the Borough at any reasonable hour of the day.
A. It shall be the duty of any keeper of animals provided for in this chapter
to maintain and operate the housing and keeping of such animals in
such a manner as not to create a public nuisance as determined by any
court of competent jurisdiction.
B. Medical laboratories, educational institutions, veterinary hospitals, pet
shops or other similar activities shall keep and maintain animals under
the same conditions prescribed by this chapter and with the distance
and structural requirements herein set forth.43
43.Editor's Note: Original Sections 8 and 9, as amended, regarding running at large and
seizure, respectively, which immediately followed this section, were deleted 9-10-1996 by
Ord. No. 822.
§ 88-5 ANIMALS § 88-8
88:85
§ 88-8. Prosecution under state statute.
Any violation of this chapter that would constitute a violation of any state
statute shall be prosecuted under the state statute.
§ 88-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this
chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Code
Enforcement.
Chapter 92
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 46.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 94.
Removal of demolition of buildings — See Ch.
96.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
210.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
Fee schedule — See Ch. A256.
§ 92-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, two copies of which are on file in the office of the
Borough Manager of the Borough of Monaca being marked and designated
as the "BOCA National Building Code, 12th Edition, 1993," as published by
the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., be and
is hereby adopted as the building code of the Borough of Monaca, Beaver
County, Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, penalties, conditions and
terms of said BOCA National Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted
and made part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 92-2 of this chapter.
§ 92-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
A. Section 101.1, Title, is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the "Building Code
of Borough of Monaca," hereinafter referred to as “this code."
B. Section 112.3.1, Fee schedule, is hereby amended to read as follows:
1123.1 Fee schedule: A fee for plan examination, building permit and
inspection shall be paid in accordance with the following schedule:
§ 88-8 MONACA CODE § 92-2
92:86
Chapter 94
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 92.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 205.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
210.
Cost of Work Amount of Fee
Up to $1,000 $7.50
$1,001 to $50,000 $7.50 plus $1.50
$50,001 and above $81.00 plus $0.75
C. Section 116.4, Violation penalties, is hereby amended to read as
follows: [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
116.4 Violation penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision
of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure
in violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official or of
a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall
be guilty of a summary offense, punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000 or, in default of payment, by imprisonment not exceeding 30
days. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense.
D. Section 117.2, Unlawful continuance, is hereby amended to read as
follows:
117.2 Unlawful continuance: Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the structure after having been served with a stopwork
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not
less than $50 or more than $100.
E. Section 3408.2, Applicability, is hereby amended to read as follows:
3408.2 Applicability: Structures existing prior to April 9, 1984, in
which there is work involving additions, alterations or changes of
occupancy shall be made to conform to the requirements of this section
or provisions of Section 3403.0 through 3407.0.
The provisions in Section 3408.2.1 through 3408.2.5 shall apply to
existing occupancies that will continue to be or are proposed to be in
Use Groups A, B, E, P, M, R and S. These provisions shall not apply to
buildings with occupancies in Use Group H or I.
§ 92-2 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 94-1
94:87
§ 94-1. Houses and unimproved lots to be numbered.
All houses and unimproved lots shall be numbered in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 94-2. Numbering on east-west streets.
The numbers on all streets, highways and avenues as running eastwardly
and westwardly and parallel with the Ohio River shall run from Fourth
Street eastwardly, the even numbers on the right-hand side and the odd
numbers on the left-hand side of the street. The first right-hand number
on each and every street or avenue running eastwardly from Fourth Street
shall be the same number as the number of the street marking the southern
boundary of the blocks or squares multiplied by 100.
§ 94-3. Streets bounding on square.
The streets marking the western boundary of the square or squares running
eastwardly shall be Fourth Street to Twentieth Street, both inclusive.
§ 94-4. Numbering system on Pennsylvania Avenue.
The first number on the west side of Pennsylvania Avenue south of Fourth
Street shall be 399. Measuring southwardly therefrom on said avenue to
the Borough line, each 20 feet of street frontage shall be assigned the next
lower number, the even numbers on the eastern side and the odd numbers
on the western side going southwardly from Fourth Street.
§ 94-5. Numbering system on Atlantic Avenue.
The numbering system on the north side of Atlantic Avenue opposite the
eastern line of Fourth Street shall be 399. Measuring southwestwardly
therefrom on said avenue to the Borough line, each 20 feet of street
frontage shall be assigned the next lower number, the even numbers on
the south side and the odd numbers on the northern side going
southwestwardly from Fourth Street.
§ 94-6. Numbering on north-south streets.
The numbers on all streets running northwardly and southwardly shall run
from Atlantic Avenue southwardly, the even numbers on the right-hand
side and the odd numbers on the left-hand side of the street. The first
number on each and every street running southwardly beginning at Atlantic
Avenue shall be 100; at Indiana Avenue, 200; at Washington Avenue, 300; at
Pennsylvania Avenue, 400; and at Pacific Avenue, 500.
§ 94-7. Numbering system on streets north of Atlantic Avenue.
The first number on the western side of every street north of Atlantic
Avenue shall be 98. Measuring northwardly therefrom to the Ohio River,
each 20 feet of street frontage shall take the next lower number, the even
§ 94-1 MONACA CODE § 94-7
94:88
numbers on the western side and the uneven numbers on the eastern side
of the street running towards the river.
§ 94-8. Frequency of numbers.
A number shall be given to each and every 20 feet of street frontage of
unimproved property and to every doorway of improved property.
§ 94-9. Requirements for numbers.
All numbers placed on houses shall be the minimum size of three inches in
height and shall be placed under the supervision of the Street Committee of
the Borough Council and shall be subject to all such reasonable restrictions
and requirements as the Borough Council shall from time to time ordain.
§ 94-10. Preparation, custody and accessibility of numbering plan.
The Borough Engineer is hereby directed, under the supervision of the
Borough Council, to prepare a plan, showing the numbers of the present
buildings and unimproved frontage, and to file the same with the Secretary
of the Council, who shall furnish the proper number to each resident or
owners when called upon to do so.
§ 94-11. Placement by owners. [Amended 11-12-1975 by Ord. No.
658]
Numbers shall be placed on all buildings by the owners thereof.
Chapter 96
BUILDINGS, REMOVAL OR DEMOLITION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Water — See Ch. 233.
Fee schedule — See Ch. A256.
§ 96-1. Permit required.
No structure situate within the Borough of Monaca and which is assessed
for tax purposes shall be demolished or removed from the premises on
which it is situate without first obtaining a permit from the Secretary of the
Borough of Monaca.
§ 96-2. Required information.
The Secretary of the Borough of Monaca shall not issue any permit for such
demolition or removal unless and until satisfactory proof is received by the
§ 94-7 BUILDINGS, REMOVAL OR DEMOLITION OF § 96-2
96:89
Borough Secretary showing whether such structure now is or during its
existence was served by Monaca water and/or sewer facilities.
§ 96-3. Sealing of water and sewer lines; fee. [Amended 9-10-1996
by Ord. No. 822]
When a structure proposed to be demolished or removed now is or during
its existence was served by Monaca water and/or sewer facilities, the
persons requesting the permit for demolition or removal shall answer upon
the application for the permit whether the owner shall, at the owner's cost,
uncover and seal off the water and/or sewer lines, backfill the trench and
then restore the surface of the ground to its former condition or if the owner
desires the Borough employees to do the work. Failure to note such entry
upon the permit shall be construed as requesting the Borough employees to
do the work. The person requesting such permit shall, with the filing of the
application, pay a fee in an amount as set from time to time by resolution
of the Borough Council,44 which fee shall be in addition to any other fee or
deposit as set forth for the issuance of such permit.
§ 96-4. Pending work; effect of sealing off lines by Borough.
[Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
The Secretary of the Borough of Monaca shall, after the issuance of any
such permit, give written notice to the Monaca Borough forces, advising
them of the existence of such water and/or sewer facilities serving the
structure to be demolished or removed and whether the Borough forces
are to uncover and seal off said lines serving the premises, backfill the
trench and restore the surface of the ground to its former condition. If so
requested, the Borough forces shall promptly perform the same, whereupon
the Borough Secretary shall transfer the fee set forth in § 96-3 to the
Borough's General Fund.
§ 96-5. Procedure when property owner seals off lines. [Amended
9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
If the owner of the premises on which is situate the structure proposed to be
demolished or removed exercises the option to do the work and seal off the
water and/or sewer lines at his own cost, then the owner or his agent shall
notify the Borough Secretary when the seal-off point has been uncovered.
The owner shall not proceed to seal off the water and/or sewer lines or to
backfill the trench except under the supervision of an authorized Borough
employee. If the owner proceeds to do such work without the supervision
of an authorized Borough employee, then the Borough forces shall uncover
the place where the lines were sealed off to ascertain whether the seal
was done in a proper manner and then backfill the trench in the required
manner, whereupon the Borough shall retain an amount as set from time to
time by resolution of the Borough Council.45 If the work is done under the
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. A256, Fee Schedule.
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. A256, Fees Schedule.
§ 96-2 MONACA CODE § 96-5
96:90
supervision and with the approval of an authorized Borough employee, then
the Borough Secretary shall refund the deposit to the owner of his agent.
§ 96-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person or persons violating the provisions of this chapter or any portion
thereof shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more
than $1,000 and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to 30 days'
imprisonment and shall be held liable for all costs, if any, to the Borough of
Monaca attributable to the uncovering of the water main and/or sewer main
to which the lines are tapped serving or previously serving the premises,
the sealing of such tap and the return of the premises back to the condition
in which they were prior to the excavation for such purposes.
§ 96-7. Proceedings.
Actions against the person or persons violating any provision of this chapter
may be brought before the District Justice by civil proceedings or criminal
proceedings, or both.
Chapter 100
CABLE TELEVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A255.
§ 96-5 CABLE TELEVISION § 96-7
100:91

ARTICLE I
Customer Service
[Adopted 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 815]
§ 100-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CABLE ACT OF 1992 — The Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act, P.L. No. 102-385, 106 Stat. 1460 (1992).
CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS — Those standards governing customer
service which are prescribed by the FCC existing on the effective date of
this article and as may be hereafter amended and may be enforced by the
franchising authority.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY — The Borough of Monaca.
SUBSCRIBER — A customer of the cable operator(s) receiving cable
television service within the geographic boundaries of the franchising
authority.
§ 100-2. Customer service standards.
§ 100-3. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Within 90 days of receipt by Adelphia Cable Television, Inc. (ACTV), of
written notice from the franchising authority of the franchising
authority's intention to monitor and enforce the customer service
standards adopted by the FCC, ACTV shall comply with said standards.
B. At the next billing cycle after receipt of said notice to its existing
subscribers and at or prior to the time of installation for new
subscribers, ACTV shall provide its subscribers with notice of its
customer service standards and shall provide said subscribers with the
name of the franchising authority or contact person for said franchising
authority that the subscriber should contact to report any violation or
alleged violation of said customer service standards.
C. The franchising authority, upon receipt of a complaint of an alleged
violation of the customer service standards or upon discovery of a
violation on its own accord, shall provide notice of the same to ACTV,
which may respond thereto within 10 days of said notice.
D. Any failure of ACTV to cure a violation of the customer service
standards within such time as shall be set by the franchising authority
or to timely respond to a notice from the franchising authority
regarding a violation shall be a violation of this article.
§ 100-1 CABLE TELEVISION § 100-3
100:93
A. Cumulative remedies. Where this article provides alternative penalties
or remedies, they shall be cumulative, and the imposition of one penalty
or remedy shall not prevent the franchising authority from invoking any
other penalty or remedy provided herein.
B. In addition to all other rights and remedies provided herein, the
franchising authority shall have all rights and remedies afforded under
the franchise agreement.
C. Unless otherwise provided, any person convicted of violating any
provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than
$500 and costs for each offense. Each day of a continuing violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense, and each violation with
respect to a subscriber shall be a separate offense.
§ 100-3 MONACA CODE § 100-3
100:94
ARTICLE II
Rates
[Adopted 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 816]
§ 100-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASIC SERVICE TIER — At a minimum, includes all signals of domestic
television broadcast stations provided to any subscriber [except a signal
secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area
of such station, regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the
cable operator(s)]; any public, educational and governmental programming
required by the franchise agreement to be carried on the basic tier; and any
additional video programming signals or service added to the basic tier by
the cable operator(s).
CABLE ACT OF 1992 — The Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act, P.L. No. 102-385, 106 Stat. 1460 (1992).
CABLE OPERATOR(S) — All cable television operators who are party to a
franchise agreement with the franchising authority.
CABLE PROGRAMMING SERVICE — Any video programming provided over
a cable television system regardless of service tier, including installation or
rental of equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other
than:
CERTIFICATION — The certification received by the franchising authority
from the FCC, empowering the franchising authority to regulate certain
cable television rates.
COST-OF-SERVICE RATE APPLICATION — A rate application filed in the
manner prescribed and on the forms adopted by the FCC. A cost-of-service
rate application may be submitted by a cable operator(s), in its sole
discretion, in support of its current rates or a proposed rate increase.
CURRENT RATES — Those rates in effect for the basic service tier and
for the equipment and installation necessary to receive the basic service
tier, existing on the date when the franchising authority notifies the cable
operator(s) that it has received certification.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
A. Video programming carried on the basic service tier;
Video programming offered on a pay-per-channel or pay-per-program
basis; or
B.
A combination of multiple channels of pay-per-channel or pay-perprogram
video programming offered on a multiplexed or time-shifted
basis so long as the combined service consists of commonly identified
video programming and is not bundled with any regulated tier of
service.
C.
§ 100-4 CABLE TELEVISION § 100-4
100:95
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — The agreement between one or more cable
operator(s) and the franchising authority pursuant to which the cable
operator(s) was granted a franchise to offer cable television services to
subscribers.
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY — The Council of the Borough of Monaca.
MAXIMUM PERMITTED RATES — Those rates against which all rate
applications shall be measured. The maximum permitted rates shall be
determined consistent with the rules adopted by the FCC.
OPINION — An opinion issued by the franchising authority in response to
any rate application.
ORDER — An order issued by the franchising authority advising the cable
operator(s) and other interested parties of the franchising authority's intent
to take additional time to review and approve or disapprove any rate
application.
PRESCRIBED RATE — The rate prescribed by the franchising authority for
the basic service tier and/or for the equipment and installation necessary
to receive the basic service tier, which may differ from the proposed rate
submitted by the cable operator(s) in a rate application.
PROSPECTIVE RATE ADJUSTMENT — A reduction by the franchising
authority in the current rates charged by a cable operator(s).
RATE APPLICATION — An application on the form adopted by the FCC to
be submitted by the cable operator(s) for approval of its current rates and/
or any proposed increase in the rates for the basic service tier and/or for
the equipment and installation necessary to receive the basic service tier.
REFUND — Any refund ordered by the franchising authority of rates
charged for the basic service tier and/or the rates for the equipment and
installation necessary to receive the basic service tier pursuant to the terms
contained in § 100-7D(2).
SUBSCRIBER — A customer of the cable operator(s) receiving cable
television service within the geographic boundaries of the franchising
authority.
§ 100-5. Obtaining certification.
A. The franchising authority is hereby empowered to make application for
certification with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to
regulate cable television rates for the basic service tier, the equipment
and installation necessary to receive the basic service tier and to
provide notice to the cable operator(s) of its application for
certification. Application shall be made in the manner and on the forms
adopted by the FCC, and notice shall be provided to the cable operator
(s) before or on the same day of filing of the application.
B. Upon the effective date of certification, the franchising authority shall
provide notice to the cable operator(s) of its certification, its intention
§ 100-4 MONACA CODE § 100-5
100:96
§ 100-6. Regulatory authority.
Pursuant to the power and authority granted to the franchising authority
under the Cable Act of 1992 and its certification by the FCC for regulating
rates for the basic service tier and rates for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier and other charges which may be
regulated by the franchising authority pursuant to the regulations adopted
by the FCC under the Cable Act of 1992, the franchising authority shall
exercise regulatory power over the rates charged or to be charged to a
subscriber for the basic service tier and for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier applicable to those subscribers of
the cable operator(s).
§ 100-7. Rate applications.
to regulate rates for the basic service tier and the equipment and
installation necessary to receive the basic service tier.
C. In the event that the franchising authority shall not obtain certification
or that its certification shall be reconsidered and revoked, the
franchising authority is hereby authorized to take such steps as are
necessary to receive certification.
A. Initial procedures.
(1) The cable operator(s) shall give notice to its subscribers within 90
days (or three billing cycles) of the effective date of the rules
adopted by the franchising authority and to all new subscribers at
the time of installation of the availability of the basic service tier.
(2) Each cable operator shall submit a rate application to the
franchising authority for approval of that cable operator's current
rates for the basic service tier and for approval of its rates for the
equipment and installation necessary to receive the basic service
tier and for approval of any proposed rate increase.
(a) The rate application for approval of current rates for the basic
service tier and the rates for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier shall be filed within
30 days of notice from the franchising authority to the cable
operator(s) that the franchising authority has been certified by
the FCC and has adopted the regulations required by the FCC
for rate regulation.
(b) The rate application for any proposed increase in rates for the
basic service tier or for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier shall be filed a
minimum of 30 days before the effective date of the proposed
increase.
(c) Included in a rate application shall be such information as is
set forth in the application form adopted by the FCC.
§ 100-5 CABLE TELEVISION § 100-7
100:97
(d) The cable operator(s) shall submit any relevant information as
is permitted by FCC rules, as contained on the application and
worksheets adopted by the FCC for rate applications, and
which the cable operator(s) would like the franchising
authority to consider in evaluating the current rates for the
basic service tier and/or for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier and/or in evaluating
any proposed rate increase of those same items.
(e) If the current rates for the basic service tier and/or for the
equipment and installation necessary to receive the basic
service tier or any proposed rate increase exceeds the
maximum permitted rates, the cable operator(s) may submit a
cost-of-service rate application in conformity with FCC rules.
Only the cable operator(s) may decide whether to submit a
cost-of-service rate application.
(3) The cable operator shall give written notice to its subscribers that a
rate application has been filed at least 30 days prior to the effective
date of any proposed rate increase. Said notice shall provide the
name and address of the franchising authority before whom the
rate application is pending.
(4) The cable operator(s) bears the burden of proof that its current
rates or any proposed rate increase complies with the statutes of
the United States and the regulations of the FCC.
(5) Within 14 days of receipt of a rate application, the franchising
authority shall provide notice in a newspaper of general circulation
within the jurisdiction of the franchising authority, which notice
shall contain at a minimum:
(a) Notice that the rate application has been received from the
cable operator(s).
(b) The manner in which interested parties may review and/or
obtain copies of the rate application.
(c) The effective date of the proposed rate increase, if that is the
subject of the rate application.
(d) The manner in which interested parties may offer their
comments regarding the rate application.
(e) The date all comments must be received by the franchising
authority.
(f) The date on which the franchising authority must act on the
rate application or the rate application shall have become
effective without action.
(6) Within 30 days of receipt of the rate application, the franchising
authority shall:
§ 100-7 MONACA CODE § 100-7
100:98
(a) Review the rate application and documentation submitted by
the cable operator(s);
(b) Compare the current rates or the proposed rate increase
submitted by the cable operator(s) with the maximum
permitted rates or with such other applicable standards as
have been adopted and/or approved by the FCC;
(c) Consider any public input on the rate application which may
have been provided; and
(d) Approve, disapprove or seek additional time to consider the
rate application.
(7) If the franchising authority shall fail to either approve, disapprove
or seek additional time to consider the rate application within said
30 days, the rate application shall be deemed approved on the 30th
day after submission.
B. Request for additional time.
(1) Rate application. If the franchising authority is unable to determine
from the rate application, including any supporting documentation
submitted by the cable operator(s), whether the current rates for
the basic service tier and/or for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier and/or the proposed rate
increase are within the maximum permitted rates, the franchising
authority may, in cases not involving cost-of-service showings, take
an additional 90 days to consider the rate application.
(a) The franchising authority shall issue an order and serve the
same upon the cable operator(s), indicating that additional
time is required to consider the rate application. The order
shall be issued prior to the expiration of the 30 days during
which the franchising authority may consider the rate
application. Within 10 days of issuance of such order, the
franchising authority shall publish notice in a newspaper of
general circulation within the jurisdiction of the franchising
authority, which notice shall contain a summary of the order,
including the additional time requested and the reason for
requesting such additional time.
(b) The cable operator may submit such additional information as
it believes will cure any deficiencies in the rate application
during the additional time.
(c) The franchising authority may require the cable operator(s) to
furnish additional specified information, including proprietary
information, when the current rate or proposed rate increase is
in excess of the maximum permitted rate. When the current
rate is equal to or below the maximum permitted rate, the
franchising authority may only require furnishing of
§ 100-7 CABLE TELEVISION § 100-7
100:99
documentation that the rate is within the maximum permitted
rate.
(d) If no decision is issued by the franchising authority at the
expiration of the additional time, the current rates or proposed
rate increase shall become effective, subject to any later
refund order adopted by the franchising authority.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the franchising authority, in
order to later order a refund, must, within the text of the order,
direct the cable operator(s) to keep an accurate account of all
amounts received by reason of the rate in issue and on whose
behalf such amounts were paid.
(2) Cost-of-service rate application. If the cable operator(s) has
submitted a cost-of-service rate application and the franchising
authority is unable to determine whether the current rates for the
basic service tier and/or for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier and/or the proposed rate
increase are within the maximum permitted rates, the franchising
authority may take an additional 150 days to consider the cost-ofservice
rate application.
(a) The franchising authority shall issue an order and serve the
same upon the cable operator(s), indicating that additional
time is required to consider the rate application because it is a
cost-of-service rate application. The order shall be issued prior
to the expiration of the 30 days during which the franchising
authority may consider the rate application. Within 10 days of
issuance of such order, the franchising authority shall publish
notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the
jurisdiction of the franchising authority, which notice shall
contain a summary of the order, including the additional time
requested and the reason for requesting such additional time.
(b) The franchising authority may require the cable operator(s) to
furnish additional specified information, including proprietary
information, when the current rate or proposed rate increase is
in excess of the maximum permitted rate. When the current
rate is equal to or below the maximum permitted rate, the
franchising authority may only require furnishing of
documentation that the rate is within the maximum permitted
rate.
(c) If no decision is issued by the franchising authority at the
expiration of the additional time, the current rates or proposed
rate increase shall become effective, subject to any later
refund order adopted by the franchising authority.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the franchising authority, in
order to later order a refund, must, within the text of the order,
direct the cable operator(s) to keep an accurate account of all
§ 100-7 MONACA CODE § 100-7
100:100
amounts received by reason of the rate in issue and on whose
behalf such amounts were paid.
(d) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this
article, the franchising authority may, pursuant to a petition for
special relief filed with the FCC, request the FCC to examine a
cable operator's cost-of-service rate application, and such
procedures and deadlines as specified by rule or order of the
FCC shall control.
C. Decision of the franchising authority.
(1) The franchising authority shall issue a written opinion when:
(a) The rate application is not approved, in whole or in part, by the
franchising authority.
(b) The rate application is approved by the franchising authority
over the objections of any interested party.
(2) The franchising authority may, but is not required, to issue a
written opinion when the rate application is approved and there
have been no objections filed.
(3) Within 10 days of issuance of an opinion, the franchising authority
shall provide notice in a newspaper of general circulation within
the jurisdiction of the franchising authority, which notice shall
contain at a minimum:
(a) That the franchising authority has reached a decision on the
rate application and announcing that decision.
(b) The manner in which interested parties may review and/or
obtain copies of the opinion.
(c) The right of interested parties to take an appeal from the
opinion of the franchising authority.
(d) The deadline for taking any such appeal.
(4) Notice of the opinion of the franchising authority shall be provided
to the cable operator(s) by mail within seven days of issuance.
D. Disapproval of the rate application.
(1) Rate reduction.
(a) Current rates. If the franchising authority shall issue an
opinion disapproving the current rates of the cable operator(s)
for the basic service tier or for rates for the equipment and
installation necessary to receive the basic service tier, the
franchising authority may order a reduction in the current
rates for the basic service tier and/or for the equipment and
installation necessary to receive the basic service tier. The
§ 100-7 CABLE TELEVISION § 100-7
100:101
prospective rate adjustment may be set at a level consistent
with the FCC-adopted maximum permitted rates, another rate
based on review of a cost-of-service rate application or another
rate consistent with FCC rules.
(b) Proposed rates. If the franchising authority shall issue an
opinion disapproving of any proposed rate increase, the
franchising authority may:
[1] Prescribe a reasonable rate to be charged by the cable
operator(s) instead of the proposed rate. The prescribed
rate may not be lower than the maximum permitted rate
unless a cost-of-service rate application has been
submitted by the cable operator(s) and the franchising
authority determines that the cost-of-service analysis
justifies a lower rate; or
[2] Advise the cable operator(s) of a rate level to which it
would not object if a modified rate application were
resubmitted.
(2) Refunds. The franchising authority may order a refund if:
(a) The cable operator failed to comply with a rate decision by the
franchising authority. The refund period may be retroactive to
the effective date of the rate order issued by the franchising
authority.
(b) The franchising authority determines in its initial review of the
current rates that they exceed the maximum permitted rates
and are unsupported by a cost-of-service rate application. In
such instance, the refund period may be retroactive to
September 1, 1993, or one year prior to the date on which the
cable operator(s) implements the prospective rate adjustment,
whichever is shorter.
(c) The franchising authority has issued an order permitting it to
take an additional 90 or 150 days to consider a rate application
and has directed the cable operator(s) to keep an accurate
account of all amounts received by reason of the rate in issue
and on whose behalf such amounts were paid but failed to
issue an opinion during that time period, causing the rates to
become provisionally effective, and the franchising authority
later finds all or a portion of the rates to be unreasonable. In
such instance, the refund period may be retroactive to the date
of the order and ending on the date on which the cable
operator(s) implements the prospective rate reduction or one
year, whichever is shorter.
(3) Before any refund order shall become effective, the franchising
authority must send notice to the cable operator(s) and provide
said cable operator(s) a maximum of 30 days to submit additional
§ 100-7 MONACA CODE § 100-7
100:102
§ 100-8. Remedies; violations and penalties.
§ 100-9. Ratemaking appeals.
Appeals of all ratemaking decisions by the franchising authority may be
taken to the FCC by the cable operator(s), subscribers or other interested
parties.
§ 100-10. Complaints; information to be included on billing.
information to the franchising authority as to why the refund
should not be ordered. At the end of said period, the franchising
authority shall either confirm, amend or rescind said refund order.
(4) Refunds shall include interest computed at applicable rates
published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and
additional tax payments.
(5) If any proposed rate increase has gone into effect due to inaction of
the franchising authority or the failure of the franchising authority
to issue an order stating a need for additional time, the franchising
authority has no right to order a refund.
(6) Any violation of any order issued hereunder shall be considered a
violation of this article.
A. Cumulative remedies. Where this article provides alternative penalties
or remedies, they shall be cumulative, and the imposition of one penalty
or remedy shall not prevent the franchising authority from invoking any
other penalty or remedy provided herein.
B. In addition to all other rights and remedies provided herein, the
franchising authority shall have all rights and remedies afforded under
the franchise agreement.46
C. Unless otherwise provided, any person convicted of violating any
provision of this article, including any order issued or any rule or
regulation promulgated hereunder, shall, upon conviction, be fined not
more than $600 and costs for each offense and, in default of payment
thereof, may be imprisoned for not more than 30 days. Each day of a
continuing violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
A. Appeals must be filed within 30 days of the date of public release of the
franchising authority's opinion.
B. Oppositions to an appeal must be filed within 15 days after the filing of
the appeal and must be served on the party appealing.
C. Replies to oppositions shall be filed within seven days of the filing of an
opposition and served on all parties.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. A255, Cable Television Franchise.
§ 100-7 CABLE TELEVISION § 100-10
100:103
A. Cable programming service rates.
(1) The franchising authority is hereby authorized to file complaints
with the FCC on behalf of itself and/or any subscriber(s) who files a
complaint with the franchising authority for those cable
programming service rates solely regulated by the FCC.
(2) The decision to file a complaint with the FCC by the franchising
authority shall be in the sole discretion of the franchising authority.
(3) Any such complaint filed by the franchising authority shall be in
conformity with the rules of the FCC.
(4) The franchising authority, if it chooses not to file a complaint, may
but is not required to assist a subscriber in filing a complaint.
(5) No formal review or adjudication by the franchising authority of
any such complaint is permitted.
B. Information to be included in billing.
(1) A cable operator(s) shall provide the following information to
subscribers on monthly bills:
(a) The name and mailing address of the franchising authority;
and
(b) The FCC community unit identifier for the cable system.
(2) A cable operator(s) shall provide notice to the franchising authority
at least 30 days in advance of any change in rates for cable
programming service or associated equipment.
§ 100-10 MONACA CODE § 100-10
100:104
ARTICLE III
Payments
[Adopted 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 817]
§ 100-11. Regulatory authority.
Pursuant to the power and authority granted to the franchising authority
under the Cable Act of 1992 and pursuant to its general powers and
authority as a borough of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to act for the
general welfare of its citizenry, the franchising authority hereby exercises
regulatory power over the advance payments and late charges which may
be imposed by a cable operator on subscribers or future subscribers for
services and/or equipment provided or to be provided by the cable operator.
§ 100-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVANCE PAYMENTS — Any and all payments imposed by a cable operator
from a resident of the Borough in order to subscribe or to reconnect the
services and/or equipment offered by the cable operator. Advance payments
shall include, without limitation, deposits prior to being provided with
equipment and/or requirements to pay in advance for services not yet
received.
CABLE ACT OF 1992 — The Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992.
CABLE OPERATOR — Each cable television operator who is or becomes a
party to a franchise agreement with the franchising authority.
DUE DATE — The date when a bill submitted by a cable operator to a
subscriber shall be due for payment. The due date shall be no less than 20
calendar days from the date a bill was sent by the cable operator to the
subscriber. For a remittance by mail, payment shall be deemed to have been
made on the date of the postmark.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — The agreement between a cable operator and
the franchising authority pursuant to which the cable operator was granted
a franchise to offer cable television services to subscribers.
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY — The Borough of Monaca.
LATE CHARGES — Any and all charges and/or penalties assessed or levied
by the cable operator against a subscriber for the nonpayment, late
payment or insufficient payment of a bill from the cable operator.
SUBSCRIBER — A customer of the cable operator receiving cable television
service within the geographic boundaries of the franchising authority.
§ 100-11 CABLE TELEVISION § 100-13
100:105
§ 100-13. Advance payments.
No cable operator shall impose on or charge any person or entity within
the geographic boundaries of the franchising authority a fee in advance of
services to be rendered and/or equipment to be provided to said person
or entity. Advance payments prohibited hereunder shall include, without
limitation, deposits on equipment ordered for use by the subscriber but not
yet installed and/or requirements that the subscriber pay for services in
advance of receipt of said services.
§ 100-14. Late charges.
§ 100-15. Refunds.
§ 100-16. Remedies; violations and penalties.
A. No late charges shall be imposed unless payment is made more than
five days after the due date or unless the payment received from the
subscriber is for less than the full amount of the bill from the cable
operator. In which case, the late charges may only be assessed against
the unpaid portion of the bill.
B. No late charge shall be imposed which shall exceed the rate of 1% per
month of the unpaid balance then due the cable operator.
C. No late charge shall be imposed for the costs of rebilling the subscriber
as a result of nonpayment, late payment or less than full payment of the
amount then due the cable operator.
A. The franchising authority may order a refund of any advance payments
and/or late charges if the cable operator failed to comply with the
provisions of this article. The refund period shall be retroactive to the
date when the first late charges and/or advance payments were
imposed.
B. Before any refund order shall become effective, the franchising
authority must send notice to the cable operator and provide said cable
operator a maximum of 30 days to comment on said order. Upon the
expiration of said thirty-day period, the franchising authority shall
consider any comments which may have been submitted and shall
confirm, amend or rescind said refund order.
C. Refunds shall include interest computed at applicable rates published
by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and additional tax
payments.
D. Any violation of any order issued hereunder shall be considered a
violation of this article.
A. Cumulative remedies. Where this article provides alternative penalties
or remedies, they shall be cumulative, and the imposition of one penalty
§ 100-13 MONACA CODE § 100-16
100:106
or remedy shall not prevent the franchising authority from invoking any
other penalty or remedy provided herein.
B. In addition to all other rights and remedies provided herein, the
franchising authority shall have all rights and remedies afforded under
the franchise agreement.
C. Unless otherwise provided, any person convicted of violating any
provision of this article, including any order issued hereunder, shall,
upon conviction, be fined not more than $500 and costs for each
offense. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense, and each violation with respect to a subscriber
shall be a separate offense.
§ 100-16 CABLE TELEVISION § 100-16
100:107
Chapter 105
CARNIVALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 1, Art. II. Fee schedule — See Ch. A256.
§ 105-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 105-2. License required.
No person shall operate or conduct any carnival at any place within the
Borough of Monaca without first having obtained a license therefor, as
herein required, and except in strict conformity with all other terms and
conditions of this chapter.
§ 105-3. Application process; fee; waiver. [Amended 9-10-1996 by
Ord. No. 822]
Application for the license hereby required shall be made to the Borough
Manager who shall have the authority, before granting any such license,
to cause an investigation to be made of the proposed carnival and to
recommend to the Borough Council that such license be refused in the
interest of the health, safety, welfare or morals of the Borough and the
inhabitants thereof. If the Borough Manager or President of the Council
shall recommend the issuance of such license or if the Borough Council
shall direct the issuance thereof, the applicant shall pay to the Borough
Manager or President of the Council, for the use of the Borough, a fee as set
from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council,47 which shall be for
the use of the Borough, provided that the Borough Council may direct that
the license fee be waived in the case of any carnival conducted or operated
for the sole benefit of any charitable, community betterment, educational or
religious organization or corporation.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, association, firm
or corporation.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. A256, Fee Schedule.
§ 100-16 MONACA CODE § 105-4
105:108
§ 105-4. Expiration of license.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, hold or operate any carnival
after the license therefor, issued hereunder, shall have expired, unless such
person shall have applied for, shall have paid the applicable fee for and shall
have been issued a permit for such extended period of operation.
§ 105-5. Revocation.
The Mayor shall have the authority to revoke any license issued under this
chapter when he shall deem such revocation to be in the interest of the
health, safety, welfare or morals of the Borough and the inhabitants thereof.
In case of revocation, no part of any license fee required hereunder shall be
refunded, provided that appeals from any action of the Mayor in revoking
a license may be made to the Borough Council within 10 days after such
action of revocation.
§ 105-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, for each and
every such violation, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, Code Enforcement.
Chapter 107
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 92.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127.
Plumbing — See Ch. 165.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
210.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
§ 107-1. Election to administer and enforce.
The Borough of Monaca hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35
P.S. §§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 107-2. Adoption and incorporation by reference.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401
through 405, promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of the Borough of
Monaca.
§ 105-4 CARNIVALS § 107-3
105:109
§ 107-3. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Act and code within the Borough of
Monaca shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by
the Council of the Borough of Monaca.
§ 107-4. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Council of the
Borough of Monaca in conformity with the requirements of the relevant
provisions of the code and Act, as amended from time to time, and for the
purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration
is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of
Appeals shall be established by joint action of the Borough of Monaca and
other participating municipalities.
§ 107-5. Effect on other regulations.
A. By the designation of an employee of the Borough of Monaca to serve as
the municipal code official to act on behalf of the Borough of Monaca.
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Borough of Monaca.
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of the code and Act through an
intermunicipal agreement.
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of the Code and Act on behalf of the
Borough of Monaca.
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by the Borough of Monaca on or before July 1, 1999, and which
equal or exceed the requirements of the Act and code shall continue in
full force and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or
exceed the minimum requirements of the Act and code, as amended
from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the Act and code are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the Act and
code.
§ 107-3 MONACA CODE § 107-5
105:110
§ 107-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Borough of Monaca for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the Act and code shall
be established by the governing body by resolution from time to time.
Chapter 109
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 148.
§ 109-1. Definitions.
Within this chapter, the following words shall be construed so as to have the
following meanings:
AFTER HOURS — That period between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m., Eastern standard time or daylight saving time, whichever may apply
at the time in question.
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business, any
place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is invited and any
similar place.
MINOR or MINORS — Any person less than 18 years of age. For the purpose
of this chapter, any person shall be deemed to be 18 years of age on the
date of his or her 18th birthday and not before that time.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
owning, operating, managing or conducting any establishment. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing a penalty, the word "operator," as applied
to an association or partnership, shall include the members, officers and
managers thereof or any of them and, as applied to corporations, shall
include officers and managers thereof or any of them.
PARENT — The natural parent or guardian or adult person, 21 years of age
or over, responsible for the custody of any minor.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Borough of
Monaca, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.48
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground,
vacant lot, public building, railway station, bus terminal or similar place.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Borough of
Monaca not governed by the Act and code shall remain in full force and
effect.
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 50, Police Department.
§ 107-5 CARNIVALS § 109-1
105:111
REMAIN — Loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play or be.
§ 109-2. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain in or upon any public place or
establishment in the Borough of Monaca after hours unless accompanied by
a parent or upon an errand or other legitimate business directed by a parent
or unless engaged in gainful, lawful employment after hours, in which case
said minor shall carry written identification and evidence of employment.
§ 109-3. Responsibility of business establishments.
It shall be unlawful for any operator of a business establishment knowingly
to permit any minor to remain in or upon the premises of said establishment
after hours.
§ 109-4. Duty of police officers; enforcement.
§ 109-5. Extension for special occasions.
The Mayor of the Borough of Monaca or, in his absence, the Chief of Police
of the Borough of Monaca is authorized to extend the curfew hour for
special occasions. When the Mayor of the Borough of Monaca or the Chief
of Police of the Borough of Monaca grants such extension of time, then the
date, hour and, if applicable, the place of such extension shall be clearly set
forth by written promulgation. Such extension of time shall not be construed
to extend beyond the limits as set forth in such promulgation.
§ 109-6. Violations and penalties.
A. Each police officer who finds a minor violating any provisions of this
chapter shall endeavor to obtain the name, age, date of birth and
address of the minor and the names of the minor's parents. The minor
shall, at the discretion of the police officer, be brought to the police
station and the parents notified or shall be taken or instructed to
proceed directly to his home. The information obtained from the minor,
together with a full report, shall be transmitted to the Chief of Police,
who shall cause a written notice to be delivered, mailed or otherwise, to
the parents of the minor advising them of the violation of this chapter. A
record of all violations shall be kept. The police officer so acting shall
use his discretion in determining age and, in doubtful cases, may bring
the minor into the police station until satisfactory proof of age is
furnished.
B. Where the minor is not a resident of the Borough of Monaca, the Police
Department shall forward a copy of the report and such additional data
as the Police Department may deem helpful in the handling of the case
to the Police Department of the municipality where the minor resides.
A. Any parent who shall permit a minor to violate provisions of this
chapter after having received notice of a prior violation shall, after
§ 109-1 MONACA CODE § 109-6
105:112
Chapter 116
FEES, AUTHORIZATION TO COLLECT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 46.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
210.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
Fee schedule — See Ch. A256.
§ 116-1. Authority.
From and after the passage of this chapter, the Council of the Borough
of Monaca shall levy, assess and collect in advance all fees and costs
conviction for a second violation, be sentenced to pay a fine of $250
and, in default of payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment in the
Beaver County Jail for a period not exceeding 24 hours; however, for
any subsequent conviction thereafter, said parent shall be fined not
less than $250 nor more than $500 and, in default of payment thereof,
shall undergo imprisonment in the Beaver County Jail for a period not
exceeding 15 days. [Amended 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 922]
B. Any operator who violates the provisions of this chapter after receiving
notice of a prior violation shall, upon conviction of a second violation, be
sentenced to pay fine of $250 and, in default of payment thereof, shall
be sentenced to undergo imprisonment in the Beaver County Jail for a
period of not more than five days; however, for any subsequent
conviction thereafter, said operator shall be fined not less than $250 nor
more than $500 and, in default of payment thereof, shall be sentenced
to undergo imprisonment in the Beaver County Jail for a period of not
less than 15 days nor more than 30 days. [Amended 6-28-2011 by
Ord. No. 922]
C. If any minor, operator or parent violates this chapter more than three
times, the Police Department shall send to the juvenile probation office
of Beaver County the data on these violations, together with such other
data as the Police Department may deem to be helpful in the handling of
the case. In the event that the minor involved in three violations no
longer is a resident of Beaver County, then the Police Department shall
forward said data to that department of government or organization
which corresponds to the Beaver County Juvenile Department and
which department of government or organization is situate in the
county where said juvenile then resides.
D. Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 109-6 FEES, AUTHORIZATION TO COLLECT § 116-1
116:113
necessary to completely offset and defray the entire cost of any hearing on
any appeal, request, proceeding or application requested by or filed by any
party under any law, statute, ordinance or regulation providing for a hearing
to be granted any person by the Borough of Monaca or any subdivision or
department thereof.
§ 116-2. Setting of fees.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Monaca shall set, reset and adjust,
increase, decrease, change and otherwise modify any fee from time to time
by resolution so as to ensure that the Borough and its taxpayers are saved
harmless from incurring any cost or expense for or on account of any
person, firm, individual, corporation or political subdivision being afforded
a hearing of any kind.49
§ 116-3. Amounts.
All fees and costs set by the Council by resolution under this chapter
shall be in such amounts as to completely defray the administrative costs
and expenses of providing said hearing, including any fees charged by
an employee or independent contractor hired by the Borough Council to
perform services in connection with such a hearing or proceeding. These
expenses shall include but not be limited to fees and costs charged by court
stenographers, hearing examiners, engineers or other experts necessarily
employed in the conduct of such a hearing or proceeding requested.
§ 116-4. Applicability.
This chapter and concomitant resolutions shall be applicable to all appeals,
hearings and proceedings requested under any state, federal or local law or
ordinance requiring or providing for a hearing to be held by the Borough or
any of its subdivisions.
§ 116-5. Payment of fee prerequisite.
The Borough of Monaca, its employees, agents and servants shall be
authorized hereunder to refuse to accept any application, appeal, request or
other document or communication seeking a hearing or proceeding unless
and until the proper fee accompanies said request or communication.
Chapter 120
FENCES, HEDGES AND WALLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 92.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
Fee schedule — See Ch. A256.
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. A256, Fee schedule.
§ 116-1 MONACA CODE § 116-5
120:114
§ 120-1. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any property owner to construct any fence or
enclosure wall within the confines of the Borough of Monaca without first
filing an application with the Building Inspector and obtaining the required
permit for such purposes.
§ 120-2. Regulations in all zoning districts.
Fences, hedges and enclosure walls may not exceed 36 inches within the
confines of a front yard or 48 inches within the confines of a side yard.
Fences, hedges and enclosure walls around the back yard may not exceed
six feet in height. All such fences, hedges and enclosure walls as mentioned
above shall be located a minimum distance of 12 inches away from the
property line. The Building Inspector shall have a right to deny any permit
application for fences which he feels would cause a safety hazard due to
view obstruction. With the exception to any stipulation in this chapter,
any fence, hedge or enclosure wall presently causing a safety hazard due
to view obstruction shall be eliminated in a means determined by the
governing body.
§ 120-3. Special conditions for installation [Amended 9-10-1996 by
Ord. No. 822]
For all applications for fences and enclosure walls where said property is
situated as a corner lot on a street, the height of said fences and enclosure
walls shall be regulated by Ch. 245, Zoning.50
§ 120-4. Fees. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
A fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council will be
charged for each permit for fences and enclosure walls.51
§ 120-5. Requests; approval.
Any person wishing to construct a fence, hedge or enclosure wall in excess
of the height or any other requirements stipulated by this chapter may
appear before the governing body to present such request. The governing
body may approve such request if deemed in the best interest of the
Borough.
50.Editor's Note: Original Section 4, Swimming Pool Enclosures, which immediately followed
this section, was deleted 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 882.
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. A256, Fees.
§ 116-5 FENCES, HEDGES AND WALLS § 120-6
120:115
§ 120-6. Exception. [Added 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
These height restrictions shall not apply to fences or other screening
surrounding automobile salvage yards and multifamily dwelling refuse
facilities.52
§ 120-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Code
Enforcement.53
Chapter 124
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
§ 124-1. Intent.
Due to the density of the population in the Borough of Monaca, it is
necessary that the use of firearms be regulated for the protection of the
public health and safety and that the unauthorized discharge of firearms be
prohibited.
§ 124-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREARM — Includes but is not limited to any gun, shotgun, rifle, handgun,
pistol, pellet gun, BB gun, crossbow, bow and arrow, slingshot or any other
device which impels a projectile through the use of force.
§ 124-3. Firing or discharge restricted.
Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful to fire or discharge any
firearm within the Borough of Monaca.
§ 124-4. Exceptions.
Exceptions to § 124-3 are as follows:
A. The use of firearms is permitted when employed by any duly appointed
law officer in the course of his or her official duty.
B. The use of firearms is permitted when necessary for the preservation of
human life, as authorized in the Pennsylvania Crimes Code.54
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 193, Storage Areas, and Ch. 184, Solid Waste, respectively.
53.Editor's Note: The diagram formerly attached is on file in the Borough offices.
54.Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 120-6 MONACA CODE § 124-4
124:116
§ 124-5. Improper use prohibited.
The careless, reckless or improper use of any firearm tending to imperil or
cause danger or harm to personal security or to endanger the property of
any person within the Borough of Monaca is prohibited.
§ 124-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons discharging a firearm in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$600 or, in default thereof, may be sentenced to no more than 30 days in
the Beaver County Jail. Each days' continued violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 124-7. Posting of signs.
Legible signs giving public notice of this chapter shall be posted at or near
the public highways at the boundaries of the Borough of Monaca.
C. The use of firearms is permitted when hunting in conformity with the
game laws and other applicable laws, regulations and ordinances of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and this Borough, provided that any
person hunting upon the land of another shall have the written
permission of the landowner or lessee of the property and shall have the
written permission upon his or her person. The written permission shall
be signed by the owner or lessee, shall clearly and legibly state the
name and address of the person to whom the permission has been
granted and shall be dated and shall be valid only for that period as
appears on the face of the permittee's then-current state hunting
license.
D. The use of firearms shall be allowed on target ranges, indoor or
outdoor, under the supervision of the owner or occupant of that land or
his or her duly appointed representative, provided that:
(1) All target ranges shall be constructed and operated in a safe and
prudent manner. If standards, regulations or recommended
procedures for operation are established or promulgated by any
recognized body, such as the National Rifle Association or the
American Trap Shooting Association, then such standards,
regulations or procedures shall be adhered to.
(2) Such range is registered as such with the township by the owner or
occupant of the land on which the range is located, which
registration shall specify the area or areas designated for target
range purposes.
§ 124-4 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS § 124-7
124:117
Chapter 127
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 16.
Building construction — See Ch. 92.
Conduct at fires — See Ch. 129.
Insurance — See Ch. 140.
§ 127-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, two copies of which are on file in the office of the
Borough Secretary of the Borough of Monaca, being marked and designated
as the "BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, Ninth Edition, 1993," as
published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International,
Inc., is hereby adopted as the fire prevention code of the Borough of
Monaca, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings,
premises and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA
National Fire Prevention Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made
part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter with the additions, insertions,
deletions and change, if any, prescribed in § 127-2 of this chapter.
§ 127-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The BOCA National Fire Prevention Code is amended and changed in the
following respects:
§ 127-3. Establishment of limits.
The limits referred to in Section F-3003.2 of the BOCA National Fire
Prevention Code/1993 in which the storage of explosive materials is
prohibited are hereby established as follows: The entire corporate limits of
the Borough of Monaca.
Chapter 129
FIRES, CONDUCT AT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 16. Fire prevention — See Ch. 127.
A. Section F-101.1 is hereby amended to insert "Borough of Monaca,
Pennsylvania."
§ 124-7 MONACA CODE § 129-1
127:118
§ 129-1. Adoption of regulations.
There are hereby adopted by the Borough of Monaca the fire control
measures and regulations as herein set forth for the purposes of controlling
conditions which could impede or interfere with fire suppression forces.
§ 129-2. Authority at fires and other emergencies.
The Fire Prevention Code Official or duly authorized representatives as
may be in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the
protection of life and/or property are empowered to direct such operations
as may be necessary to extinguish or control any suspected or reported
fires, gas leaks or other hazardous conditions or situations or of taking any
other action necessary in the reasonable performance of their duty. The Fire
Prevention Code Official may prohibit any person, vehicle or object from
approaching the scene and may remove or cause to be removed any person,
vehicle or object which may impede or interfere with the operations of the
Fire Department. The Fire Prevention Code Official may remove or cause
to be removed any person, vehicle or object from a hazardous area. All
persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so immediately and shall
not reenter the area until authorized to do so by the Fire Prevention Code
Official.
§ 129-3. Interference with operations.
It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to
interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of or block the path of travel
of any Fire Department emergency vehicle in any way or to interfere with,
attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any
Fire Department operation.
§ 129-4. Compliance with orders.
A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the Fire Prevention Code Official and shall not interfere with
the compliance attempts of another individual.
§ 129-5. Vehicle crossing fire hose.
A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose of
the Fire Department when laid down on any street, alleyway, private drive
or any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the Fire Prevention
Code Official in command of said operation.
§ 129-6. Approach of authorized emergency vehicles.
A. Authorized emergency vehicles shall be restricted to those which are
defined and authorized under the laws of the state of Pennsylvania.
B. Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, giving audible
and visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately
§ 129-1 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 129-6
129:119
§ 129-7. Vehicles following fire apparatus. [Amended 9-10-1996 by
Ord. No. 822]
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on official
business, to follow closer than 500 feet from any fire apparatus traveling
in response to a fire alarm or to drive any vehicle within the block or
immediate area where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
§ 129-8. Tampering with emergency equipment.
A person shall not, without proper authorization from the Fire Prevention
Code Official in charge of said Fire Department emergency equipment, cling
to, attach himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any Fire
Department emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest,
or sound the siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon or
manipulate or tamper with or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any
levers on or a part of any Fire Department emergency vehicle.
§ 129-9. Damage and injury to equipment or personnel.
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface or attempt or
conspire to damage or deface any Fire Department emergency vehicle at
any time or to injure or attempt or conspire to injure Fire Department
personnel while performing departmental duties.
§ 129-10. Emergency vehicle operation.
The driver of any emergency vehicle, as defined in § 129-6 of this chapter,
shall not sound the siren thereon or have the front red lights on or disobey
any existing traffic regulation, except when said vehicle is responding to an
emergency call or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire.
Tactical strategies, such as but not restricted to move-ups, do not constitute
an emergency call.
drive the same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the righthand
edge or curb of the street or roadway, clear of any intersection,
and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle or vehicles shall have passed, unless otherwise
directed by the Fire Prevention Code Official or a police officer.
A. The driver of an emergency vehicle may:
(1) Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of existing traffic
regulations.
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or other sign but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
(3) Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as the action does not
endanger life or property.
§ 129-6 MONACA CODE § 129-10
129:120
§ 129-11. Blocking fire hydrants and connections.
§ 129-12. Hydrant use approval.
A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of
the Fire Department for fire suppression purposes unless such person first
secures a permit for such use from the Fire Prevention Code Official and the
water company having jurisdiction. This section shall not apply to the use of
such hydrants by a person employed by and authorized to make such use by
the water company having jurisdiction.
§ 129-13. Public water supply.
The Fire Prevention Code Official shall recommend to the chief
administrative official of the municipality the location or relocation of new
or existing fire hydrants and the placement of inadequate water mains
located upon public property and deemed necessary to provide an adequate
fire flow and distribution pattern. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or
removed from service until approved by the Fire Prevention Code Official.
§ 129-14. Yard systems.
All new and existing shipyards, oil storage plants, lumberyards, amusement
or exhibition parks and educational or institutional complexes and similar
occupancies and uses involving high fire or life hazards and which are
located more than 150 feet from a public street or which require quantities
(4) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning
in specified directions.
B. The exemptions herein granted to an emergency vehicle shall apply
only when the driver of any such vehicle, while in motion, sounds an
audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably
necessary and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted
lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions
from a distance of 500 feet from the front of such vehicle.
A. It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or
restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any Fire Department
connection for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including
fire hydrants and Fire Department connections that are located on
public or private streets and access lanes or on private property.
B. If, upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violations,
obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the Fire Prevention
Code Official shall proceed to remove the same. Costs incurred in the
performance of necessary work shall be paid from the municipal
treasury on certificate of the Fire Prevention Code Official and with the
approval of the chief administrative official, and the legal authority of
the municipality shall institute appropriate action for the recovery of
such costs.
§ 129-10 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 129-14
129:121
of water beyond the capabilities of the fire hydrants shall be capable of
supplying fire flows as required by the fire prevention code practices.55 The
Fire Prevention Code Official shall designate and approve the number and
location of fire hydrants. The Fire Prevention Code Official may require
the installation of sufficient fire hose and equipment housed in accordance
with the approved rules and may require the establishment of a trained fire
brigade when the hazard involved requires such measures. Private hydrants
shall not be placed into or removed from service until approved by the Fire
Prevention Code Official.
§ 129-15. Tampering with and replacement of fire hydrants and
appliances.
A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb
any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained
under the provisions of the fire prevention code56 except for the purpose
of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging or making
necessary repairs or when permitted by the Fire Prevention Code Official.
Whenever a fire appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be
replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purpose for which it was removed
has been accomplished. Defective and nonapproved fire appliances or
equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the Fire Prevention
Code Official.
§ 129-16. Sale of defective fire extinguishers.
A person shall not sell, trade, loan or give away any form, type or kind of fire
extinguisher which is not approved by the Fire Prevention Code Official or
which is not in proper working order or the contents of which do not meet
the requirement of the Fire Prevention Code Official. The requirements of
this section shall not apply to the sale, trade or exchange of obsolete or
damaged equipment for junk when said units are permanently disfigured or
marked with a permanent sign identifying the unit as junk.
§ 129-17. Street obstructions.
A person or persons shall not erect, construct, place or maintain any bumps,
fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses or any other type
of obstruction in or on any street within the boundaries of the municipality.
The word "street," as used in this chapter, shall mean any roadway
accessible to the public for vehicular traffic, including but not limited to
private streets or access lanes, as well as all public streets and highways
within the boundaries of the municipality.
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Fire Prevention.
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Fire Prevention.
§ 129-14 MONACA CODE § 129-18
129:122
§ 129-18. Violations and penalties. [Added 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction before a District Justice,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus the costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof, may be imprisoned in the
Beaver County Jail for not more than 30 days. Each day's violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 131
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 107.
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Storm sewers: MS4 prohibited
discharges — See Ch. 197.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 199.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
210.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
§ 129-18 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 129-18
129:123

ARTICLE I
Authority
§ 131-1. Statutory authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,57 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Council of Monaca Borough does hereby order as
follows.
57.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 131-1 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 131-1
129:125

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 131-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 131-3. Applicability.
§ 131-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 131-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within Monaca Borough unless a permit has
been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Monaca Borough or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
§ 131-2 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 131-5
129:127
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 131-5 MONACA CODE § 131-5
129:128
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 131-6. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
§ 131-7. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of Monaca Borough.
§ 131-8. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Borough Manager is hereby appointed to administer and enforce
this chapter and is referred to herein as the "Floodplain Administrator."
The Floodplain Administrator may 1) fulfill the duties and
responsibilities set forth in these regulations, 2) delegate duties and
responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical
personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees, or 3) enter
into a written agreement or written contract with another agency or
private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these
regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another
entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to
the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR
59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Council President.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);58 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended),59 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);60 and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
58.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
59.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
60.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 131-6 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 131-8
129:129
§ 131-9. Application procedures and requirements.
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
concerns can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Council for whatever
action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
I. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in the Floodplain Ordinance as the Floodplain Administrator/
Manager.
J. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 International Building Code and the 2009
International Residential Code or the latest edition thereof adopted by
the State of Pennsylvania.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by Monaca Borough. Such
application shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
§ 131-8 MONACA CODE § 131-9
129:130
(2) The name and address of the owner of the land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) The name and address of the contractor.
(4) The site location, including address.
(5) A listing of other permits required.
(6) A brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including
a breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the
building before the flood damage occurred where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform to the requirements of this chapter and all
other applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit Application Form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
§ 131-9 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 131-9
129:131
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 International Building Code or the 2009
International Residential Code or latest edition thereof
adopted by the State of Pennsylvania.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within the floodway area (see § 131-17A), when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the base flood elevation at any point.
(d) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
§ 131-9 MONACA CODE § 131-9
129:132
§ 131-10. Review of application by other agencies and individuals.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 131-11. Changes to application, permit or plans.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the
applicant to the Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 131-12. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard,
or similar document, which shall be displayed on the premises during the
time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of
the permit and the date of its issuance and be signed by the Floodplain
Administrator.
(e) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 131-23F, Storage, and § 131-24, Development that may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 131-23F and 131-24 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 131-24
during a base flood.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control
meeting the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 131-9 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 131-13
129:133
§ 131-13. Start of construction; time limits.
§ 131-14. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The "actual start of construction" means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request, and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS is in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance.
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires.
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state.
§ 131-13 MONACA CODE § 131-14
129:134
§ 131-15. Appeals.
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a
fine to Monaca Borough of not less than $25 nor more than $600, plus
costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions
are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of or noncompliance with this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the
Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipal Planning Code and any
other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.61
61.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 131-14 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 131-15
129:135

ARTICLE IV
Floodplain Areas
§ 131-16. Identification.
§ 131-17. Description.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of Monaca Borough
classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs)
dated August 17, 2015, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), or the most recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by Monaca Borough and declared
to be a part of this chapter.
A. The floodway area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development,
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
B. AE Area/District.
(1) The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone
on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base
flood elevations have been provided.
(2) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
§ 131-16 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 131-17
129:137
§ 131-18. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Council
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person
documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change
to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the
date such information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA
of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting technical
or scientific data. See § 131-21B for situations where FEMA notification is
required.
§ 131-19. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Floodplain Administrator and
any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the
Council. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 131-20. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base
flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and
floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable
sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site. In lieu
of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine
the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the municipality.
§ 131-17 MONACA CODE § 131-20
129:138
ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 131-21. General requirements.
§ 131-22. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When Monaca Borough proposes to permit the following
encroachments: any development that causes a rise in the base flood
elevations within the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones
A1-30 and Zone AE without a designated floodway which will cause a
rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or
relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing culverts
and bridges), the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map
change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 131-21 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 131-22
129:139
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor elevated up to or above the
regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor elevated up to or above the regulatory flood
elevation determined in accordance with § 131-17C of this chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania, and ASCE 24 and 34
Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be utilized,
where they are more restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor elevated up to or above the regulatory flood elevation or be
designed and constructed so that the space enclosed below the
regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed up to or above
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 131-17C of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the abovereferenced
standards.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
§ 131-22 MONACA CODE § 131-22
129:140
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania, and ASCE 24 and 34
Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be utilized,
where they are more restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) is
prohibited.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as
defined in this chapter must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance
requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places
must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State
Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) The floor area shall not exceed 600 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
§ 131-22 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 131-22
129:141
§ 131-23. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill.
(1) If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to
and approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
§ 131-22 MONACA CODE § 131-23
129:142
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it or
contamination from it during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages," and the
"International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or that in
times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
that are not listed in § 131-24, Development that may endanger human
life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
§ 131-23 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 131-23
129:143
§ 131-24. Development that may endanger human life.
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described
in Subsection A below shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained in
accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions
apply (Subsections B, C and D):
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc,) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions, shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof
adopted by the State of Pennsylvania: Sections 801, 1202, 1403,
1603, 1605, 1612 and 3402 and Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania: Sections
R104, R105, R109 and R322 and Appendix E and Appendix J.
§ 131-23 MONACA CODE § 131-24
129:144
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,62
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject
to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following is a list of materials and substances that are
considered dangerous to human life:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides)
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise
regulated
Sodium
Sulphur and sulphur products
B. Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
structure of the kind described in Subsection A above shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
C. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A above shall be prohibited. Where permitted within any
identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved residential
structure of the kind described in Subsection A above shall be elevated
62.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 131-24 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 131-24
129:145
§ 131-25. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision and Letter of Map Revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 131-26. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood
elevation and built in accordance with §§ 131-21, 131-22 and 131-23.
D. New or substantially improved nonresidential structures.
(1) Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind
described in Subsection A above shall be built in accordance with
§§ 131-21, 131-22 and 131-23, including:
(a) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely
dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood.
(2) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992) or
with some other equivalent watertight standard.
A. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply.
B. Within any Floodway Area/District, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply.
C. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
D. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation;
§ 131-24 MONACA CODE § 131-26
129:146
§ 131-27. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must:
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
(4) Have all ductwork and utilities, including HVAC/heat pump,
elevated to the regulatory flood elevation.
E. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's "Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing." 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa.
Code, Chapters 401 through 405, shall apply.
F. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the latest edition thereto adopted by the
State of Pennsylvania, and 34 Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate
and/or applicable to units where the manufacturer's standards for
anchoring cannot be provided or were not established for the proposed
units' installation.
A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; and
C. Be removed from the floodplain when a flood warning is issued.
§ 131-26 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 131-27
129:147

ARTICLE VI
Prohibited Activities
§ 131-28. Activities prohibited in any identified floodplain area.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,63 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities, or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
63.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 131-28 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 131-28
129:149

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 131-29. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 131-30 shall apply.
§ 131-30. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any increase in
base flood elevation.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or most recent
revision thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania.
D. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
E. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss"64 shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
64.Editor's Note: See § 131-34, Terms defined.
§ 131-29 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 131-30
129:151

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 131-31. Grant of relief authorized.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
Monaca Borough may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application
of the requirements.
§ 131-32. Procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by Monaca Borough in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 131-15 and the
following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any Floodway Area/District that would cause
any increase in the base flood elevation.
(2) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated by development that may endanger human life
(§ 131-24).
(3) No variance shall be granted for prohibited activities (Article VI).
(4) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(5) In granting any variance, Monaca Borough shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in
order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to
achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(6) Whenever a variance is granted, Monaca Borough shall notify the
applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(7) In reviewing any request for a variance, Monaca Borough shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will neither:
§ 131-31 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 131-32
129:153
[1] Result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense; nor
[2] Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public
or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(8) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by Monaca Borough. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual
report to FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual chance flood.
§ 131-32 MONACA CODE § 131-32
129:154
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 131-33. Interpretation of terms.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 131-34. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OF STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
"one-percent-annual-chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
§ 131-33 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 131-34
129:155
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse, and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
D.
§ 131-34 MONACA CODE § 131-34
129:156
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — An umbrella term that includes all of
the areas within which the community has selected to enforce floodplain
regulations. It will always include the area identified as the special flood
hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Study
but may include additional areas identified by the community. See §§ 131-16
and 131-17 for the specifics on what areas the community has included in
the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for the parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after August 17, 2015, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after December
4, 1979, and before August 17, 2015, is subject to the ordinance in effect at
the time the permit was issued, provided that the start of construction was
within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
§ 131-34 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 131-34
129:157
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated December
4, 1979, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated December
4, 1979, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
A. Built on a single chassis.
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections.
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck.
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 131-34 MONACA CODE § 131-34
129:158
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above the ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage or repetitive loss, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
§ 131-34 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 131-34
129:159
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 131-34 MONACA CODE § 131-34
129:160
ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 131-35. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on August 17, 2015, and shall remain in force
until modified, amended or rescinded by Monaca Borough, Beaver County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 131-35 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 131-35
129:161
Chapter 135
FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 1, Art. II. Licenses and permits — See Ch. 144.
§ 135-1. Hours of operation.
All establishments within the confines of the Borough of Monaca, Beaver
County, Pennsylvania, offering food for consumption upon the premises
of such establishment or offering food to the general public ready to be
consumed but which may be taken from the premises of such establishment
shall be closed daily between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:45 a.m.,
prevailing time.
§ 135-2. Enforcement.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter may be prosecuted by any police
officer of the Borough before the District Justice.
§ 135-3. Separate violations.
Each calendar day's violation of the provisions of this chapter may be
charged as a separate violation.
§ 135-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person, partnership, corporation or similar entity found guilty of
violating any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, Code Enforcement.
Chapter 137
FUEL-BURNING APPLIANCES, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127. Nuisances — See Ch. 152.
§ 137-1. Purpose and scope.
A. Residences and commercial and industrial establishments situated
within the Borough of Monaca are entitled to clean air and
environmental circumstances free of unreasonable dust, obnoxious
§ 131-35 MONACA CODE § 137-1
135:162
§ 137-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OUTDOOR FUEL BURNING APPLIANCE — A device, including any furnace,
stove or boiler designed and constructed to burn oil, wood, coal or other
fuels, manufactured for placement outdoors for the heating of the living or
occupied area of a structure.
§ 137-3. Outdoor fuel-burning appliances prohibited.
All outdoor fuel-burning appliances, as defined, are hereby prohibited
within the Borough of Monaca.
§ 137-4. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Police Department and/or the Borough's
Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the terms of this chapter and secure
compliance with the requirements thereof.
§ 137-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$500 and, in default of payment of said fine, to imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 90 days. Every day that a violation of this chapter continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 140
INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127. Fee schedule — See Ch. A256.
odors, noxious fumes and smells, as well as an environment free of
stored debris and storage of combustible fuels in adjacent or exposed
exterior areas within densely populated areas.
B. Research indicates that outdoor fuel-burning appliances cause emission
problems that cross property lines because the smoke stays close to the
ground and it can easily reach humans working or playing outdoors or
penetrate neighboring buildings. It also causes problems with smoke
visibility. The low-lying smoke can worsen cardiovascular problems
such as angina, irritate eyes and lungs, trigger headaches and worsen
respiratory diseases such as asthma, emphysema and bronchitis.
§ 137-1 INSURANCE § 140-1
140:163
§ 140-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them
in this section:
THE ACT — The Insurance Company Law of 1921, as amended.65[Amended
9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
BOROUGH — The Borough of Monaca, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
COSTS FOR REPAIRS, REMOVAL OR SECURING OF A STRUCTURE —
All costs for repairs, removal or securing of a structure thereof actually
incurred by the Borough including, but not limited to, all of the following:
INSURED — Every individual, person, firm and corporation identified by
name in a policy of insurance insuring against losses sustained on account
of fire to which this chapter applies.
INSURER — Every insurance company, association, exchange, and other
entity paying a claim for fire damage sustained by a structure or building
located within the Borough of Monaca.
LOSS — Fire damage sustained by any structure or building situate within
the Borough of Monaca.
MANAGER — The duly appointed Manager of the Borough of Monaca.
PERSON — Includes an individual, firm, corporation and other entity.
PROPERTY — Every piece, parcel or tract of real estate located in the
Borough of Monaca.
STRUCTURE — Every building or other structure located upon property
located in the Borough of Monaca.
TAX COLLECTOR — The elected real estate tax collector for the Borough of
Monaca. 66 [Added 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
TAX PARCEL NUMBER — The tax parcel identification number assigned
from time to time to the property by the Tax Assessment Office of Beaver
County, Pennsylvania.
The actual labor costs of every Borough employee involved in the
repairing, removing or securing.
A.
B. Inspection fees.
C. Engineering fees.
D. Architectural fees.
E. Attorney's fees.
F. Administrative fee of 10% of the total fees and costs.
65.See 40 P.S. § 638 et seq.
66.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 35, Art. II, Delinquent Tax Collector.
§ 140-1 MONACA CODE § 140-2
140:164
§ 140-2. Requirements for payment of claim. [Amended 2-14-1995
by Ord. No. 802-A]
No insurer doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of an insured for fire damage to a structure on a parcel located within
the Borough where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the structure
under all policies exceeds $7,500 unless and until the insurer complies with
each of the following requirements:
§ 140-3. Obligation of insured. [Amended 2-14-1995 by Ord. No.
802-A]
A. The insurer receives a certificate pursuant to the provisions Section
508(b) of the Act67 and this chapter.
B. The insurer transfers from the insurance proceeds the amount required
under Section 508(c)68 of the Act and the provisions of this chapter; and
C. The insurer provides the Manager with the information regarding the
insured required under Section 508(d)69 of the Act and the provisions of
this chapter.
A. When a structure on property located within the Borough sustains fire
damage, and on account of which the amount recoverable for the fire
loss to the structure under all policies of insurance issued by an insurer
exceeds $7,500, the named insured shall submit a written request to
the Tax Collector, signed by every named insured, which written
request shall contain all the information as hereinafter provided and
the Tax Collector shall issue to the insurer within fourteen working days
of the request:
(1) A certificate, or at the discretion of the Borough, a verbal
notification which shall be confirmed in writing by the insurer to
the effect that, as of the date agreed upon by the insurer and the
named insured as the date of the receipt of a loss report of the
claim, there are no delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user
charges against the property and that, as of the date of the
certificate, or verbal notification the Borough has not certified any
amount as total costs incurred by the Borough for the removal,
repair or securing of a structure on the parcel; or
(2) Certificate and bill, as certified by the Tax Collector, showing, as of
the date of the certificate, the following:
(a) The amount of delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties and
user charges, if any, against the property specified in the
request that have not been paid; and
67.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b).
68.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(c).
69.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(d).
§ 140-2 INSURANCE § 140-3
140:165
§ 140-4. Additional requirements for payment of claim. [Amended
2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 802-A]
Upon the receipt of a certificate issued by the Tax Collector to an insured
pursuant to § 140-3A(1) of this chapter and/or Section 508(b)1(i)70 of the
Act, as amended, the insurer may pay the claim of the insured in accordance
with the policy terms, unless the loss agreed to between the insured and
the insurer equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all
fire insurance policies covering the structure. In the case of such a loss, the
insurer shall follow the procedures set forth in this chapter and in Section
508(c) and (d) of the Act.
§ 140-5. Taxes. [Amended 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 802-A]
§ 140-6. Costs. [Amended 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 802-A]
(b) The amount of total costs, if any, that have been incurred by the
Borough for the removal, repair or securing of a structure on
the property.
B. A tax, assessment, penalty or user charge becomes delinquent at the
time and on the date a lien could otherwise have been filed against the
property by the Borough under applicable law.
A. Upon the receipt of a certificate and bill pursuant to § 140-3A(2) of this
chapter and/or Section 508(b)1(ii) of the Act, the insurer shall return
the bill to the Tax Collector and transfer to the Tax Collector the lesser
of the following amounts:
(1) An amount from the insurance proceeds necessary to pay the taxes,
assessment, penalties, charges and costs as shown on said bill; or
(2) The total amount of the insurance proceeds.
B. The Borough shall receive the amount and apply or credit it to payment
of the items shown in the bill.
A. When the loss agreed to between the insured and the insurer equals or
exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire insurance
policies covering the structure, the insurer shall transfer to the
Manager from the insurance proceeds:
(1) In the aggregate $2,000 for each $15,000 and each fraction of that
amount of a claim; or
(2) If at the time of a loss report the named injured has submitted a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure in an amount less than the
amount calculated under § 140-6A(1), the insurer shall transfer
from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate.
70.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b)(1)(i).
§ 140-3 MONACA CODE § 140-6
140:166
§ 140-7. Receipt of proceeds by the Manager.
Upon receipt of fire insurance proceeds as contemplated by this chapter
and the Act, the Manager shall deposit the proceeds in an interest bearing
account with any federally insured bank or savings and loan association.
Every account shall comply with the following requirements:
§ 140-8. Notification to the insured.
Upon transfer of any funds to the Manager pursuant to this chapter or
Section 508(c) of the Act,71 the Manager shall notify the insured in writing
at the last known address of the insured, as supplied by their insurer
making said transfer, of the following:
§ 140-9. Payment of losses.
If the Borough has incurred any costs for repairs, removal or securing of the
structure, as defined in this chapter or the Act, all such costs for repairs,
B. The transfer of proceeds shall be on a prorata basis by every insurer
insuring the structure, building or the property. The insurance policy
proceeds remaining after the transfer to the Manager shall be
disbursed in accordance with the policy terms.
A. A separate account must be established for each insured fire loss;
provided that in the event the amount received for any one loss is in
excess of the amount that may be federal insured by any one institution,
then the amount received shall be placed so that the entire amount
received, and any interest thereafter earned, may be fully insured.
B. The account shall bear the name of each insured followed by the
identifier "Fire Escrow Fund."
C. The account shall contain the social security number or the federal tax
identification number, if applicable, of one of the insureds.
D. Until the proceeds are disbursed according to the provisions of this
chapter or the provisions of the Act, all interest earned on said proceeds
shall remain in said account or accounts and shall be available to pay
any costs for repairs, removal or securing of the structure incurred by
the Borough.
E. No account may be established or funds placed with any institution
having a mortgage or judgment lien against the real estate.
A. All repairs, removal and/or securing of the structure have been
completed; and
B. The Borough has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or securing
of the structure.
71.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(c).
§ 140-6 INSURANCE § 140-9
140:167
removal or securing of the structure shall be paid from the fund, and if
excess funds remain, the Manager shall return the remaining funds to the
insured.
§ 140-10. Inadequacy of fund; remedies.
§ 140-11. Estimating costs; return of excess.
In the event the insured shall submit to the Manager a written estimate
from and signed by a contractor estimating the costs of removing, repairing,
or securing the structure after the escrow fund has been established, the
Manager shall return to the insured the amount of the fund in excess of the
written estimate so submitted by the insured upon the following conditions:
§ 140-12. Other agreements.
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or the Act, the Borough,
every insured, and every person claiming an ownership interest in the
property therein may enter into a written agreement that permits the
transfer of the fund held by the Manager to the named insured upon
satisfactory terms and conditions relating to the removing, repairing, or
securing the structure or other disposition of the property and/or the
payment for the costs of removing, repairing, or securing the structure.
A. In the event that the amount of the fund held by the Manager, including
interest thereon, is insufficient to pay all the costs for repairs, removal
or securing of the structure incurred by the Borough, as defined in this
chapter or the Act, the Borough shall, and is hereby authorized to, with
or without further notice, commence any and all legal action at law and/
or equity against every insured, every person claiming an ownership
interest in and to the property or the structure, and/or the property, for
the balance of all costs for repairs, removal or securing of the structure
incurred by the Borough, as defined in this chapter or the Act.
B. In the event that the Borough does commence a legal action at law and/
or equity against an insured, a person claiming an ownership interest in
and to the property or the structure, and/or the property, the Borough is
authorized to collect in addition to the balance of all costs for repairs,
removal or securing of the structure incurred by the Borough, as
defined in this chapter or the Act, all attorney's fees actually incurred
by the Borough in the prosecution of said action(s) and all expenses and
costs thereof.
A. The Borough has not commenced to remove, repair or secure the
structure; and
B. Satisfactory proof has been submitted to the Manager, by inspection or
otherwise, that the contractor who submitted the written estimate has
commenced removing, repairing or securing the structure.
§ 140-9 MONACA CODE § 140-13
140:168
§ 140-13. Contents of application.
The contents of the application for a certificate submitted to the Manager by
the insured for a certificate or a certificate and bill to be issued pursuant to
this chapter, shall contain all information requested by the Manager, which
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
§ 140-14. Inspections.
Whenever any report of an inspection performed by the Borough Engineer
and/or the Borough Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to this chapter or
any other inspection finds or discloses that the structure involved in the loss
requires removal, repair or securing, the Borough shall notify every insured
of all of the following:
A. Full legal name of every insurer.
B. Complete mailing address for every insurer.
C. Every claim number assigned by each and every insurer.
D. Date of fire loss.
E. Agreed proof of claim date. (Date agreed upon by the insurer and the
insured as the date of the receipt of a proof of loss of the claim).
F. Proper name of every insured as contained in every policy applicable.
G. Complete mailing address for every named insured.
H. Every known telephone number of each named insured.
I. Tax parcel number of the property.
A. The fact of that an inspection occurred.
B. The date said inspection occurred.
C. The contents of the report of inspection, including any
recommendations concerning corrective action required to be done.
D. The date by which the insured must commence corrective action to
remove, repair or secure the structure.
E. The date by which the insured must complete corrective action to
remove, repair or secure the structure.
F. Notice that the Borough shall undertake and perform all corrective
action in the event the insured shall fail to commence corrective action
by the corrective action commencement date.
G. Notice that the Borough shall complete all corrective action in the event
the insured shall fail to complete corrective action by the corrective
action commencement date.
§ 140-13 INSURANCE § 140-14
140:169
§ 140-15. Notice to correct.
Whenever any report of an inspection performed by the Borough Engineer
and/or the Borough Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to this chapter or
any other inspection finds or discloses that the structure involved in the loss
requires removal, repair or securing, the Borough shall notify every insured
of all of the following:
§ 140-16. Failure to comply.
In the event that the insured fails to commence the corrective action
required by the report of inspection of the Borough Engineer and/or the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer and/or any other person by the
corrective action commencement date contained in the notice to be given
pursuant to this chapter, the Borough may, without further notice to the
insured, and without the necessity of securing bids therefor, commence
corrective action for the removal, repairing or securing of the structure by
entering into contracts and/or using Borough employees and equipment.
§ 140-17. Service of notice.
H. Notice that the Borough shall collect all costs as provided in this
chapter.
A. The fact of that an inspection occurred.
B. The date said inspection occurred.
C. The contents of the report of inspection, including any
recommendations concerning corrective action required to be done.
D. The date by which the insured must commence corrective action to
remove, repair or secure the structure.
E. The date by which the insured must complete corrective action to
remove, repair or secure the structure.
F. Notice that the Borough shall undertake and perform all corrective
action in the event the insured shall fail to commence corrective action
by the corrective action commencement date.
G. Notice that the Borough shall complete all corrective action in the event
the insured shall fail to complete corrective action by the corrective
action commencement date.
H. Notice that the Borough shall collect all costs as provided in this
chapter.
A. Every notice pursuant to § 140-15 of this chapter shall be served upon
every insured by depositing same in the United States Mail, certified
mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the address of the insured
as follows:
§ 140-14 MONACA CODE § 140-17
140:170
§ 140-18. Duties of Fire Chief; report. [Amended 2-14-1995 by Ord.
No. 802-A]
When any building or structure within the Borough is damaged by fire and
in the opinion of the Fire Chief the amount of damage amounts to at least
$7,500 the Fire Chief shall deliver a report of damage to the Manager,
which report will include the name and mailing address of the owners
thereof, and the name and address of any insurer provided to the Fire Chief
by the owners thereof.
§ 140-19. Fees.72
The Borough is hereby authorized to adopt resolutions from time to time
to fix reasonable fees to be charged for certificates, certificates and bills,
performance of inspections and opening separate fund accounts.
§ 140-20. Construction and applicability.
This chapter shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose to deter
to the commission of arson and related crimes, to discourage the
abandonment of property, and to prevent blight and deterioration.
§ 140-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and the costs of prosecution, and
may be imprisoned in the Beaver County Jail for not more than 30 days,
provided that each day's violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall constitute a separate offense.
(1) The address supplied in writing by the insured to the Manager; or
(2) The address supplied to the Manager in the application for a
certificate or a certificate and bill.
B. Every notice shall be conclusively deemed to be received by every
insured and every person claiming an ownership interest in the
property upon deposit of the notice in the mail addressed to the insured
only.
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. A256, Fee Schedule.
§ 140-17 INSURANCE § 140-21
140:171
Chapter 144
LICENSES AND PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 135.
Transient retail merchants — See Ch. 161,
Art. I.
Fee schedule — See Ch. A256.
§ 144-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Monaca.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The Borough Manager of the Borough of Monaca.
BUSINESS — The operation or conduct, for gain or profit, of any trade,
business (including financial business), profession, vocation, service,
construction, communication, manufacturing or building used for
apartments within the territories or limits of the Borough of Monaca. The
term "business" shall not include the following:
LICENSE YEAR — The twelve-month period corresponding to the fiscal year
of the Borough.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association or
corporation. The singular shall include the plural and the masculine the
feminine and neuter.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place indoors or outdoors where the
general public or a limited or selected number thereof may, upon payment
of an established price, attend or engage in any amusement, entertainment,
exhibition, contest or recreation, including, among other places, theaters,
opera houses, motion-picture houses, amusement parks, stadiums, arenas,
The business of any political subdivision, governmental agency or
municipal or school authority.
A.
The business of any nonprofit organization or association, including but
not limited to charitable, health-care, ambulance and rescue, religious,
beneficial, fraternal, social and recreational organizations and country
clubs.
B.
C. Employment for wage or salary.
Any business or activity upon which the issuance of a permit is withheld
by law.
D.
E. Any home occupied by its owner having not more than one apartment.
§ 140-21 MONACA CODE § 144-1
144:172
baseball or football parks or fields, skating rinks, circus or carnival tents
or grounds, fairgrounds, bowling alleys, billiard or pool rooms, shuffleboard
rooms, riding academies, golf courses, bathing and swimming places, dance
halls, tennis courts, archery or rifle or shotgun ranges and other like places.
The term does not include any exhibition, amusement, performance or
contest conducted by a nonprofit corporation or association organized for
religious, charitable or education purposes.
RETAIL DEALER or RETAIL VENDOR — Any person who is a dealer in or
vendor of goods, wares and merchandise who is not a wholesale dealer or
vendor.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business that
is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive calendar days.
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL DEALER or WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
VENDOR — Any person who sells to dealers in or vendors of goods, wares
and merchandise and to other persons. The terms "person," "wholesale
dealer," "wholesale vendor," "retail dealer," and "retail vendor" shall not
include the following:
WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR — Any person who sells
to dealers in or vendors of goods, wares and merchandise and to no other
persons.
§ 144-2. Licenses. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
Beginning January 1, 1980, every person desiring to continue to engage
in or thereafter to begin to engage in the business of wholesale or retail
vendor or dealer in goods, wares and merchandise and any person
conducting a restaurant or other place where food, drink or refreshments
are sold, whether or not the same shall be incidental to some other business
or occupation or place of amusement in the Borough shall, prior to
commencing business in any such license year, procure a mercantile license
for his place of business or, if more than one, for each of his places of
business in the Borough from the Borough Manager, who shall issue the
same. Such license shall be conspicuously posted at the place of business or
each of the places of business of every such person at all times.
§ 144-3. Powers and duties of Borough Manager.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager to prosecute and to collect and
receive the fees, fines and penalties imposed by this chapter. It shall also be
Nonprofit corporations organized for religious, charitable or
educational purposes or any associations organized for such purposes.
A.
Agencies of the government of the United States or of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B.
Any person vending or disposing of articles of his own growth,
production or manufacture for shipment or delivery from the place of
growth, production or manufacture thereof.
C.
§ 144-1 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 144-3
144:173
his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him from each
person paying the fee and the date of such receipt.
§ 144-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Whoever fails or refuses to procure a mercantile license when so required
under this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, Code Enforcement.
Chapter 148
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 1, Art. II. Curfew — See Ch. 109.
§ 148-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON or PERSONS — One or more individuals.
STAND or LOITER — To linger, to delay, to be dilatory or to refuse to
disperse after given an order to by the law enforcement officers of the
Borough of Monaca.
§ 148-2. Loitering prohibited.
Any person or persons who shall stand or loiter upon any of the public
streets, sidewalks or corners of streets within the Borough of Monaca to the
annoyance and inconvenience of persons passing by or along said streets,
sidewalks or corners of streets shall be in violation of this chapter.
§ 148-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person or persons violating the provisions of this chapter shall upon
conviction thereof be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Code
Enforcement.
§ 144-3 MONACA CODE § 148-3
148:174
Chapter 152
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Removal and numbering of buildings — See
Ch. 96.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 169.
Solid waste — See Ch. 184.
Storage areas — See Ch. 193.
Vandalism — See Ch. 219.
§ 152-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 152-2. Nuisances prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to create or maintain any nuisance
anywhere within the limits of the Borough.
§ 152-3. Abatement; refusal to remove; costs.
Any person who shall create or maintain any nuisance anywhere within
the Borough shall, within 10 days after notice from the Borough Council
to do so, remove or abate such nuisance. If such person shall fail, neglect
or refuse to remove or abate such nuisance within such time limit, the
Borough Council shall have authority, through its agents and/or employees,
to remove or abate such nuisance and, in so doing, shall have authority to
enter upon the property on which such nuisance shall be present or exist.
Thereupon, the Borough Council shall collect the cost and expense of such
abatement or removal with an additional amount of 10% from the person
A. The following words, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
hereby respectively ascribed thereto;
BOROUGH — The Borough of Monaca.
NUISANCE — Any use of property within the Borough or any condition
upon any property within the Borough that, other than infrequently
or occasionally, shall cause or result in annoyance or disturbance to
persons beyond the boundaries of such property, interference to the
health and/or safety of persons beyond the boundaries of such property
and/or disturbance to or interference with the peaceful use of the
property of others in the Borough, in any case taking into consideration
the location of the use or condition and the nature and condition of the
surrounding neighborhood.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
§ 148-3 NUISANCES § 152-3
152:175
who created and/or maintained such nuisance, such person having failed,
neglected or refused to remove or abate such nuisance, in the manner
provided for the collection of municipal claims or by an action in assumpsit
without the filing of a claim, provided that such cost and expense and
additional amount may be in addition to any penalty imposed under § 152-4
of this chapter.
§ 152-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, for each
and every such violation, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $100 [a minimum of $25] and costs of prosecution and, in
default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than
10 days, provided that each day's continuance of the maintenance of any
nuisance, after the expiration of 10 days following the issuance of the notice
referred to in § 152-3 of this chapter, shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 157
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Recreation Board — See Ch. 54.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 80.
Animals — See Ch. 88.
Curfew — See Ch. 109.
§ 152-3 MONACA CODE § 152-4
157:176
ARTICLE I
Allaire Park
[Adopted 3-12-1979 by Ord. No. 707-A]
§ 157-1. Purpose.
This article is enacted in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Borough of Monaca and for the prevention of unauthorized
use of the Allaire Park grounds.
§ 157-2. Hours and days of operation.
§ 157-3. Applicability.
The aforesaid Allaire Park grounds opened during the aforementioned times
as set forth in § 157-2 shall be for use of Monaca residents and their guests
only.
§ 157-4. Operation of motorized vehicles. [Amended 9-10-1996 by
Ord. No. 822]
Only four-wheeled licensed motor vehicles and two-wheeled man-powered
bicycles shall be permitted to operate on the grounds, roads, ways and lots
of said Allaire Park grounds. There shall be no two-wheeled motor vehicles
or any motorized recreational vehicles allowed. This shall include but not
be limited to quads or individual all-terrain vehicles, mopeds, scooters,
motorcycles, motorbikes, snowmobiles and powered sleds. All motor
vehicles and/or human-powered bicycles shall observe the maximum speed
limit of five miles per hour.
§ 157-5. Reservation of shelters.
Allaire Park shelters must be reserved in advance in order to be used by
any qualified citizen. Said reservation must be made with the Recreation
Director of the Borough of Monaca. All persons reserving said park shelters
must have attained the age of 21 years. Those persons acquiring said
reservations must ensure to the Recreation Director that the shelter is left
in a clean and tidy condition. Any damages caused to the shelter by the
reserving party and his or her guests shall be the sole responsibility of that
person holding the reservation.
A. The aforesaid Allaire Park grounds shall be, from May 1 of each year
through and including the second Sunday of the month of September of
each year, open for use between the times of 9:00 a.m. (opening time)
and 11:00 p.m. (closing hour).
B. The aforesaid Allaire Park grounds shall, between the Monday following
the second Sunday of September of each year up to and including April
30 of each year, be open from 9:00 a.m. until sunset. Sunset shall be
determined as the time as set forth by the Pennsylvania Game
Commission hunting regulations.
§ 157-1 PARKS AND RECREATION § 157-6
157:177
§ 157-6. Open fires.
At no time shall there be open fires permitted within the confines of the
aforesaid Allaire Park. Charcoal fires kindled for the purpose of outside
barbecues shall be permitted.
§ 157-7. Glass containers prohibited.
No glass beverage containers are permitted within the aforesaid Allaire
Park.
§ 157-8. Animals prohibited.
There shall be absolutely no pets permitted within the confines of the Allaire
Park grounds. The word "pets" shall include dogs, cats and other animals
governed by Chapter 88, Animals.
§ 157-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
Article II, Code Enforcement.
§ 157-6 MONACA CODE § 157-9
157:178
Chapter 161
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 144.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 205.
Fee schedule — See Ch. A256.
§ 157-9 PARKS AND RECREATION § 157-9
157:179

ARTICLE I
Transient Retail Merchants
[Adopted 11-12-1975 by Ord. No. 688; amended in its entirety
10-28-2014 by Ord. No. 937]
§ 161-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 161-2. License required; exceptions.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm,
corporation, or business of any type.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — Includes the following:
Engaging in peddling, canvassing, soliciting or taking orders,
either by sample or otherwise, for any goods, wares or
merchandise upon any street or alley, sidewalk or public ground or
from house to house within the Borough of Monaca; or
(1)
Soliciting or taking orders for any goods, wares or merchandise
from a fixed location within the Borough, on a temporary basis,
which shall include but shall not be limited to such activities
conducted at the time of special occasions or celebrations, for
seasonal purposes or for or in advance of specific yearly holidays.
(2)
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. No person shall engage in any transient retail business within the
Borough of Monaca without first having obtained from the Borough
Manager a license, for which the following fee, for the use of the
Borough, shall be paid, provided no license fee shall be charged under
this section 1) to farmers selling their own produce; 2) for the sale of
goods, wares and merchandise donated by the owner thereof, the
proceeds of which are to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic
purpose; or 3) to any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and
bakery products, meat and meat products, or milk and milk products,
but all persons exempt hereby from payment of the license fee shall be
required to register with the Borough Manager, obtain a license without
fee, and obtain a background check as set forth in § 161-3; provided,
further, that any person dealing in one or more of the hereinabovementioned
exempted categories, and selling other goods, wares or
merchandise not so exempted, shall be subject to the payment of the
license fee fixed by this section for his activity in connection with the
sale of goods, wares and merchandise not in such exempt categories;
provided, further, that the Borough Manager may similarly exempt from
payment of the license fee, but not from registering with him, persons
working without compensation and selling goods, wares and
§ 161-1 PARKS AND RECREATION § 161-2
157:181
§ 161-3. License application.
Every person desiring a license under this article shall first make
application to the Borough Manager for such license. If such person shall
also be required to obtain a license from any state or county officer, he/she
shall provide such license to the Borough Manager. The application shall
contain the following information:
§ 161-4. Investigation.
Upon receipt of the application and the prescribed fee, the Borough
Manager shall transmit the application to a member of his staff, who shall,
without unnecessary delay, take such action as may be necessary to verify
the identity and character of the applicant and to verify the statements and
information contained in the application. Upon completion of that review,
if the staff member is satisfied that the applicant is of good character
and that the business is legitimate, shall endorse his/her approval upon
the application. If not so satisfied, the staff member shall indicate upon
merchandise for the sole benefit of any nonprofit group; provided,
further, that every license issued under the provisions of this article
shall be issued on an individual basis to persons engaging in such
business; every individual shall obtain a separate license issued to him
in his name, and the license fee hereby imposed shall be applicable to
every such individual license.
B. License fee.
(1) The license fee per individual applicant shall be $75 per day.
(2) The deposit fee for permit cards for each individual, regardless of
the number of days the individual is permitted for, shall be $50.
A. His/her full name and address;
B. His/her previous criminal record, if any;
C. A current national criminal background check conducted by Intelius
Web-based national criminal history check at the applicant's expense;
D. The name of the person or entity by whom he/she is employed;
E. The type of goods, wares and merchandise he/she wishes to deal with in
such transient retail business;
F. The length of time for which such license is to be issued;
G. The type and license number of the vehicle(s) to be used by him/her in
such transient retail business, if any; and
H. The name of his/her automobile insurance company, together with
written proof of insurance.
§ 161-2 MONACA CODE § 161-4
157:182
the application his/her reasons for recommending that such license not be
issued.
§ 161-5. Issuance of license.
The Borough Manager, following review of any application under this article
by the staff member, shall notify the applicant if the application has been
approved or disapproved. If approved, the Borough Manager shall issue
a license in accordance with the application. The Borough Manager shall
provide the applicant with a Borough of Monaca solicitation license, a
permit card for each person and a copy of the Borough of Monaca No
Knock List and No Knock Policy.73 These articles remain the property of
the Borough of Monaca and must be promptly returned by the applicant
to the Borough Manager. Failure to return these documents will result in a
forfeiture of the applicant's deposit.
§ 161-6. Display of license.
Every license holder shall carry such license and official Borough of Monaca
permit card upon his/her person if engaged in a transient retail business
from house to house or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground
or shall display such license at the location where he/she engages in such
business if doing so at a fixed location. Persons shall exhibit such license
and official Borough of Monaca permit card upon his/her person and to be
worn on his/her outermost garment so that permits can be seen by anyone.
§ 161-7. Prohibited acts.
No person engaged in any transient retail business shall:
A. Sell any product or type of product not mentioned in his license.
B. Hawk or cry his wares upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground.
C. When selling from a vehicle, stop or park such vehicle upon any street
or alley in the Borough for longer than necessary in order to sell
therefrom to persons residing in the immediate vicinity.
D. Park any vehicle upon any street or alley in the Borough for the purpose
of sorting, rearranging or cleaning any of his goods, wares or
merchandise or disposing of any cartons or wrapping material or of any
stock of wares or foodstuffs which may have become unsalable through
handling, age or otherwise.
E. Engage in any such business, on a house-to-house basis, at any time on
Sunday or on any other day of the week at any time before 8:00 a.m. or
after 5:00 p.m., except on advance appointments.
73.Editor's Note: Examples of the solicitation permit, No Knock List, and notice of no
solicitation or peddling are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 161-4 PARKS AND RECREATION § 161-7
157:183
§ 161-8. Suspension or revocation.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke any license issued
under this article when the Mayor shall deem such suspension or revocation
to be beneficial to the health, safety or morals of the Borough and its
inhabitants, or for violation of any provision of this article, or for giving false
information on the application for the license hereunder.
§ 161-9. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Borough Manager in granting or
refusing to grant a license under this article or by the Mayor in suspending
or revoking a license shall have the right of appeal from such action to the
Borough Council. Every such appeal shall be in writing, setting forth the
matters objected to, and shall be filed with the Borough Manager within
10 days after the action appealed from. Such appeals shall be heard by the
Borough Council at its next regular meeting following the appeal, unless
either party requests a postponement. In no event shall the hearing be
held more than 30 days after the date the appeal is filed with the Borough
Manager. A stenographic record of the hearing shall be made, the cost of
which shall be paid by the person requesting the appeal. The Borough shall
be permitted to require the applicant to deposit money in advance of the
hearing in an amount estimated to be the cost of the services to be provided
by the stenographer. The decision of Council shall be sent by any available
electronic means, or by regular or by certified mail, to the applicant without
unreasonable delay. In case of suspension or revocation of a license, no part
of the license fee shall be refunded to the person whose license shall have
been suspended or revoked.
§ 161-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, for every
such violation, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of up to $250
per day per violation.
§ 161-11. Form to be displayed by No Knock List member.
Following is the form to be supplied by the Borough of Monaca to and
prominently displayed on the outside of his or her residence door by each
person requesting to be placed on the No Knock List.
F. Go in or upon any private residence in the Borough without having been
requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of such
residence.
G. Knock on any residence that is on the No Knock List or displays a No
Knock Member door marker.
§ 161-7 MONACA CODE § 161-11
157:184
Chapter 165
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 92.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 144.
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Water — See Ch. 233.
Fee schedule — See Ch. A256.
§ 165-1. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to govern and regulate the design
and installation of plumbing systems, including sanitary and storm
drainage, sanitary facilities, water supplies and stormwater and sewage
disposal as herein defined, and shall apply to existing or proposed buildings
and structures in the Borough of Monaca.
§ 165-2. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, two copies of which are on file in the office of the
Borough Manager of the Borough of Monaca, being marked and designated
as the "BOCA National Plumbing Code, Ninth Edition, 1993," as published
by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., be and
is hereby adopted as the plumbing code of the Borough of Monaca in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the control of buildings and structures
as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA National Plumbing Code are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this chapter, with the additions, insertions and changes, if any, prescribed
in § 165-3 of this chapter.
§ 165-3. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
A. Section P-101.1, Title, shall be amended as follows:
P-101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the "Plumbing
Code of the Borough of Monaca," hereinafter referred to as "this
chapter."
B. Section P-113.2 is amended to read as follows:
P-113.2 Schedule of fees:
1. The fee to be paid to the Borough of Monaca for a plumbing permit
shall be as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council.74
§ 161-11 PLUMBING § 165-3
165:185
§ 165-4. Licensing; Plumber's Examining Board; fee.
C. Section P-116.4, Violation penalties, shall be amended as follows:
P-116.4 Violation penalties: Any person who shall violate any
provision of this chapter or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair
plumbing work in violation of the approved construction documents
or directive of the code official or of a permit certificate issued under
the provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a summary offense,
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, and in default of payment
thereof, imprisonment not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense.
D. Section P-117.2, Unlawful continuance, shall be amended as follows:
P-117.2 Unlawful continuance: Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the structure after having been served with a stopwork
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine not more
than $1,000.
E. Section P-304.3, Public systems available, shall be amended as follows:
P-304.3 Public systems available: A public water main or public
sewer system shall be considered available to a structure where the
structure is located within 150 feet of the public water main or sewer.
F. Section P-309.4, Freezing, shall be amended as follows:
P-309.4 Freezing: Water service piping shall be installed below
recorded frost penetration but not less than three feet below grade.
In climates with freezing temperatures, plumbing piping in exterior
building walls or areas subjected to freezing temperatures shall be
protected against freezing by insulation or heat, or both.
G. Section P-309.5, Sewer depth, shall be amended as follows:
P-309.5 Sewer depth: Building sewers that connect to private
sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of 36 inches below
finished grade at the point of septic tank connections. Building sewers
shall be a minimum of 36 inches below grade.
A. Registered plumber's license. No individual shall engage in the
business of plumbing in the Borough of Monaca unless licensed as a
registered plumber under the provisions of this chapter.
B. Supervision of work. No individual, firm, partnership or corporation
shall engage in the business of installing, repairing or altering
74.Editor's Note: See Ch. A256, Fee Schedule.
§ 165-3 MONACA CODE § 165-4
165:186
plumbing unless the plumbing work performed in the course of such
business is under the direct supervision of a licensed registered
plumber.
C. Plumber's Examining Board.
(1) Board personnel. There is hereby established a Plumber's
Examining Board (hereinafter referred to as the "Board") to consist
of not fewer than four members. One member shall represent the
Board of Health, one member shall be a registered plumber, one
member shall represent the public, and one member shall be a
Councilman. The members of the Board shall be appointed by the
Council of the Borough of Monaca.
(2) Meetings of the Board. The Board shall hold its first meeting not
later than 30 days following the adoption of this chapter. Thereafter
the Board shall meet at such intervals as may be necessary for the
proper performance of its duties, but in any case not less than twice
a year.
(3) Examination and certification.
(a) The Board shall establish standards and procedures for the
qualification, examination and licensing of registered plumbers
and shall issue an appropriate license to each person who
meets the qualifications therefor and successfully passes the
examination given by the Board. The Board shall keep an
official record of all its transactions.
[1] All licenses shall be valid for one calendar year.
[2] No master plumber's license shall be granted to a
journeyman plumber until he has had at least one year's
experience as a licensed journeyman plumber and has
successfully passed the required examination.
[3] No journeyman plumber's license shall be granted a
registered apprentice plumber until he has a minimum of
four years' experience as a registered apprentice plumber,
has satisfactorily completed 576 hours of related technical
training at an accredited school and has successfully
passed the required examination.
(b) These requirements shall be effective as of the date of adoption
of this chapter. Individuals prior licensed as masters and
journeyman plumbers shall be relieved of this requirement.
(4) Reexamination. Any person who fails to pass an examination as
prescribed by the Board may apply for reexamination after the
expiration of 30 days, upon payment of the regular examination fee.
§ 165-4 PLUMBING § 165-4
165:187
(5) Temporary permit. The Board may issue a temporary license
pending examination, provided that the applicant holds a similar
license from an equivalent board.
D. Examination fee. Any person desiring to be licensed as a registered
plumber shall make written application to the Board. Examination fees
for registered (plumber) licenses shall be as set from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council.75 Payment of such fee, made payable
to the Borough, shall accompany the application. Examination fees not
returnable.
E. Fees for expiration; renewal; revocation.
(1) Yearly fee to be paid to the Borough. All licenses issued by the
Board shall expire on December 31 of the year in which issued but
may be renewed upon payment of a fee as set from time to time by
the Borough Council.76 The initial license fee shall be as set from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council,77 which shall be
in addition to an examination fee, if required.
(2) Revocations.
(a) The Board may revoke any license if obtained through
nondisclosure, misstatement or misrepresentation of a
material fact or if a penalty has been imposed on a licensee.
(b) Before a license may be revoked, the licensee shall have notice
in writing, enumerating the charges against him, and be
entitled to a hearing by the Board not sooner than five days
from receipt of the notice. The licensee shall be given an
opportunity to present testimony, oral or written, and shall
have the right to cross-examination. All testimony shall be
given under oath. The Board shall have power to administer
oaths, issue subpoenas and compel attendance of witnesses.
The decision of the Board shall be based on the evidence
produced at the hearing and made part of the record thereof. A
person whose license has been revoked shall not be permitted
to apply within one year from the date of revocation.
75.Editor's Note: See Ch. A256, Fee Schedule.
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. A256, Fee Schedule.
77.Editor's Note: See Ch. A256, Fee Schedule.
§ 165-4 MONACA CODE § 165-4
165:188
Chapter 169
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 152.
Property, vacant and abandoned — See Ch.
171.
Solid waste — See Ch. 184.
§ 169-1. Adoption of standards.
Except as otherwise changed or modified by this chapter, Chapter 1 through
Chapter 8, inclusive, and Appendix A of the 2012 International Property
Maintenance Code are hereby adopted by the Borough of Monaca, and
same, along with the changes and modifications listed hereinafter, shall
constitute and be known as the "Monaca Borough Property Maintenance
Code" and may be referred to as the MBPMC.
§ 169-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following changes and modifications to the 2012 International Property
Maintenance Code (hereinafter referred to as the IPMC), which changes
and modifications shall be made part of the MBPMC, appear hereinafter:
Section 101.1 of the IPMC shall be changed/modified to read as follows:
101.1 Title.
Those requirements shall be known as the Monaca Borough Property
Maintenance Code, hereinafter sometimes referred to as "MBPMC" or "this
Code."
Section 102.3 of the IPMC shall be changed/modified to read as follows:
102.3 Application of other codes.
Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy,
shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of all other
applicable prevailing codes adopted by the Borough of Monaca.
Section 103.1 of the IPMC shall be changed/modified to read as follows:
103.1 General.
The person in charge of enforcing this code shall be the Neighborhood
Services Officer, who, for purposes of this code, may also be referred to as
the "Code Official."
Section 103.2 of the IPMC shall be changed/modified to read as follows:
§ 165-4 PLUMBING § 169-2
165:189
103.2 Appointment.
The Code Official shall be appointed by the Council of the Borough of
Monaca.
Section 103.3 of the IPMC shall be changed/modified to read as follows:
103.3 Deputies.
With the concurrence of the Council of the Borough of Monaca, the Code
Official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy or deputies, who shall
have powers as delegated by the Code Official.
Section 103.5 of the IPMC shall be changed/modified to read as follows:
103.5 Fees.
The fees for activities and services performed by the Code Official or a
deputy in carrying out the responsibilities under this code shall be as set
forth in a fee schedule set by Council from time to time by resolution.
Section 106.3 of the IPMC shall be changed/modified to read as follows:
106.3 Prosecution of violation.
The word "misdemeanor" shall be replaced with "summary offense."
Section 106.4 of the IPMC shall be changed/modified to read as follows:
106.4 Violation penalties.
The following shall be added: "The fine for each day's violation shall be up
to the maximum imposable for a summary offense."
Section 109.3 of the IPMC shall be changed/modified to read as follows:
109.3 Closing streets.
When necessary for public safety, the Code Official shall temporarily close
structures, and, acting in conjunction with and obtaining the approval of
the Chief of Police of the Borough of Monaca, shall close sidewalks, streets,
public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the
same from being utilized.
Section 111.2 of the IPMC shall be changed/modified to read as follows:
Section 111.2 Membership of Board.
The Board of Appeals shall consist of three members appointed by the
Council of the Borough of Monaca.
Section 111.2.1 of the IPMC shall be changed/modified to read as follows:
§ 169-2 MONACA CODE § 169-2
165:190
Section 111.2.1 Alternative members.
The Council of the Borough of Monaca shall appoint alternative members
to the Board of Appeals who shall serve when a regular member(s) is(are)
unable to do so.
Section 202 of the IPMC shall be changed/modified to read as follows:
Section 202 General Definitions.
CODE OFFICIAL. The following shall be added: "The Code Official shall
also be known as the "Neighborhood Services Officer" and vice versa.
Section 302.4 of the IPMC shall be changed/modified to read as follows:
Section 302.4 Weeds. The following shall be added in the first sentence
after the word "of": "six inches."
Section 304.14 of the IPMC shall be changed/modified to read as follows:
Section 304.14 Insect screens.
The following shall be added in the first sentence between the words
"from" and "to": "March," and in the second sentence before the word
"every," "September."78
§ 169-3. Interpretation of code.
The commentary following each section of the IPMC is to be used in
conjunction with interpreting and implementing the IPMC and not as a
substitute for the code. The commentary is not intended to govern, rather,
it is advisory only. The Code Official alone possesses the authority and
responsibility for interpreting the code.
§ 169-4. Incorporation of code and commentary.
The IPMC and commentary, except as changed or modified as hereinbefore
set forth, is deemed to be incorporated and merged herein as though more
fully set forth at length.
§ 169-5. Copy to be kept on file.
A copy of the 2012 IPMC shall be kept on file at the Borough offices and
used, along with the modification/changes referred to hereinbefore, in any
type of enforcement action taken by the Code Official.
78.Editor's Note: "September" would follow the word "to" before "every."
§ 169-2 PLUMBING § 169-5
165:191
Chapter 171
PROPERTY, VACANT AND ABANDONED.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 107.
Nuisances — See Ch. 152.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 169.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
Fee schedule — See Ch. A256.
§ 171-1. Applicability and scope.
This chapter shall be applicable to all abandoned real property and every
vacant building and structure located within the geographical confines of
the Borough of Monaca, Beaver County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
that has been vacant for more than 60 consecutive days and to each owner,
interest holder, or local agent of any such abandoned real property or
vacant building, vacant storefront, or structure, without regard to whether
such owner, interest holder, or local agent is a public, private,
governmental, commercial, industrial, residential, institutional, nonprofit,
or for-profit person.
§ 171-2. Definitions.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, where terms are not defined, such
terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context
implies.
B. As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings indicated unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
ABANDONED — Deserted or discarded for more than 180 days.
ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY — Any real property, including but not
limited to one or more vacant buildings or structures, without respect
to occupancy or vacancy, that is subject to a mortgage and is either
i) in default on such mortgage for which a mortgagee has obtained a
judgment in foreclosure; ii) in default on such mortgage and subject to
an application or proceeds for a tax deed or pending tax claim bureau
or tax assessor sale for unpaid property taxes; iii) in default on such
mortgage and subject to an application or proceedings for a sheriff
sale for unpaid claims, debts, or obligations; or iv) in default on such
mortgage and has been transferred to a mortgagee by deed in lieu of
foreclosure, or any similar document. The designation of real property
as "abandoned real property" shall continue and remain in place until
such time as the real property is sold or transferred to a new owner,
the foreclosure action is dismissed, or any default on the mortgage has
been cured.
§ 169-5 MONACA CODE § 171-2
165:192
BOROUGH — The Borough of Monaca, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Monaca.
CELLAR — A room typically used for storage that is located in the
basement of a building and is not used for commercial, industrial, or
residential purposes.
COMMERCIAL BUILDING — A building that is used, or partially used,
for commercial business activities. Commercial buildings include, but
are not limited to, stores, offices, schools, churches, gymnasiums,
libraries, museums, hospitals, clinics, warehouses, and jails.
COMMERCIAL BUSINESS — Any business that relates to the exchange
of goods or services.
DISCARDED — Cast aside as useless or undesirable.
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GROUND FLOOR — Any occupied floor of a building with direct access
to grade, that is located less than one story above or less than one story
below grade, provided that no portion of a floor that constitutes a cellar
as defined in this chapter shall constitute a ground floor.
HABITABLE; LIVABLE — With reference to this chapter, a structure
with a hard roof and sides that is equipped with heat, electricity and
functional plumbing and is capable of being lived in without undue risk
to human health and safety.
INDUSTRIAL BUILDING — Property or design for, or used by,
companies or persons for manufacturing, warehousing or assemblage
of components.
INDUSTRIAL BUSINESS — Any business that relates to the production
or manufacture of goods.
NOTICE — Written notice of a violation, pursuant to first-class mail, to
the last known address of the owner of the property in question.
OCCUPIED — Any building or structure where one or more persons
actually conducts a lawful business or resides in all or any part of the
building as the licensed business occupant or as the legal or equitable
owner/occupant(s) or tenant(s) on a permanent, nontransient business,
or any combination of the same.
OWNER — Any person:
(1) Having a legal or equitable interest in a property;
Having a legal interest in a property recorded in the official records
of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property;
or
(2)
Otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of
the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator
(3)
§ 171-2 PLUMBING § 171-2
165:193
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, financial
institution, bank, credit union, savings and loan company, investment
firm, government agency, government authority, municipal corporation
or any other group acting as a unit.
PROPERTY — Any portion of unimproved or improved real estate
located within the Borough of Monaca which includes the buildings or
structures located on it regardless of condition.
PUBLIC NUISANCE —
REFUSE — Materials that are abandoned, discarded, or destined for
recycling. The term includes rubbish, garbage, scrap metal, tires,
appliances, vehicles, general trash, construction/demo debris, etc.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage. The term shall include the residue from the burning of wood,
coal coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin
cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust, construction/
demo debris and other similar materials.
of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real
property by a court.
Any building, structure, or property which, because of physical
condition, use or occupancy, is considered to be an attractive
nuisance to minors or uninvited persons.
(1)
Any building or structure which because it is dilapidated,
unsanitary, unsafe, insect- or vermin-infested or lacking in the
facilities and equipment required by the ordinances of Monaca
Borough has been designated by the Borough as a public nuisance.
(2)
Any structure which is a fire hazard, a structural hazard, or is
otherwise dangerous to the safety of any persons or any property.
(3)
Any building or structure which lacks, or has rendered inoperable,
fire-protection systems as required by the applicable codes and
ordinances.
(4)
Any structure from which water, plumbing, heating, sewage or
other facilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed or
rendered ineffective, so that the property creates a hazard to
neighboring properties.
(5)
Any building or structure which for reason of neglect or lack of
maintenance has become a place for the accumulation of refuse or
a haven for insects, rodents, and other vermin.
(6)
Any building or structure which as a result of its dilapidated,
unsanitary, unsafe, insect- or vermin-infested condition creates
damage or a risk of damage to a neighboring property.
(7)
§ 171-2 MONACA CODE § 171-2
165:194
§ 171-3. Purpose; enforcement.
STOREFRONT — Any facade located on the ground floor of a
commercial building having one or more storefront windows.
STOREFRONT WINDOW — Any window of any commercial building
that permits an unobstructed public view into the interior of the
building from any immediately adjacent street, sidewalk or right-of-way.
STRUCTURES — Constructed objects. For purposes of this chapter,
the term includes, but is not limited to, buildings, sheds, garages,
swimming pools and recreational facilities.
VACANT — A building or structure, or portion thereof, shall be deemed
to be vacant if no person or persons currently conduct a lawfully
licensed business there, or lawfully reside in or live in any part of the
building as the legal or equitable owner(s) or tenant occupant(s) or
owner-occupants or tenant(s), on a permanent nontransient basis.
VACANT BUILDING — A property or structure, or portion thereof, that
is unoccupied for more than 60 days or has been the subject of:
VACANT STOREFRONT — A storefront shall be deemed vacant if no
person or persons currently conduct a lawfully licensed business there.
WINDOW — An opening in a building that has a glass casement for
permitting natural light into a building.
WINDOW DISPLAY — A visual representation of information or
graphics for viewing by the public in a window.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign that is painted on, applied or attached to a
window or that is located within the interior of a structure and that is
plainly visible and is erected, constructed or maintained for the primary
purpose of being viewed from the exterior of that structure.
(1) A mortgage foreclosure action or notice;
(2) A bankruptcy sale or notice;
(3) A delinquent tax sale or notice, or
A mortgage foreclosure action where the title to the property has
been retained by the beneficiary of a deed or trust involved in the
foreclosure or transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.
(4)
A. The purpose of the section requiring the registration of all vacant and
abandoned buildings, vacant storefronts, and structures and the
payment of registration fees is to assist the Borough of Monaca in
protecting the public health, safety and welfare, to monitor the number
of vacant buildings in the Borough, to assess the effects of the condition
of those buildings on nearby businesses in the neighborhoods in which
they are located particularly in light of fire and safety hazards and
unlawful, temporary occupancy by transients, including illicit drug
users and traffickers, and to require of the owners of such vacant
§ 171-2 PLUMBING § 171-3
165:195
§ 171-4. Registration.
buildings their registration and payment of related fees, and to promote
substantial efforts to rehabilitate such vacant buildings. The provisions
of this chapter are applicable to the owners of such vacant buildings
as set forth herein and are in addition to and not in lieu of any and all
other applicable provisions of the ordinances of the Borough of Monaca
and all relevant codes and/or regulations adopted therein.
B. Administration and enforcement of this section shall remain under the
sole control of the Borough Manager. The Borough Manager and/or
designee shall have the authority to institute summary criminal
proceedings as a means of enforcement of this section and shall, when
acting within the scope of employment hereunder, have the powers of a
police office to the Borough; provided, however, that under no
circumstances shall they have the power to arrest.
A. Registration required.
(1) An owner shall register a vacant or abandoned property with the
Borough of Monaca Neighborhood Services Officer or his designee
on a form or forms provided by the Borough and pay the
appropriate registration fee.
(2) Registration shall contain:
(a) The name of the owner(s) of the property;
(b) The direct street/office mailing address of the owner(s) (no
post office box addresses are allowed);
(c) A direct contact name and phone number for the owner(s);
(d) The local property management company responsible for the
security, maintenance and marketing of the property;
(e) The date of vacancy; and
(f) Any other information deemed necessary by the Monaca
Neighborhood Services Officer.
(3) Registration fees shall not be prorated.
(4) Properties subject to registration under this chapter shall remain
under the registration fee requirement for as long as they remain
vacant.
(5) Each vacant or abandoned building or structure shall be registered
with the Borough within 180 days of the date such building or
structure becomes a vacant building or structure and annually
thereafter by July 15, for each subsequent calendar year, if such
building or structure continues to be a vacant building or structure
§ 171-3 MONACA CODE § 171-4
165:196
during each subsequent calendar year, until such time as such
building or structure ceases to be a vacant building or structure.
B. Fee schedule. The registration fee shall be established by resolution of
the Council of the Borough of Monaca. The fee structure is based on the
number of years the building, storefront, or portion thereof has been
vacant under its current ownership. See the attached schedule. The
Borough reserves the right to file municipal liens/claims with the
prothonotary at any time, and from time to time, for any or all unpaid
registration fees.
C. Waiver of fees. A waiver of fees may be granted by the Borough Council
for the current year if the following conditions are met:
(1) All local municipal fees are paid in full;
(2) A good faith effort is shown to rent, sell, or lease the space. Good
faith efforts include, but are not limited to, contracts with realtors,
newspaper ads, window signs, or other methods, provided that the
effort is actually likely to generate interest in the property and the
owner is actually willing to rent, sell or lease;
(3) Pricing is consistent with other similar buildings;
(4) The building is in compliance with all Borough of Monaca codes
and ordinances and is habitable; or
(5) Other good cause as determined by a majority vote of Council.
D. Duty to amend registration statement. If the status of the registration
information changes during the course of any calendar year, it is the
responsibility of the new owner, his/her representative, or agent for the
same to notify the Borough of Monaca Neighborhood Officer in writing
within 30 days of the occurrence of such change.
E. Local agent requirement.
(1) Each owner or interest holder of abandoned real property or any
vacant building or structure, or vacant storefront, not providing a
residence, office or business location with an address within the
geographical confines of Beaver County, Pennsylvania, shall
designate a local agent and shall provide the complete name,
address, telephone number and e-mail address (if applicable) of
such local agent on the registration form filed with the Borough.
(2) Such owner or interest holder shall also provide a statement signed
by the local agent whereby the local agent accepts the designation
as local agent of such owner or interest holder, which signed
statement shall be an acknowledgment of the local agent of the
requirements, responsibilities, and obligation under the chapter.
(3) With such designation, a local agent shall be authorized by such
owner or interest holder to accept service of process, notices,
§ 171-4 PLUMBING § 171-4
165:197
§ 171-5. Inspections.
An inspection must be completed within 60 days of the initial registration.
In addition, an annual inspection of a registered vacant building shall
be performed by the Borough of Monaca Neighborhood Services Officer
or other code officials to determine if it complies with the minimum
requirements, as determined by the code official, or applicable property
maintenance code, building code and/or fire prevention code. If violations of
these codes are identified, the Borough of Monaca Neighborhood Services
Officer or other code officials shall issue a notice of violation as per the
requirements of those codes and give notice to the owner to comply with
the codes with a time to cure. If the violations are not corrected within the
time given, the property may be declared a public nuisance. These annual
inspections must occur within 60 days of the anniversary date of the initial
registration date. Inspection costs will be determined by the Borough of
Monaca.
statements, invoices, and other communications resulting from or
related to this chapter on behalf of such owner or interest holder.
With such designation, a local agent shall be responsible for
providing the Borough and the Neighborhood Services Officer with
access to the abandoned property or vacant building or structure
for the purposes of making inspections, maintaining and securing
the abandoned property or vacant building structure, and
responding to any emergency associated with the abandoned
property or vacant building or structure affecting the public health,
safety or welfare.
(4) Each owner and interest holder and each respective local agent
shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with
ordinances of the Borough and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as applied to the abandoned property or vacant
building or structure.
A. Failure to appear for inspection. If the owner or his/her representative
cannot be available at the proposed time, said owner or representative
shall provide no less than 24 hours' written notice to the Borough of
Monaca Code Enforcement Officer. Upon failure to give such written
notice or upon failure to gain entry, an administrative fee of $50 will be
assessed against the owner or representative of the owner. For each
rescheduling beyond the second rescheduling, an administrative fee of
$100 shall be assessed in all cases. Failure to pay administrative fees
shall, at the discretion of the Borough of Monaca Neighborhood
Services Officer or other code officials, constitute a violation of this
chapter or the applicable code, including, but not limited to, the
Borough of Monaca Property Maintenance Code.79 Failure of an owner,
or his/her responsible agent, to appear for a scheduled inspection shall
79.Editor's Note: See Ch. 169, Property Maintenance.
§ 171-4 MONACA CODE § 171-5
165:198
§ 171-6. Maintenance requirements.
Properties subject to registration under this chapter shall be kept free of
weeds, high grass, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, garbage, junk, debris,
rubbish, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars,
flyers, notices (except those required by federal, state or local law),
discarded personal items, including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing,
large and small appliances, printed material, vehicle or vehicle parts, or
any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned,
and the property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar
markings.
§ 171-7. Security requirements.
be considered probable cause for obtaining a search warrant to inspect
the premises.
B. Complaint inspections. Nothing in this section shall preclude the
Borough of Monaca Neighborhood Services Officer or other code
officials from performing an inspection upon receipt of a complaint or
violation of the ordinances of the Borough of Monaca existing at the
building or structure. Said inspections shall be in accord with the
applicable codes and ordinances and regulations and policies
established by the Borough of Monaca.
A. Visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and maintained.
Landscaping includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers,
bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark, or
artificial turf or sod. Landscaping does not include weeds, gravel,
broken concrete, asphalt, plastic sheeting, indoor-outdoor carpet or any
similar material unless approved by the Borough.
B. Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so the water remains
clear and free of larvae, pests, pollutants and debris, or drained and
kept dry. In either case, a property with a pool or spa must comply with
the minimum security fencing requirements of the Borough of Monaca
Property Maintenance Code.
C. Adherence to this chapter does not relieve any property owner of any
obligations set forth in any other ordinance of the Borough of Monaca,
including, but not limited to, the Borough of Monaca Property
Maintenance Code.
D. A property owner required to register a property under this chapter is
hereby given 30 days to comply with these maintenance requirements.
A. Properties subject to registration under this chapter shall be
maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to
unauthorized persons, vermin, and any other pests.
B. "Secure manner" includes, but is not limited to, the closure and locking
of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage), gates, and any
§ 171-5 PLUMBING § 171-7
165:199
§ 171-8. Requirements for vacant storefronts.
Responsibility for compliance with this section includes any person owning,
leasing, maintaining, or otherwise in possession or control of any vacant
storefront located within the Borough of Monaca, or any owner of the
property upon which the vacant storefront is located.
other opening of such size that it may allow an uninvited person to
access the interior of the property and/or structure(s). In the case of
broken windows, "securing" means the reglazing or boarding of the
window.
C. If the property has been condemned, the property shall be posted with
the name and twenty-four-hour contact phone number of the owner and
local property management company. The posting shall be no less than
8 1/2 inches by 11 inches and shall be of a font that is legible and
written in English and shall contain, along with the name, the Borough
of Monaca vacant properties registration number, a twenty-four-hour
contact number, and the words "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY" and
"TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL. . .." The posting shall
be placed on the interior of the window facing the street to the front of
the property or, if no such area exists, on an area of sufficient size to
support the posting in a location that is visible to the front of the
property, but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting must be
constructed of, and printed with, weather-resistant materials.
A. Maintenance. The vacant storefront of a commercial building located in
the Borough of Monaca shall be maintained in good condition, kept
neat, clean, secure and free of graffiti, and lighted.
B. Window display requirement.
(1) In order to improve the appearance of vacant storefronts and
improve overall security, any vacant storefront that is located
within the Borough of Monaca shall, not more than 60 business
days after the date on which the ground floor premises first
becomes vacant, contain a window display, or other form of
decorative screen, in each of the storefront windows. A variety of
window displays are acceptable, provided that they have a
professional appearance, achieve a desired coverage of at least
30% unless otherwise specified by the Neighborhood Services
Officer, and are not offensive to the general public. The
Neighborhood Services Officer of the Borough of Monaca shall
approve all window displays.
(2) Unless otherwise decided by the Neighborhood Services Officer,
plywood used as a temporary cover for windows and doors on any
property within the Borough must be permanently removed after a
period of no longer than 30 days. After this thirty-day period, the
window/door must be replaced or repaired so that it is in
§ 171-7 MONACA CODE § 171-8
165:200
§ 171-9. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 172
QUALITY OF LIFE TICKETING
§ 172-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Quality of Life
Ticketing Ordinance of the Borough of Monaca.
§ 172-2. Definitions.
compliance with the Monaca Property Maintenance Code. (See
MPMC Sections 304.13 and 304.15.)80
C. Signage. All signage must be in compliance with applicable Borough
ordinances. Handwritten signs are not permitted. Professionally made
window signs and real estate signs are permitted, provided that they
meet the requirements of the Monaca Borough zoning ordinances.81
Not more than nine square feet of informational signage such as real
estate signs or contact information may be placed in a vacant ground
floor window. Larger professional signs that function as the window
display are permitted.
A. Any person who violates, or permits the violation of, any provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be subject
to a fine of up to $500 and costs of the prosecution for each offense, or
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both fine and imprisonment.
B. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Any fines collected as a result of a violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be placed in the general fund of the Borough of Monaca.
A. The following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the
following meanings:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Monaca.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm, corporation or other legal
entity having a legal or equitable interest in the property located in the
Borough, as recorded in the official records of the Recorder of Deeds
of Beaver County, or otherwise having control of the property, including
the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or
administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession
of real property by a court.
80.Editor's Note: See Sections 304.13 and 304.15 of the 2012 International Property
Maintenance Code.
81.Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 171-8 PLUMBING § 172-2
165:201
§ 172-3. Abatement of violation.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership or any other entity
acting as a unit.
QUALITY OF LIFE TICKET/VIOLATION TICKET — A document issued
by a person authorized to do so on behalf of the Borough to a person
alleged to be in violation of the provisions of the Code of the Borough of
Monaca, as cited in this chapter, calling for payment to be made in lieu
of the issuance of a citation or the commencement of legal proceeding
seeking penalties for violations.
VIOLATION — The failure to abide by or conform to the provisions of
the Code of the Borough of Monaca cited in this chapter.
VIOLATOR — See "owner."
B. The singular shall include the plural.
A. Any person violating the following provisions of the Code of the
Borough of Monaca is hereby directed to satisfy the Borough, upon
issuance of a quality of life ticket, by correcting the violation in
question. A Monaca police officer or person appointed by the Council of
the Borough to be in charge of issuing notices of violations of the
provisions of the Code of the Borough of Monaca, is authorized and
empowered to cause a violation to be corrected. The cost associated
with correcting the violation shall be determined by the Borough in
order that the Borough shall be compensated for both direct and
indirect costs and expenses incurred.
B. The Borough acting through its employee workforce or through an
independent contractor, reserves the right to abate the violation in
question at the expense of the owner. If the Borough has effected the
abatement of the violation, the costs thereof may be charged to the
owner of the property. A bill/invoice will be generated to the violator for
payment separate from the quality of life ticket, which will also be paid
separately.
C. In all instances where the Borough abates the violation, in addition to
the fine set forth in the quality of life ticket, the Borough is authorized
to recover from the offending party or the owner of the property,
charges pursuant to rules and regulations established by the Borough.
D. Borough cleanup. The Borough reserves the right to perform any
necessary work to abate any violation once seven days pass from the
date of issuance of the quality of life ticket. Should the violation at the
discretion of the person enforcing the provisions of this chapter on
behalf of the Borough present imminent danger and/or pose a health
hazard and/or risk, the Borough reserves the right to perform the
abatement immediately. The Borough will perform this work at a rate of
$60 per hour, per man, and plus the cost of any material necessary for
the abatement. The Borough reserves the right to charge an additional
§ 172-2 MONACA CODE § 172-3
165:202
§ 172-4. Enforcement.
20% on all material purchases to cover all miscellaneous expenses,
such as wear and tear on equipment.
E. Contractor cleanup. The Borough reserves the right to direct a
contractor to perform the abatement of the violation in question once
seven days pass from the date of issuance of the quality of life ticket.
Should the violation present imminent danger and/or pose a health
hazard and/or risk, the Borough reserves the right to direct an
independent contractor it chooses to hire to perform the abatement
immediately. The contractor will submit a bill for his/her/its work to the
Borough and the Borough will forward these costs to the violator. The
Borough reserves the right to add a 30% processing fee in addition to
the cost of the contractor.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced either by police officers
and Code Enforcement Officers who are sworn to uphold and enforce
the laws of the Borough.
B. Borough Council may change those sections of the Code of the Borough
of Monaca to be covered under this Quality of Life Ticketing Ordinance
from time to time, however, at the time of the adoption of this chapter
the following chapters or sections of said Code are hereby deemed and
ordained to be under the jurisdiction of this process called for in this
chapter:
(1) Sections 169-1 through 169-5 inclusive, sometimes referred to as
the Monaca Borough Property Maintenance Code.
(2) Sections 184-1 through 184-10 inclusive, relating to solid waste
storage, collection and disposal.
(3) Sections 184-11 through 184-15 inclusive, relating to solid waste
accumulation or dumping.
(4) Sections 120-1 through 120-7 inclusive, relating to fences, hedges
and walls.
C. Any violation of the provisions of any of the sections referred to in
Subsection B above may be cause for a violation ticket to be issued to
the violator.
D. A violation ticket shall be served upon the violator in the following
manner:
(1) By handing it personally to the violator.
(2) By handing it to an adult resident of the subject property.
(3) By leaving or posting it at a prominent location on the property
where the violation exists.
§ 172-3 PLUMBING § 172-4
165:203
§ 172-5. Violation ticket disposition.
A person in receipt of a violation ticket shall have seven calendar days to
rectify the alleged violation failing which he/she/it shall have 10 calendar
days within which time to pay the amount of the ticket. In the event the
ticket is not paid within 10 calendar days, such failure to pay shall result
in the issuance of a nontraffic citation for the offense as enumerated on the
ticket.
§ 172-6. Violations and penalties.
§ 172-7. Violation ticket penalties.
(4) By mailing it to the violator's address on record with the Borough
by first-class mail, verified by a certificate of mailing and/or by
registered mail, return receipt requested.
E. Each day after the issuance of a ticket that a violation continues or is
permitted to continue, constitutes a separate offense for which a
separate fine may be imposed.
F. If the Borough has corrected a violation, the cost thereof shall be
charged to the owner of the property or to the property itself, by
whatever means is available to the municipality, including but not
limited to the filing of a municipal claim or lien.
A. For the first offense constituting a violation of any of the sections
referred to in § 172-4B within a twelve-month period, the violation
ticket shall be issued in the amount of $25.
B. For the second offense constituting a violation of any of the sections
referred to in § 172-4B within a twelve-month period, the violation
ticket shall be issued in the amount of $50.
C. For the third offense constituting a violation of any of the sections
referred to in § 172-4B within a twelve-month period, the violation
ticket shall be issued in the amount of $100.
D. For the fourth offense constituting a violation of any of the sections
referred to in § 172-4B within a twelve-month period, the violation
ticket shall be issued in the amount of $300.
E. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply should the violation be
prosecuted through the citation process, in which case the fines and
costs shall be determined by the provision of the applicable section of
the Code of the Borough of Monaca.
A. If the person or owner in receipt of a $25 violation ticket does not pay
the fine or request a hearing within 15 days, the person will be subject
to a $10 penalty for days 16 through 30.
§ 172-4 MONACA CODE § 172-7
165:204
§ 172-8. Alternative to existing provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not supersede or supplant the
enforcement, fines, or penalty provisions of the Code of the Borough of
Monaca generally and in particular, the sections referred to in § 172-4B
but rather shall act as an alternative means by which to resolve alleged
violations of said Code and sections.
§ 172-9. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any section, clause,
sentence, part or provision thereof shall be held illegal, invalid, and
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the
court shall not effect, impair, or invalidate any of the remaining sections,
clauses, sentences, parts or provisions of this chapter.
§ 172-10. Repealer.
The provisions of any prior ordinance which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency. This chapter shall be effective immediately upon adoption.
§ 172-11. Effective date.
The provisions of this chapter shall become effective upon enactment
hereof.
B. If the person or owner in receipt of a $50 violation ticket does not pay
the fine or request a hearing within 15 days, the person will be subject
to a $25 penalty for days 16 through 30.
C. If the person or owner in receipt of a $100 violation ticket does not pay
the fine or request a hearing within 10 days, the person will be subject
to a $50 penalty for days 16 through 30.
D. If the person or owner in receipt of a $300 violation ticket does not pay
the fine or request a hearing within 10 days, the person will be subject
to a $100 penalty for days 16 through 30.
E. Failure of a person to make payment or request a hearing within 30
days of a violation ticket shall make the person subject to the filing of
citation for failure to pay.
F. If violations are believed to be continuous or egregious, in the
discretion of the Borough, the Borough authorizes any of its police
officers or Code Enforcement Officials to issue citations without first
issuing violation tickets, provided notice has been given to the person
alleged to be in violation that a citation will be issued. Such notice shall
be in the form of a letter sent on behalf of the Borough to the person
alleged to be in violation. Upon issuance of four tickets for the same
violation, right is reserved for the police officer or Code Enforcement
Officer to issue citations for the fifth and subsequent offenses.
§ 172-7 PLUMBING § 172-11
165:205
Chapter 173
REAL ESTATE REGISTRY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
§ 173-1. Definitions.
The following words when used in this chapter shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning:
LESSEE — That person or persons who has the use of real estate of a lessor
and is responsible for the giving of any type of rent therefor, but excluding
those who are lessees for a period of less than 30 days; provided, however,
that if a tenancy originally believed to be for less than 30 days does, in fact,
continue for more than 30 days, then on the 31st day of such tenancy, the
person or persons using or renting the real estate shall become a lessee as
above defined.
LESSOR — Any person who grants a lease or otherwise permits the use
of real estate or portion thereof titled entirely or in part to him or who is
authorized by the person or persons owning such real estate to act as agent
for such owners to grant such lease or permit such use for rent.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
REAL ESTATE — Vacant land, land occupied by one or more buildings,
rental apartments or rooms within a building, regardless of whether the
remainder of the building is or is not available for rent.
RENT — The payment of a consideration, monetary or otherwise, for the use
of real estate owned by some other person or persons.
§ 173-2. Reports of rental property and occupancy.
All lessors, within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter or in
case of real estate acquired after the date of this chapter or being made
available for rent after the date of this chapter shall, within 30 days after
the acquisition, rental or availability for rental thereof, as the case may be,
report to the Borough Secretary in writing, addressed to her at the Borough
office, the number of parcels or units of real estate presently or hereafter
rented and available for rental, a description (by address, number and/or
some other meaningful method) of said parcels or units and the names of all
lessees and all adults residing permanently with the lessee even though not
a party to a lease at the time of such report, together with a designation as
to which unit or parcel is occupied by each.
§ 172-11 MONACA CODE § 173-3
173:206
§ 173-3. Changes in occupancy.
Any change in the occupancy or real estate rented or leased or in the
identity of the lessee from that shown in the report of the lessor as required
§ 173-2 hereof shall be reported by lessor to the Borough Secretary within
10 days after such change. It is intended hereby that lessors shall report
a new lessee or a lessee who rents or leases a different unit or parcel of
lessor's real estate and when a unit or parcel of their real estate becomes
vacant.
§ 173-4. Use of status of occupancy form; exception.
The Borough Secretary may prepare a form report entitled "status of
occupancy report," which form report may require that information set forth
above and such other pertinent information that the Council, by resolution,
may direct the Borough Secretary to incorporate into said report form. The
failure to have such report forms, however, shall not excuse the obligation
of lessors to provide the information required herein. The report may be
filed by presenting to the Borough Secretary a copy of any lease agreement
which may be in effect or a copy of any form that the lessor may be required
to submit to any other agency concerning tenants.
§ 173-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any lessor violating any of the provisions of this chapter or who furnishes
information the lessor knows to be false to the Borough or who uses a
false name or address in any report required by this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Code
Enforcement.
Chapter 175
RENTAL UNITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 169. Solid waste — See Ch. 184.
§ 173-3 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 173-5
173:207

ARTICLE I
Registration of Residential Units
[Adopted 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 875]
§ 175-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH COMMON AREAS — Borough of Monaca, Beaver County,
Pennsylvania.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT — Any form of conduct, action, incident or
behavior perpetrated, caused or permitted by any occupant or visitor of a
regulated dwelling unit that is so loud, untimely (time of day), offensive,
riotous or that otherwise disturbs other persons of reasonable sensibility
in their peaceful enjoyment of their premises such that a report is made
to police complaining of such action, conduct, incident or behavior. It is
not necessary that such action, conduct, incident or behavior constitute a
criminal offense, nor that criminal charges be filed against any person in
order for a person to have perpetrated, caused or permitted the commission
of disruptive conduct as defined herein; provided, however, that such shall
be deemed to have occurred unless the police shall investigate and make a
determination that such did occur and make a record of such occurrence.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT — A written report of disruptive conduct
on a form to be prescribed therefor, to be completed by the police who
actually investigate an alleged incident of disruptive conduct and which
shall be maintained by the Borough's Code Enforcement Officer.
DWELLING — A building having one or more dwelling units.
GUEST — A person on the premises with the actual or implied consent of
the occupant.
ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES — The occupant shall not engage in nor tolerate
nor permit others on the premises to engage in any conduct declared
illegal under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code (18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.)
or the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act (35 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 780-101 et seq.).
LANDLORD — One or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested
all or part of the legal title of the premises, or all or part of the beneficial
ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises,
including a mortgage holder in possession of the regulated rental unit (same
as "owner").
MANAGER — An adult individual designated by the owner of a regulated
rental unit. The manager shall be the agent of the owner for the service of
process and receiving notices or demands and to perform the obligation of
the owner under this chapter and under rental agreements with occupants.
MULTIPLE-UNIT DWELLING — A building containing three or more
independent dwelling units, including, but not limited to, double houses,
§ 175-1 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 175-1
173:209
row houses, townhouses, condominiums, apartment houses and conversion
apartments.
OCCUPANCY LICENSE — The license issued to the owner of a regulated
rental units under this chapter, which is required for the lawful rental and
occupancy of a regulated rental unit.
OCCUPANT — An individual who resides in a regulated rental unit, whether
or not he or she is the owner thereof, with whom a legal relationship with
the owner/landlord is established by a written lease or by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
OWNER — One of more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested all
or part of the legal title to the premises, or all or part of the beneficial
ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises,
including a mortgage holder in possession of a regulated rental unit.
OWNER-OCCUPIED DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit in which the
owner resides on a regular, permanent basis.
PEACEFUL ENJOYMENT — The occupant shall conduct himself or herself
and require other persons, including, but not limited to, guests on the
premises and within his or her regulated rental unit with his or her consent,
to conduct themselves in a manner that will not disturb the peaceful
enjoyment of adjacent or nearby dwellings by the persons occupying same.
PERSON — A natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association, limited partnership, trust or any other entity.
POLICE — The police Department of the Borough of Monaca or any properly
authorized member or officer thereof or any other law enforcement agency
having jurisdiction within the Borough of Monaca.
PREMISES — Any parcel of real property in the Borough, including the land
and all buildings and appurtenant structures or appurtenant elements on
which one or more regulated rental units is located.
REGULATED RENTAL UNIT — Any dwelling unit that is rented, leased, let
out or otherwise permitted to be occupied by a person(s) other than the
owner. Vacant dwelling units are classified as regulated rental units.
RENTAL AGREEMENT — A written agreement between owner/landlord and
occupant/tenant supplemented by the addendum82 embodying the terms
and conditions concerning the use and occupancy of a specified regulated
rental unit or premises.
RESIDENTIAL USE — The occupant shall, unless otherwise permitted by
applicable law or ordinance, occupy or use his or her regulated rental unit
for no other purpose than as a residence.
TENANT — An individual who resides in a regulated rental unit, whether
or not he or she is the owner thereof with whom a legal relationship with
the owner/landlord is established by a written lease or by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (same as "occupant").
82.Editor's Note: A copy of the addendum is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 175-1 MONACA CODE § 175-1
173:210
UNRELATED — Of or pertaining to two or more persons not related to one
another through blood to the level of second cousins, adoption or marriage.
§ 175-2. Duties of owner.
A. General.
(1) It shall be the duty of the every owner to keep and maintain
regulated rental units in compliance with all applicable codes and
provisions of all other applicable state laws and regulations and
Borough ordinances and to keep such property in good and safe
condition.
(2) As provided for in this chapter, every owner shall be responsible for
regulating the proper and lawful use and maintenance of every
dwelling which he, she or it owns. As provided for in this chapter,
every owner shall also be responsible for regulating the conduct
and activities of the occupants of every regulated rental unit which
he, she or it owns in the Borough, which conduct or activity takes
place at such regulated rental unit or its premises.
(3) In order to achieve those ends, every owner of a regulated rental
unit shall regulate the conduct and activity of the occupants
thereof, both contractually and through enforcement, as more fully
set forth below.
(4) This section shall not be construed as diminishing or relieving, in
any way, the responsibility of occupants and their guests for their
conduct or activity, nor shall it be construed as an assignment,
transfer or projection over or onto any owner or any responsibility
or liability which occupants or their guests may have as a result of
their conduct or activity under any private cause of action, civil or
criminal enforcement proceeding, or criminal law, nor shall this
section be construed so as to require an owner to indemnify or
defend occupants or their guests when any such action or
proceeding is brought against the occupant based upon the
occupant's conduct or activity. Nothing herein is intended to
impose any additional civil/criminal liability upon owners other
than that which is imposed by existing law.
(5) This chapter is not intended to, nor shall its effect be, to limit any
other enforcement remedies which may be available to the
Borough against an owner, occupant or guest thereof.
B. Designation of manager. Every owner who is not a full-time resident of
the Borough or elsewhere in Beaver County, Pennsylvania, shall
designate a manager who shall reside in Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
If the owner is a corporation, a manager shall be required if an officer of
the corporation does not reside in Beaver County, Pennsylvania. The
officer shall perform the same functions as a manager. If the owner is a
partnership, a manager shall be required if a partner does not reside in
§ 175-1 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 175-2
173:211
Beaver County, Pennsylvania. Said partner shall perform the same
function as a manager. The manager shall be the agent of the owner
for service of process and receiving of notices and demands, as well
as for performing the obligations of the owner under this chapter
and under rental agreements with occupants. The identity, address
and telephone number(s) of a person who is designated as manager
hereunder shall be provided by the owner or manager to the Borough,
and such information shall be kept current and updated as it changes.
C. Disclosure.
(1) The owner or manager shall disclose to the occupant, in writing, on
or before the commencement of the tenancy:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the manager, if
applicable; and
(b) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
premises.
(2) Before an occupant initially enters into or renews a rental
agreement for a regulated rental unit, the owner or manager shall
furnish the occupant with the most recent inspection report
relating to the property.
D. Maintenance of premises.
(1) The owner shall maintain the premises in compliance with the
codes of the Borough and shall regularly perform all routine
maintenance, including lawn mowing and ice and snow removal
and shall promptly make any and all repairs necessary to fulfill this
obligation.
(2) The owner and occupant may agree that the occupant is to perform
specific repairs, maintenance tasks, alterations or remodeling. In
such case, however, such agreement between the owner and
occupant must be in writing. Such an agreement may be entered
into between the owner and occupant only if:
(a) The agreement of the parties is entered into in good faith and
not for the purpose of evading the obligations of the owner or
occupant; and
(b) The agreement does not diminish or affect the obligation of the
owner to other occupants in the premises.
(3) In no case shall the existence of any agreement between owner and
occupant relieve an owner of any responsibility under this chapter
or other ordinances or codes for the maintenance of the premises.
E. Written rental agreements.
§ 175-2 MONACA CODE § 175-2
173:212
§ 175-3. Duties of occupant.
(1) All rental agreements for regulated dwelling units shall be in
writing and shall be supplemented with the addendum.83 No oral
leases and no oral modifications thereof are permitted. All
disclosure and information required to be given to occupants by the
owner shall be furnished before the signing of the rental
agreement. The owner shall provide the occupant with copies of
the rental agreement and addendum upon execution.
(2) Terms and conditions. Owner and occupant may include in a rental
agreement terms and conditions not prohibited by this chapter or
other applicable ordinances, regulations and laws, including rent,
terms of the agreement and other provisions governing the rights
and obligations of the parties.
(3) Prohibited provisions. Except as otherwise provided by this
chapter, no rental agreement may provide that the occupant or
owner agrees to waive or to forego rights or remedies under this
chapter. A provision prohibited by this subsection included in a
rental agreement is unenforceable.
(4) Attachment of article to rental agreement. Following the effective
date of this chapter, a summary hereof in a form provided to the
owner by the Borough at the time of licensing shall be attached to
each rental agreement delivered by or on behalf of an owner when
any such agreement is presented for signing to any occupant. If a
summary has been provided when the rental agreement was first
executed, a summary does not have to be provided upon renewal.
Where a rental agreement has been entered into prior to the
effective date of this article, the owner shall provide the occupants
with a copy of the summary within 60 days after enactment of this
article.
F. Complaints. The owner shall reply promptly to reasonable complaints
and inquiries from occupants.
G. Landlord/tenant Act. The owner shall comply with all provisions of the
landlord and tenant Act,84 as amended, of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
H. Common areas. Where an owner does not regulate the use of common
areas and the behavior of occupants and guests in the common areas,
the owner shall be directly responsible for the behavior of occupants
and guests in the common area as if the owner were an occupant.
83.Editor's Note: A copy of the addendum is included at the end of this chapter.
84.Editor's Note: See 68 P.S. § 250.101 et seq.
§ 175-2 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 175-3
173:213
A. General. The occupant shall comply with all obligations imposed upon
occupants by this chapter, all applicable codes and ordinances of the
Borough and all applicable provisions of state law.
B. Health and safety regulations.
(1) The maximum number of persons permitted in any regulated rental
unit at any time shall not exceed the standards outlined in the
Borough's prevailing property maintenance code section85
concerning occupant load. The maximum number of persons
permitted in the common areas of any multiple-unit dwelling at any
time shall not exceed one person for each 15 square feet of
common area on the premises.
(2) The occupant shall dispose from his or her regulated rental unit all
rubbish, garbage and other waste in a clean and safe manner
prescribed by Borough ordinance and separate and place for
collection all recyclable materials in compliance with the Borough's
Recycling Plan of Solid Waste and Recycling.86
C. Peaceful enjoyment. The occupant shall conduct himself or herself and
require other persons, including, but not limited to, guests on the
premises and within his or her regulated rental unit with his or her
consent, to conduct themselves in a manner that will not disturb the
peaceful enjoyment of the premises by others and that will not disturb
the peaceful enjoyment of adjacent or nearby dwellings by the persons
occupying the same.
D. Residential use. The occupant shall, unless otherwise permitted by
applicable law or ordinance, occupy or use his or her regulated rental
unit for no other purpose than as a residence.
E. Illegal activities. The occupant shall not engage in, nor tolerate nor
permit others on the premises to engage in any conduct declared illegal
under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code (18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or
Liquor Code (47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.) or the Controlled Substance, Drug,
Device and Cosmetic Act (35 Pa.C.S.A. § 780-101 et seq.).
F. Disruptive conduct.
(1) The occupant shall not engage in nor tolerate nor permit others on
the premises to engage in disruptive conduct or other violations of
this chapter.
(2) When police investigate an alleged incident of disruptive conduct,
he or she shall complete a disruptive conduct report upon a finding
that the reported incident did, in his or her judgment, constitute
disruptive conduct as defined herein. The information filled in on
said report shall include, if possible, the identity or identities of the
85.Editor's Note: See Ch. 169, Property Maintenance.
86.Editor's Note: See Ch. 184, Solid Waste.
§ 175-3 MONACA CODE § 175-3
173:214
§ 175-4. Registration and licensing requirements.
alleged perpetrator(s) of the disruptive conduct and all other
obtainable information, including the factual basis for the
disruptive conduct request on the prescribed form. Where the
police make such investigation, said police office shall then submit
the completed disruptive conduct report to the Code Enforcement
Office. In all cases, the Code Enforcement Office shall mail a copy
of the disruptive conduct report to the owner or manager within
three working days of the occurrence of the alleged disruptive
conduct.
(3) The third occurrence of disruptive conduct within a one-year period
could result in the Borough taking legal action which could result in
the eviction from the regulated dwelling unit and premises.
G. Compliance with rental agreement. The occupant shall comply with all
lawful provisions of the rental agreement entered into between owner
and occupant. Failure to comply may result in the eviction of the
occupant by the owner.
H. Damage to premises. The occupant shall not intentionally cause, nor
permit nor tolerate others to cause, damage to the premises. Conduct
which results in damages in excess of $500 shall be considered a
violation of this chapter.
I. Inspection of premises. The occupant shall permit inspection of the
premises by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer, or his designated
representative, at reasonable times, upon reasonable notice.
J. Fees.
K. Every person applying for a license initially shall supply all information
requested by the Borough and pay an initial license fee, and thereafter
an annual license fee, as follows: [Amended 9-12-2006 by Ord. No.
892]
Type of Rental Fee
One-family rental unit $50
Two-family rental unit $75
Multifamily, 3 to 10 $100, plus $10 per unit
Multifamily over 10 $125, plus $10 per unit
Rooming houses, dormitories and
hotels
$125, plus $10 per unit
L. Thereafter, the subsequent fee for annual licenses for one- and twofamily
units will be assessed at $25 per unit. Multifamily units, three to
10 and over 10 units, will be $20. Rooming houses, dormitories and
hotels will be $15 per unit.
§ 175-3 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 175-4
173:215
A. Registration requirements. The owners of each dwelling listed herein
will be subject to the following registration requirements and fees:
(1) Each person who allows a one-family dwelling to be occupied by a
person or persons other than the owner of the one-family dwelling,
and where this action by the owner has occurred for a period in
excess of one year, shall be required to annually file with the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer a rental unit registration.
(2) Each person who operates a two-family dwelling shall be required
to annually file with the Borough Code Enforcement Officer.
(3) The rental unit registration and accompanying registration fees
shall be filed and paid annually on or before August 31 of each year
in which the rental occurs.
B. Inspection: periodic inspection. The Borough Code Enforcement
Officer, or designated representative, shall inspect each one-family and
two-family dwelling at least once on or before the sixth anniversary of
the initial inspection following the filing of the rental unit registration.
These periodic inspections shall occur notwithstanding more frequent
inspections which may be required in the investigation of complaints
regarding the dwelling.
C. Inspection; issuance. The Borough Code Enforcement Officer, or
designated representative, shall, upon receipt of an application for a
license, inspect the rental dwelling and, in the event such rental
dwelling is in compliance with this article, the license applied for shall
be issued.
D. Noncompliance. In the event the rental dwelling is not in compliance
with the Borough's property maintenance code,87 the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer shall notify the applicant, in writing, and shall
specify the noncompliance with the property maintenance code. Upon
completion of the changes needed to achieve compliance with the
property maintenance code, the Borough Code Enforcement Officer
shall issue the license applied for.
E. Cost for missed inspection. The reasonable costs incurred by the
Borough of Monaca when an appointment for an inspection by the
Rental Registration Officer or the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Borough of Monaca is missed is a follows:
Activity
Time
(hours) Fee
Scheduling appointment and preparation
of forms
0.75 $20
Certified mailing, return receipt $5
87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 169, Property Maintenance.
§ 175-4 MONACA CODE § 175-4
173:216
Activity
Time
(hours) Fee
Appointment preparation, waiting at
property and travel to and from property
1.0 $25
Total $50
F. Multifamily dwelling display of license. Every license shall be displayed
in a conspicuous place within the multifamily dwelling.
(1) License duration. Every multifamily dwelling license shall remain
in force for one year from the date of issuance.
(2) License transfers. No license required by this article shall be
transferable unless the new owner shall give notice, in writing, to
the Borough Code Enforcement Officer within 10 days after the
transfer in any manner of ownership or control of the interest in
such multifamily dwelling. Such notice shall include the name and
address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control.
G. Violation; license revocation; notice. Whenever the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer determines that there exists a violation of the
Borough's property maintenance code,88 it shall serve notice and may
notify the owner or operator, in writing, that unless the notice of
violation is complied with, the rental dwelling licenses may be revoked.
After the expiration of the time for compliance as stated on the notice of
violation, a reinspection shall be made to determine compliance. If the
violation has not been corrected and no appeal is pending, the Borough
Code Enforcement Officer may revoke the multifamily dwelling license
and, in such event, shall serve written notice upon the owner or
operator of such action.
H. Appeal. Any person whose rental dwelling license has been revoked, or
whose application for license to operate a multifamily dwelling has
been denied, may appeal to the Board as provided in the Borough's
property maintenance code.89
I. Licensing of rooming houses, dormitories and hotels. No person shall
operate a rooming house, dormitory or hotel unless he has first
obtained from the Borough Code Enforcement Officer a license to
operate such rooming house, dormitory or hotel.
(1) Compliance with code. The Borough Code Enforcement Officer
shall not issue a license unless the rooming house, dormitory or
hotel for which the licenses is required is in compliance with the
Borough's property maintenance code.90
88.Editor's Note: See Ch. 169, Property Maintenance.
89.Editor's Note: See Ch. 169, Property Maintenance.
90.Editor's Note: See Ch. 169, Property Maintenance.
§ 175-4 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 175-4
173:217
§ 175-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 175-6. Miscellaneous provisions.
(2) Number of occupants specified. Every license shall specify the
maximum number of occupants allowed to occupy the rooming
house, dormitory or hotel. Every license shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place within the rooming house, dormitory or hotel.
A. Basis for violation. It shall be unlawful for a person, as either owner or
manager of a regulated rental unit for which a license is required, to
operate without a valid current license issued by the Borough
authorizing such operation. It shall also be unlawful for any person,
either owner or manager, to allow the number of occupants of a
regulated rental unit to exceed the maximum limit as set forth on the
license or to violate any other provision of this article. It shall be
unlawful for any occupant to violate this article.
B. Penalties. Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a summary
offense punishable, upon conviction thereof by a District Justice, by a
fine not to exceed $1,000, plus costs, or by a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 30 days. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
C. Nonexclusive remedies. The penalty provisions of this section and the
license nonrenewal, suspension and revocation procedures provided in
this chapter shall be independent, non-mutually exclusive, separate
remedies, all of which shall be available to the Borough as may be
deemed appropriate for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. The
remedies and procedures provided in this chapter for violation hereof
are not intended to supplant or replace, to any degree, the remedies
and procedures available to the Borough in the case of a violation of any
other code or ordinance of the Borough, whether or not such other code
or ordinance is referenced in this chapter and whether or not an
ongoing violation of such other code or ordinance is cited as the
underlying ground for a finding of a violation of this chapter.
A. Notices.
(1) For purposes of this chapter, any notice required hereunder to be
given to a manager shall be deemed a notice given to the owner.
(2) There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any notice required to
be given to the owner under this chapter shall have been received
by such owner if the notice was given to the owner in the manner
provided by this chapter.
(3) A claimed lack of knowledge by the owner of any violation
hereunder cited shall be no defense to license nonrenewal,
suspension or revocation proceedings as long as all notices
prerequisite to institution of such proceedings have been given and
§ 175-4 MONACA CODE § 175-6
173:218
deemed received in accordance with the applicable provisions of
this chapter.
B. Changes in ownership or occupancy. It shall be the duty of each owner
of a regulated rental unit to notify the Borough Code Enforcement
Officer, in writing, of any change in ownership of the premises or of the
number of regulated rental units on the premises. It shall be the duty of
the owner to notify the Borough Code Enforcement Officer, in writing,
of any increase in the number of occupants in any regulated rental unit
or of the changing of a dwelling unit from owner-occupied to nonowner-
occupied, which thereby transforms the dwelling into a
regulated rental unit for the purposes of this chapter.
C. Owners severally responsible. If any regulated rental unit is owned by
more than one person in any form of joint tenancy, as a partnership or
otherwise, each person shall be jointly and severally responsible for the
duties imposed under the terms of this chapter and shall be severally
subject to prosecution for the violation of this article.
§ 175-6 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 175-6
173:219
Chapter 177
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 131.
Plumbing — See Ch. 165.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 199.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
210.
Water — See Ch. 233.
Water and sewage assistance program — See
Ch. 237.
Manholes — See Ch. A252.
Fee schedule — See Ch. A256.
§ 175-6 MONACA CODE § 175-6
173:220
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 11-12-1975 as Ch. XIX, Part 2, of the 1975 Code]
§ 177-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 177-2. Applicability.
All owners of property connecting with and having use of the sewer system
or the facilities thereof and all owners of property who may hereafter
connect with and have use of the sewer system or the facilities thereof,
whether such use be direct or indirect, shall be subject to the provisions of
this article.
A. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL USER — Any establishment, whether located in or out
of a building, engaged in vending goods or services of any nature to the
public or classes of persons forming the public.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any establishment, whether located in or out of
a building, employing an annual average of five or more persons per
working day and engaged in gainful business, that is not defined as a
commercial user.
OTHER USER — Churches, clubs, organizations, groups or individual
not otherwise defined herein.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
RESIDENCE USER — The owner of a dwelling unit, portion thereof or
combination thereof having a separate water meter.
SCHOOL — The public or parochial schools of the Borough of Monaca.
SEWAGE — Liquids, solids and combinations thereof such as are
appropriately treated by the sewage treatment plant of the sewer
system.
SEWER RENTALS — The charge or fee made by the Borough of Monaca
to users of the sewer system.
SEWER SYSTEM — The sewers, sewage system or extensions thereof
and the sewage treatment plant and additions thereto, owned by
Monaca Borough Municipal Authority and operated by the Borough of
Monaca, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
SUPERINTENDENT — Such person as is the superintendent of the
sewage treatment plant.
§ 177-1 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-3
173:221
§ 177-3. Quarterly computation of rents.
All sewer rentals shall be computed at quarter-year intervals, on such dates
as will cause the period for which the charge is imposed to cover the same
calendar days for which water consumption charges for that period are
imposed.
§ 177-4. Water-consumption basis.
All sewer rentals shall be computed on the basis of water consumption
unless otherwise herein specifically provided.
§ 177-5. Determination of water consumption.
The water consumption upon which sewer rentals are based shall include
any and all metered water purchased from the Borough of Monaca or any
water obtained from any other source as determined by:
§ 177-6. Superintendent to supervise estimates.
Unless otherwise provided by amendment hereto, estimates or
measurements of water consumption shall be made under the supervision
of the superintendent.
§ 177-7. Alternate computation methods.
If a meter measuring water consumption fails to register properly, the
superintendent shall compute the sewer rental in such manner as is most
expedient and accurate under the circumstances.
§ 177-8. Residential and commercial sewer rates. [Amended
12-8-1975 by Ord. No. 700; 12-27-1983 by Ord. No. 749; 8-12-1985
by Ord. No. 759; 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 778; 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
780; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. 846; 9-25-2001 by Ord. No. 854;
12-9-2008 by Ord. No. 908; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 921; 12-28-2015
by Ord. No. 94791]
The sewer rates for residential and commercial consumers shall be billed
quarterly. Consumption will be billed as follows:
A. Meters installed and maintained by the Borough;
B. Meters installed and maintained by the user as approved by the
Borough of Monaca; or
C. Estimates or measurements made by the Borough of Monaca.
A. For 4,000 gallons or less each quarter year, the minimum charge shall
be $60, plus penalty, if applicable.
91.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2016.
§ 177-3 MONACA CODE § 177-8
173:222
§ 177-9. Industrial rates. [Amended 8-12-1985 by Ord. No. 759;
7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 778; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. 846; 2-10-2004
by Ord. No. 870; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 921; 12-28-2015 by Ord. No.
94792]
The sewer rates for industrial consumers shall be billed monthly.
Consumption will be billed as follows:
§ 177-10. School rates.
Sewer rental for a school shall be:
B. From 4,001 gallons through 300,000 gallons per quarter year, the
charge shall be $0.525 per 100 gallons plus penalty, if applicable, in
addition to the minimum charge.
C. For each 100 gallons over 300,000 gallons per quarter year, the charge
shall be $0.275 plus penalty, if applicable, in addition to the minimum
charge.
D. A penalty of 10% of the minimum charge shall be added to the minimum
charge in full on or before the 10 days after the due date of the bill for
same.
A. For 4,000 gallons or less per month, the minimum charge shall be $60,
plus penalty, if applicable.
B. From 4,001 gallons through 300,000 gallons per month, the charge
shall be $0.525 per 100 gallons, plus penalty, if applicable, in addition
to the minimum charge.
C. For each 100 gallons over 300,000 gallons per month, the charge shall
be $0.275, plus penalty if applicable, in addition to the minimum
charge.
D. A penalty of 10% of the minimum charge shall be added to the minimum
charge in full on or before 10 days after the due date of the bill for
same.
A. A minimum rate of $0.95 per pupil and plus per teacher per quarter
year, plus penalty if applicable. [Amended 12-8-1975 by Ord. No.
700]
B. The number of pupils per quarter shall be based upon the average
number of pupils attending during the school days of the quarter
involved. For the purpose of sewer rental, teachers and employees of
the school shall be counted with the pupils.
C. Whenever sewer service begins after the first day or terminates before
the last day of any calendar quarter, the per-pupil sewer rentals for
such period shall be a pro rata amount for that portion of the period
92.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2016.
§ 177-8 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-10
173:223
§ 177-11. Rates for other users.
Sewer rates for other users shall be as set forth for a resident user.
§ 177-12. Additional classifications and reclassifications authorized.
Additional classifications and reclassifications of users of the sewer system
may be set by ordinance of the Borough of Monaca from time to time.
§ 177-13. Changes in rates authorized.
Changes in the rates of sewer rentals may be established by ordinance of
the Borough of Monaca at any time.
§ 177-14. Quarterly payments.
Sewer rentals shall be a charge payable each quarter year.
§ 177-15. Combined sewer and water billing; failure to pay.
All charges or sewer rental shall be combined with charges for consumption
of water furnished by the Borough of Monaca to the user of the sewer as is
provided for in the Act of April 14, 1949, P.L. 482, Section 3, as amended.93
The charge due for sewer rental and the charge for water consumption
shall both be for the same period of calendar days. The charge due for
sewer rental shall be shown separately from the charge due for water
consumption, provided that the two charges shall be considered as one bill.
Failure to pay the combined charge shall be construed as failure to pay the
charge for water.
§ 177-16. Superintendent of sewage treatment plant.
during which said school is served; provided, however, that, in making
any such apportionment, a fraction of a calendar month amounting to
1/2 or more of a calendar month shall be counted as a full month and
a fraction of a calendar month amounting to less than 1/2 of a calendar
month shall be disregarded.
D. A penalty of 10% of the minimum rate shall be added to the minimum
rate upon failure to pay the minimum rate in full on or before 10 days
after the date of the bill for the same.
A. Appointment and tenure of superintendent. The superintendent of the
sewage treatment plant shall be such individual as is designated by
resolution of the Council of the Borough of Monaca. His term of office
shall continue for such time as is set by said resolution.
B. Authority of superintendent. The superintendent of the sewage
treatment plant shall be in charge of the use, maintenance, control,
repair and functioning of the sewer system.
93.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 2261.
§ 177-10 MONACA CODE § 177-16
173:224
§ 177-17. Rules and regulations.
C. Duties. The duties of the superintendent shall include:
(1) Charge of sewer system.
(2) Prompt correction of all interference seriously impeding flow of
sewage in any portion of the sewer system to the sewage treatment
plant and prompt correction of any matter seriously curtailing the
effective functioning of the sewage treatment plant.
(3) Computation of sewer rentals.
(4) Collection of sewer rentals.
(5) Accounting of sewer rentals.
(6) Enforcement of this article.
(7) Issuance of permits to tap into the sewer system.
(8) A proposed annual budget for coming year to be submitted to the
Council on or before 60 days prior to the beginning of the fiscal
year set by the Council of the Borough of Monaca.
(9) Such other duties as may be set by the Council of the Borough of
Monaca.
D. Reports by superintendent. The superintendent shall submit duplicate
reports to the Council of the Borough of Monaca and to the Monaca
Borough Municipal Authority not less than once each quarter, wherein
is set forth:
(1) Sewer rental collections for the preceding quarter.
(2) Names of persons delinquent more than one quarter on sewer
rentals and the amount of each such delinquency.
(3) Action taken on each delinquency listed in Subsection D(2) above.
(4) All expenditures for the preceding quarter.
(5) A statement of the amount of any anticipated deficit on the annual
revenue requirements or a statement that no such deficit is then
anticipated.
(6) A statement regarding any item then foreseeable as creating an
emergency situation for which action should be begun prior to the
next quarterly report or a statement that no such item is then
foreseeable.
(7) Any comment appropriate in the opinion of the superintendent.
(8) Such other items as may be requested by the Council of the
Borough of Monaca or the Monaca Borough Municipal Authority.
§ 177-16 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-17
173:225
§ 177-18. Violations and penalties.
A. Access to industrial establishments. The superintendent or his
designated agent shall have access at all times to industrial
establishments and any meters used for establishing or determining
water consumption, water excluded from the sewer system or sewage
and/or wastewaters discharged to the sewer system.
B. Screening of drains may be required. Upon request of the
superintendent, any user of the sewer system shall install fine screens
to remove husks, hulls, vegetable skins and peelings, threads, lint,
grease and any and all such materials found by the superintendent to
overload, impair the efficiency of or cause difficulties in the operation of
the sewer system.
C. Prevention of harmful discharge to sewer system. The superintendent
shall have the right to refuse connection to a Borough sewer or to
compel discontinuance of use of a sewer or to compel pretreatment of
industrial wastes by any industry in order to prevent discharge into the
sewer such waste as is found to be harmful to the sewer system or to
have a deleterious effect on the sewage treatment or sludge handling
process.
D. Holding tanks required for certain industries. Industries discharging
wastes in excess of 50,000 gallons per day, having large variations in
the rate of waste discharged, shall install suitable holding tanks for
equalizing the rate of discharge uniformly over the entire 24 hours of
the day. The peak rate of discharge for any industry shall not exceed
150% of the average daily discharge at any time.
E. Nonliability of superintendent, Borough or Municipal Authority. Neither
the superintendent nor the Borough of Monaca nor the Monaca
Borough Municipal Authority nor any combination of them shall be
responsible for any stoppage, breakdown or obstruction of any sort
which stops or hinders the flow of sewage from its source or its
entrance into the sewer system.
F. Certain substances not to be discharged into sewer. No user of the
sewer system shall discharge therein, other than through normal
household usage, any tars, acids, gasoline or other volatile liquids,
grease or any substances found by the superintendent to impair the
effectiveness of the sewage treatment plant or found by the
superintendent to be dangerous when confined within the sewer
system.
G. Discharge of storm- or drainage waters restricted. No stormwaters or
drainage waters shall be discharged into the sewer system by any user
without the approval of the superintendent.
A. Denial of water to violators. The superintendent is authorized, at his
discretion, to refuse water supplies to any user of the sewer system who
§ 177-17 MONACA CODE § 177-18
173:226
violates or fails to conform to any part of this article or of such
amendments thereto as may be made from time to time.
B. Penalty for violation. The superintendent is authorized at his discretion
to file charges against any user of the sewer system who violates or fails
to conform to any part of this article or such amendments as may be
made from time to time. Upon conviction thereof such person shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Code Enforcement.
[Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
C. Right to file lien. Nothing contained in this article shall in any way be
construed as a waiver of the right of the Borough of Monaca to file a lien
against the property supplied with service by the sewer system for
unpaid sewer rentals or other charges made in connection with sewage
disposal, but on the contrary, the Borough of Monaca expressly reserves
said right and hereby declares the same to be a lien against the
particular property to which sewage disposal service is furnished by the
Borough of Monaca or the Monaca Borough Municipal Authority, as
provided by the Acts of Assembly in such cases specified.
D. When bills payable; water supply shutoff for delinquency. All charges
shown on the bill for combined sewer rental and water consumption
shall be paid in full each quarter year or before 30 days after the date of
the bill for the same. The Borough Council of the Borough of Monaca
does hereby delegate to the Borough Manager of the Borough of
Monaca the authority to shut off the supply of water of persons
delinquent in payment of such charges. The Borough Manager is
hereby directed by the Borough Council of the Borough of Monaca that
he shall shut off the water supply to persons who do neglect or fail to
pay for a period of 30 or more days from the date of the bill for the same
charge as stated on said bill. The water supply so turned off shall not be
turned on until all delinquent payment, plus lawful interest from the
date of shutting off of water, plus any service charge lawfully connected
therewith, are paid in full.
§ 177-18 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-18
173:227

ARTICLE II
Connections and Uses
[Adopted 11-12-1975 by Ord. No. 690]
§ 177-19. Definitions; word usage.
§ 177-20. Connection required; costs. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord.
No. 822]
Every person who shall own property abutting or adjoining any portion
of a street in the Borough of Monaca in which there shall be a sanitary
sewer owned or constructed by the Monaca Borough Municipal Authority
shall, within the time limit hereinafter prescribed, be required to connect
the buildings erected on such property to such sewer for the purpose of
discharging there into all household wastes, waste liquid and other matter
customarily discharged into the sanitary sewer system. The cost of making
such connection shall be paid by such property owner. Such connections
shall be made by running a lateral sewer from the main sewer to the
buildings upon such property. No connection shall be made until a tapping
permit shall be obtained by such property owner. The work of making such
connection shall be in conformity with all regulations and requirements of
the Borough, and no tap shall be covered until written authorization to do
so shall have been obtained from the Borough Manager.
§ 177-21. Notice; failure to comply.
Every owner of property abutting upon any portion of a street in the
Borough of Monaca in which there shall be a sanitary sewer owned or
constructed by the Monaca Borough Municipal Authority shall be given 90
days' notice from the Borough Secretary to connect all buildings on such
property to the sanitary sewer, and, if he shall fail to make such connection
within such ninety-day period, the Borough shall have the authority to make
the same and to collect the cost thereof from such property owner by filing
a municipal claim or in an action in assumpsit as provided by law.
A. The following words, as used in this article, shall have the meanings
hereby respectively ascribed thereto:
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
STREET — Any public way in the Borough of Monaca intended for
vehicular use, whether named and designated as a street, road, lane,
alley, drive or otherwise.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
§ 177-19 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-22
173:229
§ 177-22. Permit required.
No person shall make any connection with any sanitary sewer until he shall
have made application for and obtained a sewer tapping permit, nor shall
be open any street in order to make any connection with the sanitary sewer
until he shall have obtained the required street opening permit.94
§ 177-23. Application; contents; fees.95 [Amended 2-15-1977 by Ord.
No. 467-A; 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822; 12-10-2002 by Ord. No. 864]
Every property owner desiring or required to make a connection with the
sanitary sewer system of the Borough of Monaca shall make an application
with the Borough Manager for a permit. The Manager, upon being satisfied
that the proposed sewer connection shall be in conformity with this article
and all other rules, regulations and requirements of the Borough of Monaca
applicable thereto, shall issue to the applicant a sewer tapping permit, upon
payment by the applicant of all applicable and prevailing fees, which shall
be for use of the Borough.
A. Customer facilities.
(1) A customer facilities fee is hereby imposed against each
residential, commercial and industrial unit connected or required
to be connected to the Borough's sewer system to cover the costs
associated with the installation of customer-owned facilities from
the property line to the unit or structure to be served. The facilities
referred to herein shall not include the sewer service line on the
customer's property, which line shall be installed and maintained
by and be the responsibility of the customer. The Borough does,
however, perform an inspection of the service line extension for
compliance with its rules and regulations, the labor and cost for
which shall be part of the fee.
(2) The amount of the customer facilities fee shall be set from time to
time by resolution of the Monaca Borough Council.
B. Connection fee.
(1) A connection tee is hereby imposed against each residential,
commercial and industrial unit connected or required to be
connected to the Borough's sewer system to cover the cost of the
facilities installed by the Borough from the system's trunk sewer to
the property line of the property or unit to be served. A typical
installation would include a wye at the main sanitary sewer line and
all necessary piping and fittings to bring the line to the property
line or edge of the sanitary sewer right of way line.
(2) To the extent that the Borough does not install the connection
previously mentioned then no connection fee would be due.
94.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. IV, Excavations.
95.Editor's Note: See Ch. A256, Fee schedule.
§ 177-22 MONACA CODE § 177-23
173:230
(3) To the extent that the Borough performs an inspection of the
connection previously mentioned for compliance with its rules and
regulations, the labor cost associated therewith shall be part of this
fee.
(4) The amount of the connection fee shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the Monaca Borough Council.
C. Tapping fee.
(1) A tapping fee is hereby imposed against each residential,
commercial and industrial unit connected or required to be
connected to the Borough's sewer system. The purpose of the
tapping fee is to recover the capacity of the collection facilities
required to serve each new customer. It shall have four component
parts: capacity component, collection component, special purpose
component and reimbursement component. The tapping fee
authorized by this article and promulgated by any resolution
adopted pursuant hereto shall not include the cost of operation and
maintenance.
(a) Capacity component. The capacity component shall provide for
cost sharing of general sewer system facilities built to supply
both existing and future service needs. Such facilities would
include but not be limited to treatment plants, detention
facilities, pump stations, interceptions and related
appurtenances. This component is restricted to the cost of such
facilities, less any outstanding debt and contributions-in-aid-of
construction.
(b) Collection component. The collection component shall be the
amount charged for the cost of collection facilities such as
trunk sewers and manholes. This component is restricted to
the cost of such facilities, less any contributions-in-aid-of
construction.
(c) Special purpose component. The special purpose component
shall serve as a reimbursement of costs applicable to a
particular group of customers, or serving a particular purpose
or servicing a particular area.
(d) Reimbursement component. The reimbursement component
shall serve to collect tapping fees from new connections to
facilities constructed by parties other than the Borough (i.e.,
developers). This component shall apply to sanitary sewer
extensions made by a developer which serve or can serve
homes outside the development. Therefore, where a property
owner or developer constructs or causes to be constructed at
his expense any extension of the sewer system of the Borough,
the Borough shall provide for the reimbursement to the
property owner or developer when the owner of another
property not in the development for which the extension was
§ 177-23 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-23
173:231
constructed connects a service line directly to the extension
within 10 years of the date of the dedication of the extension
to the Borough in accordance with the following provisions:
[1] Such reimbursement shall be equal to the distribution or
collection part of each tapping fee collected as a result of
subsequent connections. The Borough shall be entitled to
deduct from each reimbursement payment an amount
equal to 5% which shall be deemed to represent the
appropriate charge for administrative expenses and
services rendered in calculating, collecting, monitoring
and disbursing the reimbursement payments to the
property owner or developer entitled thereto.
[2] Reimbursement shall be limited to those lines which have
not previously been paid for by the Borough.
[3] The Borough shall, in the preparation of the necessary
reimbursement agreement with the property owner or
owners or developer(s) for whose benefit reimbursement
will be provided, attach as an exhibit an itemized listing of
all sewer facilities for which reimbursement shall be
provided.
[4] The total reimbursement to which a property owner or
owners or developer(s) shall be entitled shall not exceed
the cost of all labor and material. engineering design
charges, the cost of performance and maintenance bonds,
Borough review and inspection charges, as well as flushing
and televising charges and any and all charges involved in
the acceptance and dedication of such facilities by the
Borough, less the amount which would be chargeable to
such property owner or developer based upon the
Borough's collection and distribution tapping fees which
would be applicable to all lands of the property owner or
developer served directly or indirectly through such
extension if the property owner or developer did not fund
the extension.
[5] The Borough shall be required to notify by certified mail,
to their last known address, the property owner or owners
or developer(s) for whose benefit such reimbursement
shall apply within 30 days of the Borough's receipt of any
such reimbursement payment. In the event that the
property owner(s) or developer(s) have not claimed a
reimbursement payment within 120 days of the mailing of
the notice, the payment shall revert to and become the
sole property of the Borough with no further obligation on
the part of the Borough to refund the payment to the
property owner(s) or developer(s).
§ 177-23 MONACA CODE § 177-23
173:232
§ 177-24. Separate sewer required.
Every such property shall be connected separately with the sanitary sewer
through a house connection branch directly opposite the building or nearest
in a downstream direction. Grouping of buildings upon one house sewer
shall not be permitted, except with special permission of the Borough
Council.
§ 177-25. Prohibited discharges.
Oil, grease, tar, gasoline or other liquids that are not of the usual household
nature, including stormwater or drainage resulting from rain or snow, shall
not be emptied into or permitted to enter the sanitary sewer. Violation of
any provision of this section shall subject the owner of the property from
which any such unlawful discharge emanates to the penalties hereinafter
prescribed.
§ 177-26. Private sewer disposal.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or maintain any privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool or similar receipt for human excrement upon any premises
from which connection with the sanitary sewer shall have been made. It
shall be the responsibility of the owner of every such property, within 45
days after connection with a sewer to abandon, cleanse and fill any steel
vault or tank, under such direction and supervision as may be required by
the Borough Council.
§ 177-27. Connection of private system to sanitary sewer
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool or similar receptacle for human excrement with the sanitary sewer
system of the Borough.
§ 177-28. Abandonment of private sewer; filling.
Any privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other receptacle, abandoned
pursuant to this article, which at any future time shall constitute a nuisance
or a menace to health, shall be cleansed and filled within 30 days of notice
to do so from the Borough Council, to the owner of the property upon which
such receptacle shall be located; and, upon failure of any property owner
to comply with such notice, within such time limit, such receptacle shall
(2) The amount of the tapping fee as comprised by its four component
parts shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Monaca
Borough Council.
D. Fee schedule. The fee schedule appearing in Chapter A256 of the Code
of the Borough of Monaca shall be amended to reflect any fees imposed
by any resolutions adopted pursuant to the authority granted by this
article.
§ 177-23 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-28
173:233
be cleansed and filled under the direction of the Borough Council, at the
expense of the owner of such property.
§ 177-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person who shall violate or fall to conform to any provision of this
article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Code
Enforcement.
§ 177-28 MONACA CODE § 177-29
173:234
ARTICLE III
Wastewater Systems
[Adopted 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 753-A]
§ 177-30. Purpose; applicability.
§ 177-31. Definitions; word usage.
A. This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for
the Borough of Monaca and enables the Borough to comply with all
applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of
1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403).
B. The objectives of this article are to:
(1) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge.
(2) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will pass through the system
inadequately treated into receiving waters or the atmosphere or
otherwise be incompatible with the system.
(3) Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system.
(4) Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal
wastewater system.
C. This article provides for the regulation of direct contributors to the
municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits to
certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general
requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and
enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing
customers' capacity will not be preempted and provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein.
D. This article shall apply to the Borough of Monaca and to persons
outside the Borough who are, by contract or agreement with the
Borough, users of the Borough system. This article is a supplement to
Article I, as amended. Except as otherwise provided herein, the
superintendent of the wastewater treatment plant of the Borough of
Monaca shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
article.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise the following terms
and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
§ 177-30 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-31
173:235
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Director in an NPDES state with an
approved state pretreatment program and the administrator of the
EPA in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state
pretreatment program.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER —
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure, five days at 20° C., expressed in terms of weight
and concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)].
BOROUGH — The Borough of Monaca or the Borough Council of
Monaca.
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
of a user to the Borough of Monaca.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — The National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or Pretreatment Standard.
COLOR — The optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum
absorption, relative to distilled water. One-hundred-percent transmittal
is equivalent to zero-and-zero-tenths optical density.
An authorized representative of an industrial user may be:
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice
president, if the industrial user is a corporation.
(a)
A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship respectively.
(b)
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated
above if such representative is responsible for the overall
operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge
originates.
(c)
(1)
If the industrial user is a federal, state or local governmental
facility, an "authorized representative" shall mean a director or
highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility or his/
her designee.
(2)
The individuals described above may designate another authorized
representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization
specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall
operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or
having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company and the written authorization is submitted to Borough.
(3)
§ 177-31 MONACA CODE § 177-31
173:236
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — The sample resulting from the combination of
individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals, based on an
increment of either flow or time.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration or to which the only pollutant
added is heat.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — Refers to the approval authority defined
hereinabove or the superintendent if the Borough has an approved
pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The United
States Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the
term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other
duly authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such
source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with
Section 307 of the Act.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on
a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and
without consideration of time.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks, such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuumpump
tank trucks.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of
nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section
307(b) or (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), into the Borough (including
holding tank waste discharged into the system).
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge which does not
constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant
to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT —
The maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be
discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or
composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and
the duration of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the
POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes,
use or disposal and, therefore, is a cause of a violation of the Borough's
NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
§ 177-31 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-31
173:237
in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions
or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local
regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II commonly referred to as the
"Resource Conversation and Recovery Act (RCRA)";96 any state
regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic
Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and
Sanctuaries Act.
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood by-products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts,
fomites, etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes,
potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulations on containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with
Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347) which applies to a
specific category of industrial users.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or
NPDES - — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the
authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5 and which
appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable
to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located;
(a)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge
of pollutants at an existing source; or
(b)
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent
factors, such as the extent to which the new facility is
(c)
(1)
96.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 755.1 et seq.
§ 177-31 MONACA CODE § 177-31
173:238
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling which
does not come into direct contact with any raw material intermediate
product, waste product or finished product.
PASS THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the Borough's NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include
the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural where indicated
by the context.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as
the existing source, should be considered.
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
resulted in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or
institution meeting the criteria of Subsection (1)(b) or (c) above
of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing
process or production equipment.
(2)
Construction of a new source, as defined under this definition, has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment;
[1]
Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly
or installation of "new source" facilities or equipment; or
[2]
(a)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase
or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering and
design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this definition.
(b)
(3)
§ 177-31 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-31
173:239
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge munitions, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and
agricultural waste discharged into water.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That part of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such
pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained
by physical, chemical or biological processes, by process changes or by
other means except diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless
allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national
pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS — Prohibitive
discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local
limits.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED
DISCHARGES — Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances. These prohibitions appear in § 177-33 of this article.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW), MONACA,
PENNSYLVANIA — A treatment works, as defined by Section 212 of
the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned in this instance by the
Borough. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to
the POTW treatment plant but does not include pipes, sewers or other
conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the
purposes of this article, POTW shall also include any sewers that convey
wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the Borough of Monaca
who are, by contract or agreement with the Borough of Monaca, users
of the Borough of Monaca's POTW.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE — Any sewage from holding tanks, such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
SEWAGE — Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.)
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL — Applies to industrial users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards and any other industrial user that
discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) or more of
process wastewater, contributes a process waste stream which makes
up 5% or more of the average dry-weather hydraulic or organic capacity
of the treatment plant or is designated as significant by the Borough
§ 177-31 MONACA CODE § 177-31
173:240
on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement.
SLUG LOAD — Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which
could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in
§ 177-33 of this article or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic
nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a
noncustomary batch discharge.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1972.
STATE — The State of Pennsylvania or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.97
SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated by the Borough to
supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who
is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article or his
duly authorized representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of the Clean
Water Act, Section 307(a), or other acts.
TREATMENT PLAN EFFLUENT — Any discharge of pollutants from the
POTW into waters of the state.
USERS — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the Borough's POTW.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions, together with what may be present, whether treated or
untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMIT — As set forth in § 177-41B of
this article.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT — That
portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment of sewage and
industrial waste.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourse, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
97.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 199, Stormwater Management.
§ 177-31 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-31
173:241
§ 177-32. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
l Liter
mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW Publicly owned treatment works (Monaca, Pennsylvania)
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
USC United States Code
TSS Total suspended solids
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
§ 177-33. General discharge prohibitions.
No user shall contribute or cause to be contribute, directly or indirectly,
any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or
performance of the Borough. These general prohibitions apply to all such
users of a Borough whether or not the user is subject to National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other national, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the
following substances to any Borough:
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or
any portion thereof.
B. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
A. Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the municipal
wastewater collection and POTW, including but not limited to waste
streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. (60° C.) using
the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
B. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in
a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater
treatment facilities, such as but not limited to grease, garbage with
particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues,
paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood,
§ 177-31 MONACA CODE § 177-33
173:242
feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal,
glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops,
wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from
refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding
or polishing wastes.
C. Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 10.5 or
otherwise causing structural damage to the POTW or equipment or
endangering Borough personnel. [Amended 8-14-2001 by Ord. No.
853]
D. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either
singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with
any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the Borough or
to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment
standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any
pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act.
E. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either singly
or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public
nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance and repair.
F. Any substance which may cause the Borough's effluent or any other
product of the Borough, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the
Borough cause the Borough to be in noncompliance with sludge use or
disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section
405 of the Act or any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting a
sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal
Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state criteria
applicable to the sludge management method being used.
G. Any substance which will cause the Borough to violate its NPDES and/
or state disposal system permit or the receiving-water quality
standards.
H. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment
process, such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions.
I. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the Borough treatment plant resulting in interference, but in
no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the
Borough which exceeds 40° C. (104° F.) unless the Borough treatment
plant is designed to accommodate such temperature.
J. Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding
pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or
pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
§ 177-33 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-33
173:243
§ 177-34. Federal categorical pretreatment standards.
The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards found at 40 CFR Chapter
I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, are hereby incorporated herein as
though more fully set forth.
§ 177-35. Specific pollutant limitations. [Amended 8-14-2001 by
Ord. No. 853]
pollutants, will cause interference with either the POTW or any
wastewater treatment or sludge process or which will constitute a
hazard to humans or animals.
K. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such
half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the
superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations.
L. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public
nuisance.
M. Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated
by the Borough.
N. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil
origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
O. Any discharge of fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin
beyond the limit of 100 mg/l.
P. Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
A. The Borough hereby adopts the pretreatment program local limits as
developed from time to time and accepted by the USEPA. The
applicable limits shall be individually allocated in each user's sewer use
permit. Allocations shall be made at the discretion of the Borough,
while maintaining appropriate reserves. Limits appearing in user
permits shall be enforceable local limits. Any violation of the permitted
limit shall be considered a violation of the Borough's ordinance.
[Amended 10-13-2009 by Ord. No. 913]
B. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the
aforesaid limits. Concentrations apply at the point where the
wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic
substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. At his
discretion, the Superintendent may impose mass limitations in addition
to or in place of the concentration-based limitations above.
§ 177-33 MONACA CODE § 177-36
173:244
§ 177-36. Amendments; more stringent standards.
The Borough reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges
to the POTW if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented
in §§ 177-30 through 177-32 of this article or the general and specific
prohibitions in §§ 177-33 through 177-38 of this article.
§ 177-37. Special agreements.
The Borough reserves the right to enter into special agreements with
industrial users, setting out special terms under which they may discharge
to the POTW. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with
a pretreatment standard or requirement. However, the industrial user may
request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.15. They may also request a variance from the categorical
pretreatment standard from EPA. Such a request will be approved only
if the industrial user can prove that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when
establishing that pretreatment standard. An industrial user requesting a
fundamentally different factor variance must comply with the procedural
and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13.
§ 177-38. Dilution.
No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any
way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation
unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or
requirement. The superintendent may impose mass limitations on industrial
users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards
or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate.
§ 177-39. Accidental discharge/slug control plans.
The superintendent may require any industrial user to develop and
implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. At least once every
two years, the superintendent shall evaluate whether each significant
industrial user needs such a plan. Any industrial user required to develop
and implement an accidental discharge/control slug plan shall submit a plan
which addresses, at a minimum, the following:
A. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges.
B. Description of stored chemicals.
C. Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or
slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge
§ 177-36 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-39
173:245
§ 177-40. Fees.98
§ 177-41. Administration.
which would violate any of the prohibited discharges in § 177-33A of
this article.
D. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include but are not limited to inspection
and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials,
loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker
training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents) and/or
measures and equipment for emergency response.
E. Industrial users shall provide notice of planned changes that could
increase the potential for slug discharges to occur in the sanitary
collection system. Examples include, but are not limited to, changed
treatment processes, changed floor drains, changed chemical storage
areas, etc. [Added 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 896]
A. It is the purpose of this article to provide for the recovery of costs from
users of the Borough's wastewater disposal system for the
implementation of the program established herein. The applicable
charges or fees shall be set forth in the Borough's schedule of charges
and fees, to be adopted by resolution:
(1) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
Borough's pretreatment program.
(2) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures.
(3) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction.
(4) Fees for permit applications.
(5) Fees for filing appeals.
(6) Fees for consistent removal (by the Borough) of pollutants
otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards.
(7) Other fees as the Borough may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
B. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are
separate from all other fees chargeable by the Borough.
A. Discharge permit required. It shall be unlawful to discharge without a
Borough permit to any natural outlet within the Borough of Monaca or
in any area under the jurisdiction of said Borough and/or to the Borough
98.Editor's Note: See Ch. A256, Fee Schedule.
§ 177-39 MONACA CODE § 177-41
173:246
any wastewater except as authorized by the superintendent in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. Wastewater contribution permits.
(1) General permits. All significant users proposing to connect to or to
contribute to the Borough shall obtain a wastewater discharge
permit before connecting to or contributing to the Borough. All
existing significant users connected to or contributing to the
Borough shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit within 180
days after the effective date of this article.
(2) Permit application. Users required to obtain a wastewater
contribution permit shall complete and file with the Borough an
application in the form prescribed by the Borough and
accompanied by a fee as set forth in the fee schedule resolution
adopted from time to time by the Borough Council.99 Existing users
shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 60 days
after the effective date of this article, and proposed new users shall
apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the
Borough. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in
units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following
information: [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
(a) Name, address and location (if different from the address).
(b) SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended.
(c) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not
limited to those mentioned in §§ 177-33 through 177-38 of this
article as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory.
Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g)
of the Act and contained in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended.
(d) Time and duration of contribution.
(e) Average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
(f) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and
appurtenances by the size, location and elevation.
(g) Description of activities, facilities and plan processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be
discharged.
(h) Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants
in the discharge which are limited by any Borough, state or
99.Editor's Note: See Ch. A256, Fee Schedule.
§ 177-41 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-41
173:247
federal pretreatment standards and a statement regarding
whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on
a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation
and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment
standards.
(i) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to
meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by
which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
[1] The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an
engineer, preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing a contract for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction, etc.).
[2] No increment referred to in Subsection B(2)(i)[1] shall
exceed nine months.
[3] Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule
and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a
progress report to the superintendent, including, as a
minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment
of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on
which it expects to comply with this increment of progress,
the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the user
to return the construction to the schedule established. In
no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the superintendent.
(j) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes
and rate of production.
(k) Type and amount of raw materials process (average and
maximum per day).
(l) Number and type of employees and hours of operation of plan
and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment
system.
(m) Any other information as may be deemed by the Borough to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application. The Borough will
evaluate the date furnished by the user and may require
additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the
data furnished, the Borough may issue a wastewater
§ 177-41 MONACA CODE § 177-41
173:248
§ 177-42. Application; signatures and certifications.
contribution permit subject to terms and conditions provided
herein.
A. All wastewater discharge permit applications and industrial user
reports must contain the following certification statement and be
signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather
and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons who manage the system or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted
is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete.
I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations."
B. Permit modifications. Within nine months of the promulgation of a
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater
contribution permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised
to require compliance with such standard within the time frame
prescribed by said standard. Where a user, subject to a National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an
application for a wastewater contribution permit as required by
§ 177-41B(2), the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit
within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable federal
categorical pretreatment standard the information required by
§ 177-41B(2)(h) and (i).
C. Permit contents. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable
regulations, user charges and fees established by the Borough. Permits
may contain the following:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer.
(2) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
(3) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
(4) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities.
(5) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule.
§ 177-41 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-42
173:249
(6) Compliance schedules.
(7) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports.
(8) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records, relating
to wastewater discharge as specified by the Borough, and affording
Borough access thereto.
(9) Requirements for notification of the Borough or any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change
in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being
introduced into the wastewater treatment system.
(10) Requirements for notification of slug discharges.
(11) That the permit is issued and subject to all prevailing federal, state
and local civil and criminal penalties.
(12) Requirements for the installation and operation of pretreatment
technology pollution control, best management practices (BMPs),
or construction of appropriate devices designed to protect the
POTW. [Added 10-13-2009 by Ord. No. 913]
(13) Other conditions deemed appropriate by the Borough or required
by federal statute to ensure compliance with this article. [Added
10-13-2009 by Ord. No. 913]
D. Appeals. Any person, including the industrial user, may petition the
Borough to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit
within 30 days of its issuance.
(1) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be
a waiver of the administrative appeal.
(2) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reason for this
objection and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in
the wastewater discharge permit.
E. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
F. If the Borough fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration
shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater
discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit or not to
modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final
administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
G. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint
with the Court of Common Pleas of Beaver County or any other court
having jurisdiction within 30 days.
§ 177-42 MONACA CODE § 177-42
173:250
H. Modifications to permit.
(1) The superintendent may modify the wastewater discharge permit
for good cause, including but not limited to the following:
(a) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
(b) To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial
user's operation, processes or wastewater volume or character
since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance.
(c) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized
discharge.
(d) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a
threat to the Borough's POTW, Borough's personnel or the
receiving waters.
(e) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater
discharge permit.
(f) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any
required reporting.
(g) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical
pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
(h) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit.
(i) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation
to a new owner/operator.
(2) The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge
permit modification does not stay any wastewater discharge
permit.
I. Permit revocation.
(1) Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following
reasons:
(a) Failure to notify the Borough of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge.
(b) Failure to provide prior notification to the Borough of changed
condition pursuant to § 177-43E.
(c) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application.
(d) Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
§ 177-42 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-42
173:251
§ 177-43. Reporting requirements.
(e) Tampering with monitoring equipment.
(f) Refusing to allow the Borough timely access to the facility.
(g) Failure to meet effluent limitations.
(h) Failure to pay fines.
(i) Failure to pay sewer charges.
(j) Failure to meet compliance schedules.
(k) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application.
(l) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted
facility.
(m) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article.
J. Waste discharge permits shall be voidable upon nonuser cessation of
operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge
permits are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge
permit.
K. Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not
to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a
year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply
for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of
the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may
be subject to modification by the Borough during the term of the permit
as limitations or requirements as identified in § 177-42B are modified or
other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed
changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of
change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance.
L. Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific
user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not
be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises or a new or changed operation without the approval of the
Borough. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the
terms and conditions of the existing permit.
A. Baseline monitoring reports.
(1) Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is
later, existing significant industrial users subject to such
§ 177-42 MONACA CODE § 177-43
173:252
categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall be required to submit
to the Borough a report which contains the information listed in
Subsection A(2) below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of
their discharge, new sources and sources that become industrial
users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard shall be required to submit to the Borough a report
which contains the information listed in Subsection A(2) below.
A new source shall also be required to submit to the Borough a
report which contains the information listed in Subsection A(2)
below. A new source shall also be required to report the method
of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment
standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated
flow and quantity of pollutants discharged.
(2) The industrial user shall submit the information required by this
section, including:
(a) Identifying information: the name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owners.
(b) Wastewater discharge permits: a list of any environmental
control wastewater discharge permits held by or for the
facility.
(c) Description of operations: a brief description of the nature,
average rate of production and standard industrial
classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial
user. This description should include a schematic process
diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes.
(d) Flow measurement: information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to
the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams,
as necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream
formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(e) Measurement of pollutants:
[1] Identifying the categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process.
[2] The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature
and concentration (and/or mass where required) by the
standard or by the Borough of regulated pollutants in the
discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous,
daily maximum and long-term average concentrations (or
mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall
be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed
in accordance with procedures set out in § 177-43J.
§ 177-43 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-43
173:253
[3] Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 177-43K.
[4] In cases where the standard requires compliance with a
best management practice or pollution prevention
alternative, the user shall submit documentation as
required by the Borough or the applicable standards to
determine compliance with the standard. [Added
10-13-2009 by Ord. No. 913]
(f) Certification: a statement reviewed by the industrial user's
authorized representative and certified by a qualified
professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are
being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional
operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards
and requirements.
(g) Compliance schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or (O&M)
will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the
shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide
such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion
date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance
date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the
requirements set out in § 177-41B(2) of this article.
B. Compliance schedule progress report. The following conditions shall
apply to the schedule required by § 177-43A(2)(g). The schedule shall
contain progress increments in the form of dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events
include hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and
completing construction and beginning and conducting routine
operation). No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months.
The industrial user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent
no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final
date of compliance, including, as a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay and,
if appropriate, the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to
the established schedule. In no event shall more than nine months
elapse between such progress reports to the superintendent.
C. Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source,
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the
POTW, any industrial user subject to such pretreatment standards and
requirements shall submit to the Borough a report containing the
§ 177-43 MONACA CODE § 177-43
173:254
information described in § 177-43A(2)(d), (e) and (f). For industrial
users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established
in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report
shall contain a reasonable measure of the industrial user's long-term
production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this
report shall include the industrial user's actual production during the
appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed
and certified in accordance with § 177-42A.
D. Periodic compliance reports.
(1) Any significant industrial user subject to a pretreatment standard
shall, at a frequency determined by the superintendent but in no
case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a
report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by such pretreatment standards and
the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for
the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with § 177-42A.
(2) All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial
user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement
facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean and maintained in
good working order at all times. The failure of an industrial user to
keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be
grounds for the industrial user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
(3) If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in and of
this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required
by the POTW, using the procedures prescribed in § 177-43K of this
article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the
report.
(4) In cases where the standard requires compliance with a best
management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user
shall submit documentation as required by the Borough or the
applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard.
[Added 10-13-2009 by Ord. No. 913]
E. Report of changed conditions. Each industrial user is required to notify
the superintendent of any planned significant changes to the industrial
user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or
volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change.
(1) The superintendent may require the industrial user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed
condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge
permit application under § 177-41A(2).
§ 177-43 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-43
173:255
(2) The superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit
under § 177-42 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit
under § 177-42E.
(3) No industrial user shall implement the planned changed
conditions) until and unless the superintendent has responded to
the industrial user's notice.
(4) For purposes of this requirement, flow increases of 10% or greater
and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants shall be
deemed significant.
F. Reports of potential problems.
(1) In the case of any discharge, including but not limited to accidental
discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge or a slug load which may cause
potential problems for the POTW (including a violation of the
prohibited discharge standards in § 177-33 of this article), it is the
responsibility of the industrial user to immediately telephone and
notify the Borough of the incident. This notification shall include
the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume,
if known, and corrective actions taken by the industrial user.
(2) Within five days following such discharge, the industrial user shall,
unless waived by the superintendent, submit a detailed written
report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to
be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future
occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user
of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources or
any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification
relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties or other
liability which may be imposed by this article.
(3) Failure to notify the Borough of potential problem discharges shall
be deemed a separate violation of this article.
(4) A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom
to call in the event of a discharge described in Subsection F(1)
above. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or
suffer such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.
G. Reports from nonsignificant industrial users. All industrial users not
subject to categorical pretreatment standards and not required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports
to the Borough at least twice a year (in June and December) describing
the nature, concentration and flow of pollutants required to be reported
to the Borough. All reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with § 177-42A.
§ 177-43 MONACA CODE § 177-43
173:256
H. Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling
performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the industrial user
must notify the superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of
the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and
analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the
superintendent within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.
The industrial user is not required to resample if the POTW performs
monitoring at the industrial user's at least once a month or if the POTW
performs sampling between the industrial user's initial sampling and
when the industrial user receives the results of this sampling.
I. Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.
(1) Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous
waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management
Division Director and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing,
of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261.
Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as
set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number and
the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the industrial
user discharges more than 10 kilograms of such waste per calendar
month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following
information to the extent such information is known and readily
available to the industrial user: an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged
during that calendar month and an estimation of the mass of
constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during
the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later
than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification
under this subsection needs to be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed
discharges must be submitted under § 177-43E above. The
notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants
already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of
§ 177-43D above.
(2) Discharges are exempt from the requirements of Subsection A of
this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no
more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are
acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and
261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute
hazardous wastes in a calendar month or of any quantity of acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e)
requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which
the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any
hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
(3) In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA,
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing
§ 177-43 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-43
173:257
any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user
must notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste
Division Director and state hazardous waste authorities of the
discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of
such regulations.
(4) In the case of any notification made under this section, the
industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce
the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the
degree it has determined to be economically practical.
J. Analytic requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling
techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in
an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136
does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with
procedures approved by the EPA.
K. Sample collection.
(1) Except as indicated in Subsection K(2) below, the industrial user
must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional
composite collection techniques. In the event that flowproportional
sampling is unfeasible, the superintendent may
authorize the use of time-proportional sampling or through a
minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that
this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being
discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show
compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
(2) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
toxicity, sulfides and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained
using grab collection techniques.
L. Determination of noncompliance. The superintendent may use a grab
sample(s) to determine noncompliance with pretreatment standards.
M. Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the
date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid,
into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date
of receipt of the report shall govern.
N. The POTW and all industrial users subject to this article shall retain and
preserve, for no less than three years, any records, books, documents,
memoranda, reports, correspondence, and any and all summaries
thereof relating to monitoring, sampling, chemical analyses and
compliance with best management practice (BMP) requirements
performed by or on behalf of a user in connection with its discharge.
[Amended 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 896; 10-13-2009 by Ord. No.
913]
§ 177-43 MONACA CODE § 177-43
173:258
§ 177-44. Compliance monitoring.
(1) All sampling records shall include:
(a) The date, exact place, method and time of sampling and the
names of the person or persons taking the samples;
(b) The dates that analyses were performed;
(c) Who performed the analyses;
(d) The analytical techniques/methods used; and
(e) The results of such analyses.
(2) All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of any
enforcement or litigation activities brought by the Borough, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or USEPA pursuant hereto shall
be retained and preserved by the user until all enforcement
activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect
to any and all appeals have expired.
A. Inspection and sampling. The Borough shall have the right to enter the
facilities of any industrial user to ascertain whether the purpose of this
article and any permit or order issued hereunder is being met and
whether the industrial user is complying with all requirements thereof.
Industrial users shall allow the superintendent or his representatives
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, records examination and copying and the performance of any
additional duties.
(1) Where an industrial user has security measures in force which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements
with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable
identification, personnel from the Borough, state and EPA will be
permitted to enter without delay, for the purposes of performing
their specific responsibilities.
(2) The Borough, state and EPA shall have the right to set up on the
industrial user's property or require installation of such devices as
are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's
operations.
(3) The Borough may require the industrial user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the industrial user at its own expense. All
devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated yearly to ensure their accuracy.
(4) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the industrial facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be
§ 177-43 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-44
173:259
§ 177-45. Confidential information.
Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits
and monitoring programs and from Borough inspection and sampling
activities shall be available to the public without restriction unless the
industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Borough that the release of such information would
divulge trade secrets under applicable state law. When requested and
demonstrated by the industrial user furnishing a report that such
information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which
might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available
for inspection by the public but shall be made available immediately upon
request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program
or pretreatment program and in enforcement proceedings involving the
person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics
and other effluent data, as defined by 40 CFR 23.302, will not be recognized
as confidential information and will be available to the public without
restriction.
§ 177-46. Publication of industrial users in significant
noncompliance. [Amended 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 896]
The Borough shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper
published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the
industrial users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant
promptly removed by the industrial user at the written or verbal
request of the superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs
of clearing such access shall be borne by the industrial user.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing Borough personnel access to the
industrial user's premises shall be a violation of this article.
B. Search warrants. If the superintendent has been refused access to a
building, structure or property or any part thereof and if the
superintendent has demonstrated probable cause to believe that there
may be a violation of this article or that there is a need to inspect as
part of a routine inspection program of the Borough designed to verify
compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder or
to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the
community, then, upon application by the Borough Solicitor, the Court
of Common Pleas of Beaver County or any other appropriate judicial
issuing authority shall issue a search and/or seizure warrant describing
therein the specific location subject to the warrant. The warrant shall
specify what, if anything, may be searched and/or seized on the
property described. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours
by the superintendent in the company of a uniformed police officer of
the Borough. In the event of an emergency affecting public health and
safety, inspections shall be made without the issuance of a warrant.
§ 177-44 MONACA CODE § 177-46
173:260
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
The term "significant noncompliance" shall mean:
§ 177-47. Administration enforcement remedies.
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1);
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1),
multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil
and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
C. Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW determines
has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference
or pass-through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel
or the general public):
D. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the
POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under § 177-47 of this
article to halt or prevent such a discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction
or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required reports
such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
H. Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation
of best management practices, which the POTW determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
A. Notification of violation. Whenever the superintendent finds that any
user has violated or is violating this article, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment
requirement, the superintendent or his agent may serve upon said user
§ 177-46 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-47
173:261
a written notice of violation. Within 30 days of the receipt of this
notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions,
shall be submitted by the user to the superintendent. Submission of
this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations
occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in
this section shall limit the authority of the Borough to take any action,
including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without
first issuing a notice of violation.
B. Consent orders. The superintendent is hereby empowered to enter into
consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar
documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for
noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by
the user to correct the noncompliance of within a time period also
specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and
effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to § 177-47D and E
below and shall be judicially enforceable.
C. Show cause hearing. The superintendent may order any user which
causes or contributes to violation(s) of this article, wastewater
discharge permits or orders issued hereunder or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement to appear before the
superintendent and show cause why a proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the
time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the
reasons for such action and a request that the user show cause why this
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the
meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail
(return receipt requested) at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Such
notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user.
Whether or not the user appears as ordered, immediate enforcement
action may be pursued following the hearing date. A show cause
hearing shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against
the user.
D. Compliance orders. When the superintendent finds that a user has
violated or continues to violate this article, wastewater discharge
permits or orders issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the
discharge, directing that the user come into compliance within 30 days.
If the user does not come into compliance within 30 days, sewer service
shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or
other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated.
Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the
noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to
the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for
compliance established for a federal pretreatment standard or
requirement, nor does a compliance order release the user of liability
§ 177-47 MONACA CODE § 177-47
173:262
for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a
compliance order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action
against the user.
E. Cease and desist order.
(1) When the superintendent finds that a user is violating this article,
the user's wastewater discharge permit, any order issued
hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement or
that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the
superintendent may issue an order to the user directing it to cease
and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
(a) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(b) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened
violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the
discharge.
(2) Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to
taking any other action against the user.
F. Emergency suspensions.
(1) The superintendent may immediately suspend a user's discharge
(after informal notice to the user) whenever such suspension is
necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The
superintendent may also immediately suspend a user's discharge
(after notice and opportunity to respond) that threatens to interfere
with the operation of the POTW or which presents or may present
an endangerment to the environment.
(a) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a
user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the superintendent shall take such steps as
deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the
sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW,
its receiving stream or endangerment to any individuals. The
superintendent shall allow the user to recommence its
discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction
of the Borough that the period of endangerment has passed,
unless the termination proceedings set forth in § 177-47G are
initiated against the user.
(b) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed
written statement describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future
§ 177-47 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-47
173:263
§ 177-48. Injunctive relief.
Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment standard or requirement or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, wastewater discharge
permits or orders issued hereunder or any pretreatment requirement, the
Borough Attorney may apply for the issuance of a temporary or permanent
injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order or other
requirement imposed by this article on activities of the industrial user. Such
other action as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be
sought by the Borough. A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as a
prerequisite to taking any other action against a user.
§ 177-49. Violations and penalties; costs; civil penalties.
occurrence to the superintendent, prior to the date of any show
cause or termination hearing under §§ 177-47C and G.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
G. Termination of discharge.
(1) In addition to any other action authorized by this article, any user
that violates the following conditions of this article, wastewater
discharge permits or orders issued hereunder is subject to
discharge termination:
(a) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions.
(b) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge.
(c) Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to
discharge.
(d) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling.
(e) Violation of the pretreatment standards in §§ 177-33 through
177-38 of this article.
(2) Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under
§ 177-47C of this article why the proposed action should not be
taken.
A. Any user which has violated or continues to violate this article, any
order or wastewater discharge permit hereunder or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the Borough for
a maximum civil penalty of the larger of $1,000 per day per violation or
the maximum allowed by state law per day, per violation.
§ 177-47 MONACA CODE § 177-49
173:264
§ 177-50. Affirmative defenses to discharge violations.
B. The superintendent acting on behalf of the Borough may recover
reasonable attorney's fees, court costs and other expenses associated
with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring
expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the Borough.
C. In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any
economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions
by the user, the compliance history of the user and any other factor as
justice requires.
D. Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a prerequisite for taking any
other action against a user.
A. Upset.
(1) For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An
upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or
careless or improper operation.
(2) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment
standards if the requirements of Subsection A(3) are met.
(3) An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense
of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed,
contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence, that:
(a) An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the
cause(s) of the upset.
(b) The facility was, at the time, being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable
operation and maintenance procedures.
(c) The industrial user has submitted the following information to
the POTW and treatment plant operator within 24 hours of
becoming aware of the upset (If this information is provided
orally, a written submission must be provided within five
days.):
[1] A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance.
§ 177-49 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-50
173:265
[2] The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and
times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the
noncompliance is expected to continue.
[3] Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
(4) In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
(5) Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment
standards.
(6) The industrial user shall control production on all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical
pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its
treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative
method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the
situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
B. General/specific prohibitions. An industrial user shall have an
affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the general and specific prohibitions in § 177-33 of
this article if it can prove that it did not know or have reason to know
that its discharge, along or in conjunction with discharges from other
sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either a
local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the industrial user
was in compliance with each limit directly prior to and during the pass
through or interference or no local limit exists, but the discharge did
not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior
discharge when the Borough was regularly in compliance with its
NPDES permit and, in the case of interference, was in compliance with
applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
C. Bypass.
(1) Terms defined.
(a) "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams
from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility.
(b) "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage
to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes
them to become inoperable or substantial and permanent loss
of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to
occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does
not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
§ 177-50 MONACA CODE § 177-50
173:266
(2) An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not
cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated but
only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient
operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of
Subsection C(3) and (4) of this section.
(3) If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it
shall submit prior notice to the POTW, at least 10 days before the
date of the bypass if possible. An industrial user shall submit oral
notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable
pretreatment standards to the POTW within 24 hours from the time
it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be
provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes
aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a
description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass,
including exact dates and times; and, if the bypass has not been
corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps
taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of
the bypass. The POTW may waive the written report on a case-bycase
basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
(4) Exceptions.
(a) Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take enforcement
action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless:
[1] Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury or severe property damage;
[2] There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as
the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of
untreated wastes or maintenance during normal periods of
equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if
adequate backup equipment should have been installed in
the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to
prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of
equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
[3] The industrial user submitted notices as required under
Subsection C(3) of this section.
(b) The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it
will meet the three conditions listed in Subsection C(4)(a) of
this section.
§ 177-50 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-50
173:267

ARTICLE IV
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 3-10-1998 by Ord. No. 835]
§ 177-51. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of existing and new holding tanks designed to receive and
retain sewage, whether from residential or commercial uses, and it is
hereby declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the
protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of this municipality.
§ 177-52. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the
meanings of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
BOROUGH — The Council of the Borough of Monaca, Beaver County,
Pennsylvania.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle, whether permanent or
temporary, which receives and retains sewage conveyed by a water-carrying
system and which is designed and constructed to facilitate the ultimate
disposal of the sewage at another site.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Borough upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Monaca, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the Borough.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation.
§ 177-53. Control and methods of use.
The Borough is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the
Borough the control and methods of holding tank use, sewage disposal and
sewage collection and transportation thereof.
§ 177-54. Rules and regulations.
§ 177-51 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-54
173:269
§ 177-55. Rates and charges.
The Borough shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect
rates, assessments and other charges in the area served by its facilities at
reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by applicable law. The Borough
shall have the right and power to require a bond or escrow account
sufficient to ensure the costs of future operation and maintenance of the
holding tanks under local ordinances.
§ 177-56. Collection and transportation of sewage; reports.
§ 177-57. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
A. Adoption. The Borough is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt
such rules and regulations concerning sewage which it may deem
necessary from time to time to effect the purposes herein.
B. Conformity with applicable law. All such rules and regulations adopted
by the Borough shall be in conformity with the provisions herein, all
other ordinances of the Borough and all applicable laws and applicable
rules and regulations of administrative agencies of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
A. The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved
property utilizing a holding tank shall be done solely under the approval
and control of the Borough, and the disposal thereof shall be made only
at such site or sites as may be approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The Borough will receive, review and retain pumping receipts from
permitted holding tanks.
C. The Borough will complete and retain annual inspection reports for
each permitted tank.
A. Maintain the holding tank and dispose periodically of its contents in
conformance with this article or any ordinance of the Borough, the
provisions of any applicable law and the rules and regulations of the
Authority and any administrative agency of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. Permit only the Borough or its agent to inspect holding tanks on an
annual basis.
C. Permit only the Borough or its agent to approve the methods of
collection, transportation and disposal of the contents therein.
§ 177-54 MONACA CODE § 177-58
173:270
§ 177-58. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of § 177-57 shall, upon conviction
thereof by summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $100 and not more than $300, and in default of said fine and costs to
undergo imprisonment in the county prison for a period not in excess of 30
days.
§ 177-59. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation
of § 177-57 above shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated by the
municipality by either seeking mitigation of the nuisance or appropriate
equitable or legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 177-58 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 177-59
173:271
Chapter 178
SMOKING
§ 178-1. Addition to Code.
Chapter 178 and the following sections shall be added to the Code of the
Borough of Monaca.
§ 178-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to comply with the Pennsylvania Clean Indoor
Air Act 35 P.S. § 637.1 et seq. and to further promote a safe and healthful
environment for employees and the public in and around Borough buildings
and facilities leased or owned by the Borough of Monaca. It is intended to
reduce the health risks associated with exposure to environmental smoke.
§ 178-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
MONACA BOROUGH BUILDINGS — Buildings owned or leased by the
Borough of Monaca, which the Council designates as public places within
the meaning set forth in the Clean Indoor Air Act, including but not limited
to:
SMOKING — The carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or
other lighted smoking device.
§ 178-4. Policy.
A. The Municipal Building located at 928 Pennsylvania Avenue.
B. The Monaca Pumphouse located at 599 Atlantic Avenue.
C. The Monaca Maintenance Building located at 900 Taylor Avenue.
D. The C.J. Mangin Building located at 998 Indiana Avenue.
E. The Sewage Treatment Plant located at 407 Pennsylvania Avenue.
F. The Monaca Public Library located at 609 Pennsylvania Avenue.
G. The Monaca V.F.D. No. 4 building located at 913 Taylor Avenue.
H. The Monaca V.F.D No. 5 building located at 800 Jackson Avenue.
A. Smoking is prohibited in all the Monaca Borough buildings and
facilities whether leased or owned by the Borough. Smoking is
permitted on Monaca Borough property only in designated areas.
B. Smoking is permitted in any outdoor area 35 feet away from any
entrance/exit, window or ventilation/air intake system of any Monaca
§ 177-59 MONACA CODE § 178-4
173:272
§ 178-5. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Borough owned or leased building or facility; however, where such
location would cause a person to be outside the boundaries of said
Monaca Borough property, smoking is permitted at the furthest point
from any entrance/exit, window or ventilation/air intake system of any
Monaca Borough owned or leased building or facility which may be less
than 35 feet.
C. Smoking is permitted in the following specifically designated outdoor
areas:
(1) Municipal Building: 35 feet from the rear doors of the Municipal
Building and the parking lot area.
(2) Monaca Pumphouse: Flagpole area or lower lawn area outside the
side door.
(3) Monaca Highway Building: Door No. 1 and parking lot area nearest
Taylor Avenue.
(4) C.J. Mangin Building: front sidewalk area.
(5) Sewage Treatment Plant: at the end of the loading dock.
(6) Monaca Public Library: parking lot area.
(7) Monaca V.F.D. No. 4 Building: end of driveway/parking lot area.
(8) Monaca V.P.D. No. 5 Building: parking lot area.
(9) Other outdoor areas designated by the Borough Manager
consistent with the objectives set forth herein from time to time
and reviewed and approved by the Council of the Borough of
Monaca.
D. Receptacles shall be provided and maintained by the Borough of
Monaca for the proper disposal of cigarette butts in areas designated as
smoking areas herein. Cigarette buns shall only be discarded in the
receptacles provided; the disposal of cigarette butts on the ground or in
landscaping beds is prohibited.
E. All entrances to Monaca Borough owned or leased buildings and
facilities shall be posted with appropriate signage as required by the
Clean Indoor Air Act. Smoking-permitted signs shall be posted in areas
specifically designated for smoking as set forth herein. Said signs shall
be placed and properly maintained by the Borough of Monaca.
A. The Monaca Borough Police Department shall have authority to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
B. Any person who violates this chapter is guilty of a summary offense and
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $250. A repeat offense within a
§ 178-4 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 178-5
173:273
§ 178-6. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective upon enactment hereof.
Chapter 184
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Storage areas — See Ch. 193.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 228.
Fee schedule — See Ch. A256.
year shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500. Offenses subsequent
to a second offense shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
C. This chapter repeals any and all ordinances previously adopted which
are inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 178-5 MONACA CODE § 178-6
184:274
ARTICLE I
Storage, Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 11-12-1975 by Ord. No. 684]
§ 184-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. The following words and terms, as used in this article, shall have the
meanings hereby respectively ascribed thereto:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Monaca.
BULKY WASTE — Large discarded items from residences that can be
reduced in volume and bundled, including but not limited to boxes,
crates, barrels and certain items of furniture.
BULKY WASTE (WHITE GOODS) — Large discarded items from
residences which cannot readily be reduced in volume or easily handled
by one person, including but not limited to stoves, refrigerators, bed
springs and certain appliances and items of furniture.
COMBUSTIBLE HOUSEHOLD RUBBISH — Burnable waste from
residences, including but not limited to paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, furniture, bedding, rubber and leather and yard
rubbish.
COMMERCIAL RUBBISH — Discarded solid waste material from
commercial establishments.
DEAD ANIMALS — The bodies of animals that die naturally from
disease or have been accidentally killed but not the bodies of
condemned animals or of animals from commercial institutions or parts
of animals from slaughterhouses or similar establishments.
DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION WASTE — Waste material
resulting from the construction, remodeling, repair and/or demolition of
buildings and structures, including but not limited to excavated earth,
stones, blocks, plaster, wallpaper, lumber, roofing material, concrete
and waste parts resulting from the installation or replacement of
plumbing, heating or electrical systems.
GARBAGE — Waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and serving of food but not waste from the handling, storage or sale
of produce or food-processing wastes from canneries, slaughterhouses,
frozen food dealers or other commercial enterprises.
INCINERATOR WASTE — Ashes removed from household incinerator
furnaces after burning, which may contain partially burned organic and
inorganic matter.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Solid waste resulting from industrial processes
and manufacturing operations, including but not limited to foodprocessing
waste, boiler-house cinders, lumber scraps and shavings
and metal scraps and shavings
§ 184-1 SOLID WASTE § 184-1
184:275
§ 184-2. Collection practices.
The Manager, using Borough personnel or by contractual arrangements,
shall collect and remove refuse, as indicated in this article, produced within
the Borough, in accordance with the provisions of this article and Borough
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 184-3. Collectible materials.
The following materials shall be collected under the terms of § 184-2 of this
article:
MANAGER — The Borough Manager or his authorized agent and/or
representative.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE HOUSEHOLD RUBBISH — Nonburnable waste
from residences, including but not limited to tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery, dust and metal furniture.
NONRESIDENCE — A building or structure that is not a residence and
that is associated with or essential to the performance of commercial
activity within the Borough.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
REFUSE — Solid waste, including garbage, combustible and
noncombustible household rubbish, incinerator waste, dead animals,
bulky waste and industrial refuse.
RESIDENCE — The permanent home of one or more individual within
the Borough.
SPECIAL WASTE — Waste which is hazardous by reason of its
pathological, explosive, radioactive or toxic nature.
WASTE — Useless, unused, unwanted or discarded material resulting
from normal activities in the Borough.
YARD RUBBISH — Tree branches (two-inch diameter or less), twigs,
grass, shrub clippings, weeds, leaves and general yard and garden
waste.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. Garbage from all residences and other properties so described in the
contract. Household garbage from residences shall be drained of all
moisture and wrapped before being placed in the container. Garbage
from other than residences may be placed directly into suitable
watertight containers after being thoroughly drained of all excess
moisture. The Manager shall refuse to collect garbage of a liquid or
semiliquid nature, unwrapped or improperly placed.
§ 184-1 MONACA CODE § 184-3
184:276
§ 184-4. Uncollectible materials.
The following materials shall not be collected under the terms of § 184-2 of
this article:
B. Combustible and noncombustible rubbish from residences.
(1) Broken glass or sharp metal objects from residences will be
acceptable for collection only if properly wrapped and placed in a
heavy box or punctureproof container before deposit in the refuse
receptacle.
(2) Yard rubbish will be acceptable for collection only if placed in a
suitable bag or container and securely tied to prevent spillage in
handling. Large branches or shrubs shall be reduced in size to
lengths not to exceed four feet and tied securely and compactly in
bundles. Yard rubbish shall be placed at the curb at the front or
rear of the residence not later than 7:00 a.m. of the designated
collection day and not earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the day proceeding
the scheduled removal.
C. Bulky wastes.
(1) Bulky wastes from residences will be collected, provided that such
wastes are reduced in size to lengths not to exceed four feet and
securely tied and bundled. Each bundle is to be limited to 75
pounds in weight and of such size and volume as to be easily
handled by one man. Bulky wastes are to be placed at the curb in
the front or rear of the residence before 7:00 a.m. of the scheduled
regular refuse collection day and not earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the
day proceeding the scheduled removal.
(2) Bulky wastes (white goods) will be picked up with regular refuse
collection if placed at the curb on the scheduled collection day.
D. Cold incinerator wastes from residences. Wastes shall be placed in a
suitable container, securely tied to prevent spillage in handling.
E. Dead animals. Dead animals shall be promptly removed by the Manager
upon notification by any resident.
A. Demolition and construction wastes.
B. Human or animal matter.
C. Sewage treatment residue.
D. Special wastes.
E. Trees other than Christmas trees.
F. Industrial refuse.
G. Commercial rubbish.
§ 184-3 SOLID WASTE § 184-4
184:277
§ 184-5. Containers.
§ 184-6. Regulations.
The Manager shall prepare and publish reasonable regulations concerning
collection schedules and any other regulations pertaining to the storage and
collection of refuse he may deem advisable, provided that such regulations
are not contrary to the provisions or intent of this article. He may change or
H. Hot incinerator wastes.
A. It shall be the duty of the occupant, owner or proprietor of every
residence, dwelling, apartment building or other building on whose
premises refuse is produced for collection under this article and other
properties so described in the contract to provide sufficient and proper
refuse containers to adequately store all refuse accumulated between
scheduled collections.
B. Containers shall be of a durable, lightweight, watertight material, of
such size as to be easily handled by one man. The containers shall not
exceed 32 gallons in capacity. Containers shall be equipped with tightfitting
lids sufficient to keep out water and to prevent disturbance by
animals and the entrance of rodents and insects. Containers shall be
kept tightly closed except when being filled or emptied. Drain or vent
holes shall not be permitted.
C. The occupant, owner or proprietor of every building eligible for refuse
collection under the provisions of this article and using fifty-five-gallon
containers shall have 60 days from the date of approval of this article to
convert to the thirty-two-gallon containers.
D. Refuse containers shall be kept at the rear of the building at ground
level and located so as not to create a fire or health hazard. Containers
shall be readily accessible to the collectors at a maximum of 150 feet
from the point of entry onto the property. Where the refuse container
location exceeds the one-hundred-fifty-foot limit or the location does
not afford reasonable access to the containers, said containers shall be
placed for collection by the owner or occupant at the front or rear curb
before 7:00 a.m. of the scheduled collection day and not before 6:00
p.m. of the preceding day. Borough personnel are not permitted, unless
specifically authorized by the Manager, to enter any building or other
structures for the purpose of refuse removal.
E. Refuse containers that are not in compliance with the provisions of this
article or that are in such condition as to possibly hamper or injure the
person collecting the contents thereof shall be promptly replaced with a
proper receptacle upon receipt by the owner of written notice to that
effect from the Manager. Nonconforming or defective refuse containers
not replaced within 10 days of receipt of proper notification to the
owner may be removed and disposed of by the Manager as waste.
§ 184-4 MONACA CODE § 184-6
184:278
modify these regulations periodically, if necessary; such regulation changes
to become effective one week after publication.
§ 184-7. Imposition of charges; terms defined. [Amended
11-28-1977 by Ord. No. 684-A]
§ 184-8. Collection of delinquent refuse accounts. [Amended
12-27-1978 by Ord. No. 684-B; 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
In connection with the fees of the Borough pertaining to the annual charge
per annum per family unit for the removal and collection of refuse within
the Borough of Monaca,100 the Borough Secretary may hereby institute a
civil action before a District Justice and/or with a collection agency for the
collection of any delinquent accounts whereupon the delinquent party or
parties shall be liable for payment of interest from the date the garbage
collection charge is due at the rate of 5% per quarter, plus the costs of
suit and/or collection charges. As to accounts that are delinquent on the
effective date of this article, interest shall begin on that date.
§ 184-9. Prohibited acts.
A. There is hereby imposed a charge on each family unit in the Borough
from whose premises refuse, as defined in § 184-1 of this article (the
ordinance regulating the collection and storage of refuse in the
Borough of Monaca), is collected by the Borough's own personnel or by
persons under contract with the Borough. Such charges shall be
determined from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
This charge shall be paid to the Borough at least quarterly, and the
responsibility for such payment shall rest with the property owner.
B. For purposes of this article, a "family unit" shall have the following
meaning: a permanent building designed for or occupied exclusively as
a residence for only one family or any part or parts of a permanent
structure designed for the separate occupancy of a single family. For
the purpose of this article, the term family shall consist of one or more
persons occupying a structure or a unit of a structure.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited
any refuse, demolition and construction waste or other offensive
material in any public street, alley or upon any public property of any
nature nor upon a vacant private property, except approved private or
public dumps and except where certain of these materials are normally
used for grading, fertilizing or resurfacing purposes.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any paper wrappers or
containers, newspapers, waste food products or any refuse of a similar
nature by droppings, throwing or otherwise placing the same upon any
street, alley or sidewalk in the Borough other than in a receptacle
intended to be a container for the same.
100. Editor's Note: See Ch. A256, Fee Schedule.
§ 184-6 SOLID WASTE § 184-9
184:279
§ 184-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or any regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
Article II, Code Enforcement.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any dead animal in or upon
any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground or in refuse receptacle.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons vacating any dwelling,
storeroom or other building within the Borough to fail to remove or
cause to be removed all accumulated refuse from the premises and
surrounding grounds.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow dogs or other pets to
interfere with refuse personnel in their collection activities. All such
animals shall be securely restrained upon receipt by the owner of
written notice from the Manager. Failure to comply with this
notification can result in suspension of refuse collection at the site and/
or legal action as provided in § 184-10 of this article.
§ 184-9 MONACA CODE § 184-10
184:280
ARTICLE II
Accumulation or Dumping
[Adopted 5-9-1977 by Ord. No. 706]
§ 184-11. Definitions; word usage.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Monaca.
BULKY WASTES — Large discarded items from residences that can
be reduced in volume for bundling, including but not limited to boxes,
crates, barrels and certain items of furniture.
BULKY WASTES (WHITE GOODS) — Large discarded items that cannot
readily be reduced in volume, including but not limited to stoves,
refrigerators, bed springs, certain appliances and items of furniture.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Borough of Monaca or
his authorized agent and/or his authorized agent or representative.
COMBUSTIBLE HOUSEHOLD RUBBISH — Burnable waste from
residences, including but not limited to paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, furniture, bedding, rubber, leather and yard rubbish.
DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION WASTE — Waste material
resulting from the construction, remodeling, repair and/or demolition
of building or structures, including but not limited to excavated earth,
stones, block, brick, plaster, wall and floor coverings, lumber, roofing
material, concrete and waste parts resulting from the installation of
plumbing and electrical systems.
GARBAGE — Waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and serving of food.
INCINERATOR WASTE — Ashes removed from a household incinerator
after burning.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Solid waste resulting from industrial processes
and manufacturing operations.
MECHANICAL WASTE — Discarded items, including but not limited
to engines, machines, mechanical and electrical equipment, tools,
discarded vehicles and vehicle parts and similar material.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE HOUSEHOLD RUBBISH — Nonburnable wastes
from residences, including but not limited to tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery, dust and metal furniture.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
REFUSE — Solid waste, including garbage, combustible and
noncombustible household rubbish, incinerator waste, bulky wastes,
§ 184-11 SOLID WASTE § 184-11
184:281
§ 184-12. Unlawful dumping.
§ 184-13. Storage of vehicles.101
§ 184-14. Notice; removal.
bulky wastes (white goods), industrial waste and mechanical waste,
demolition and construction wastes.
WASTE — Useless, unused, unwanted or discarded material resulting
from normal activities in the Borough.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited
any refuse or other offensive material in any public street, alley or upon
any public property of any nature nor upon a private property within
the Borough of Monaca.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or permit to be used any
property within the Borough for public or private refuse dump.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to store or cause to be stored upon
any private property within the Borough of Monaca any automobile or
vehicles that are not in operating condition and displaying a current
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Transportation,
registration tag or license plate and inspection sticker.
B. It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any street or
thoroughfare within the Borough of Monaca which does not have a
current inspection sticker and registration plate or tag. It is also
unlawful to park any motor vehicle having current inspection sticker
and registration plate or tag that is deemed inoperable for legal use.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in any street
or thoroughfare within the Borough of Monaca for the purpose of
repairing said vehicle if the repairs will render the vehicle inoperative
for a period in excess of 36 hours. No person shall perform a repair
operation in such a manner as to present a danger of injury to
pedestrian traffic or obstruction of view to pedestrian or motorist.
A. Whenever Borough authorities have determined that a person has
deposited or has caused to be deposited refuse upon private property
within the Borough or has allowed such illegal refuse to remain on said
property, the Borough officials shall notify said person, by certified mail,
that the violation must be rectified within 10 calendar days of receipt of
said notice or the violation provisions contained herein will be invoked.
101. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 228, Storage of Vehicles.
§ 184-11 MONACA CODE § 184-14
184:282
§ 184-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, for each and
every such violation, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article
II, Code Enforcement, provided that a separate offense shall be deemed to
be committed upon each calendar day during or on which any such violation
shall be committed or shall continue after 10 days of receipt of official
notice of noncompliance.
B. The Chief of Police is hereby empowered, if the situation shall warrant
such action, to enter onto said property and remove the illegal material
and to proceed against the person for the cost of said removal.
C. Motor vehicles parked in violation of § 184-13B above, may be removed
from the street by Borough authorities and the owner of said vehicles
assessed the cost of removing and storing of the vehicles.
§ 184-14 SOLID WASTE § 184-15
184:283

ARTICLE III
Recycling
[Adopted 7-10-1989 by Ord. No. 785]
§ 184-16. Short title.
The short title of this article shall be the "Monaca Borough Recycling
Ordinance," and the same may be cited in that manner.
§ 184-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
BIMETALLIC CANS — Empty food and beverage containers consisting of
ferrous sides and bottom and an aluminum top.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes.
CORRUGATED PAPER — That material consisting of two or more pieces
of kraft liner separated by corrugated (fluted) liner board; excluded are
materials without a corrugated interliner and those materials with a
corrugated liner made from rice or other nonwood-based materials.
CURBSIDE COLLECTION — The collection by the municipality or its
authorized agent(s) of recyclable materials placed at the curbside or other
designated location.
FERROUS CANS — Empty steel or tin food or beverage containers.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass; expressly excluded are noncontainer glass, plate glass, blue glass and
porcelain or ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — That paper collected from commercial,
institutional and municipal establishments that was discarded from
xerographic copiers, from nonthermal computer printers, from general
office use forms, memos and correspondence and from print shops and
other commercial printing processes; expressly excluded are papers with
self carbons, carbon paper, envelopes and all other grades of papers not
meeting specifications in the regulations. Material sorting and classification
grades will be specified in the regulations specific to this article.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people, e.g., hospitals, schools, nursing homes.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues and similar material, but not
including grass clippings.
MAGAZINES AND PERIODICALS — Printed matter containing
miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals;
§ 184-16 SOLID WASTE § 184-17
184:285
expressly excluded, however, are all other paper products of any nature
whatsoever.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and
opinions, containing advertisements and other matters of public interest;
expressing excluded, however, are newspapers which have been soiled.
PERSON(S) — Owners, lessees and occupants of residences or commercial
or institutional establishments.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers.
Due to the large variety of types of plastics, the recycling regulations shall
stipulate the specific types of plastic which may be recycled.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials specified by the municipality
to be recycled. The list of materials shall be specified in the recycling
regulations resulting from this article and may be revised from time to time
as deemed necessary by the municipality.
RESIDENCE — Any occupied single-family or multifamily dwelling from
which a municipal or private waste hauler collects solid waste.
SOLID WASTE — All refuse (garbage and rubbish) and other discarded solid
material normally collected by a municipal or private hauler.
YARD WASTE — Prunings, grass clippings, weeds, leaves and garden waste.
§ 184-18. Establishment of program.
There is hereby established by the Borough of Monaca, hereinafter referred
to as the "municipality," a program that mandates that recyclable materials
shall be kept separate from solid waste by all persons within the
municipality.
§ 184-19. Separation and placement.
Recyclable materials shall be placed at the curb, (or in areas designated by
the municipality) separate from solid waste, for collection at such times and
dates as may be hereinafter established by regulations.
§ 184-20. Collection by unauthorized person(s).
It shall be a violation of this article for any person(s) unauthorized by
the municipality to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked
up any such recyclable material. Each such collection in violation hereof
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter
provided.
§ 184-21. Enforcement and administration.
The municipality is authorized and directed to enforce this article. The same
is hereby authorized and directed to establish and promulgate reasonable
regulations as to the manner, days and times for the collection of recyclable
§ 184-17 MONACA CODE § 184-21
184:286
materials in accordance with the terms hereof and any other matters
required to implement this article. The municipality may change, modify,
repeal or amend any portion of said rules and regulations at any time.
§ 184-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any action by any person, firm, corporation or other entity which violates or
does not comply with any provision of this article or any regulation thereof
shall, upon conviction thereof before a District Justice, be punishable by a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be punishable
by imprisonment in the county jail for up to 30 days. No enforcement of
§§ 177-18 and 177-19 of this article shall be made until three months from
the effective date of regulations authorized to be promulgated hereunder.
§ 184-23. Collection agreements.
The municipality may enter into agreements with public or private agencies
or firms to authorize them to collect all or part of the recyclable materials
from curbside or elsewhere as designated by the municipality.
§ 184-24. Alternative collection.
Any person may donate or sell recyclable materials to individuals or
organizations authorized by the municipality in its recycling regulations.
These materials must either be delivered to the individual's or
organization's site or they may be placed at the curb for collection by
said individual or organization on days not indicated as recyclable material
collection days by the municipality. Said individuals or organizations may
not collect recyclable materials on or immediately preceding (within 24
hours) a regularly scheduled curbside collection day.
§ 184-21 SOLID WASTE § 184-24
184:287

ARTICLE IV
Collection of Recyclables
[Adopted 3-12-1990 by Res. No. 8-90]
§ 184-25. Adoption of regulations.102
By and with the authorization of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Monaca, effective this date, these rules and regulations shall hereby be
adopted to regulate the waste generation as required by the specifications
of Pennsylvania Act 101 of 1988.103
102. Editor's Note: The regulations are on file in the Borough offices.
103. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 184-25 SOLID WASTE § 184-25
184:289

ARTICLE V
Waste Flow Control
[Adopted 7-13-1993 by Ord. No. 800]
§ 184-26. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following terms used in
this article shall have the following meanings:
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act, Act of July 28, 1988, P.L. 528, No. 101, as now or hereafter amended.104
DISPOSAL — The deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing
of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner that the solid waste
or a constituent of the solid waste enters the environment, is emitted into
the air or is discharged to the waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
LANDFILL — A facility using land for disposing of municipal waste. The
facility includes land affected during the lifetime operations, including but
not limited to areas where disposal or processing activities actually occur,
support facilities, borrow areas, offices, equipment sheds, air and water
pollution control and treatment systems, access roads and transportation
and storage facilities. The term does not include construction/demolition
waste landfills or a facility for the land application of sewage sludge.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
in the Solid Waste Management Act105 from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or
air pollution control facility. The term does not include source-separated
recyclable materials.
MUNICIPAL WASTE LANDFILL — Any facility that is designed, operated
or maintained for the disposal of municipal waste, whether or not such
facility possesses a permit from the Department under the Solid Waste
Management Act.106 The term shall not include any facility that is used
exclusively for disposal of construction/demolition waste or sludge from
sewage treatment plants or water supply treatment plants.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, incorporated town, township or home
rule municipality located in the county.
PERMIT — Permit No. issued by the Department for the operation of the
landfill by the operator.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
104. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
105. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
106. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 184-26 SOLID WASTE § 184-26
184:291
federal government agency, state institution or agency or any other legal
entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and
duties.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the mechanized
separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than through
combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials other than a
fuel for the operation of energy.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT ACT — Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et
seq., and the Department regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 184-27. Licensing of collectors and/or transporters.
Not later than 120 days after the effective date of Beaver County Ordinance
No. 082092,107 all persons collecting and/or transporting waste within the
municipality shall be required to obtain a county license pursuant to County
Ordinance No. 082092.
§ 184-28. Disposal at designated processing or disposal facilities.
All municipal waste collectors and transporters shall deliver and dispose of
all municipal waste generated within the municipality, other than recyclable
materials as designated in a municipality's recycling ordinance,108 at the
site(s) designated by the municipality. The Borough of Monaca has
contracted for waste disposal capacity with designated disposal facilities
as approved and identified in the Beaver County Solid Waste Management
Plan.
§ 184-29. Compliance with other provisions.
All collectors and transporters shall comply with all county rules and
regulations adopted by the county and this municipality pursuant to Act
101, County Ordinance No. 082092109
§ 184-30. New processing or disposal facilities prohibited;
continuation of existing facilities.
A. Prohibition of municipal waste processing and disposal facilities. No
person other than the county, the United States of America, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or this municipality shall use or permit
to be used any property owned or occupied by that person within the
municipality as a new municipal waste processing or disposal facility,
for the processing or disposal of waste generated within Beaver County,
107. Editor's Note: The county ordinance is on file in the county offices.
108. Editor's Note: See Art. III, Recycling, of this chapter.
109. Editor's Note: The county ordinance is on file in the county offices.
§ 184-26 MONACA CODE § 184-30
184:292
§ 184-31. Unlawful activity; nuisance.
without the express written approval of the county and the Department
of Environmental Protection (DEP).
B. Existing facilities. The prohibition set forth in § 184-30A of this article
shall not interfere with the operation of any existing facility, provided
that:
(1) The owner/operator of the facility has an approved permit or has
submitted a permit application to DEP prior to April 9, 1990.
(2) The facility does not accept municipal waste from any sources
within the county other than those authorized by the facility's
permit.
C. Recycling. The prohibition set forth in § 184-30A of this article shall not
interfere with the operation of any program adopted by the municipality
for recycling.
A. Unlawful conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Violate, cause or assist in the violation of any provision of this
article, County Ordinance No. 082092 or any rule, regulation or
order promulgated by the county pursuant to County Ordinance
No. 082092.110
(2) Cause to be processed, treated or disposed of municipal waste
generated within this municipality at a facility other than those
identified in the Beaver County Solid Waste Management Plan,
pursuant to the Borough of Monaca waste disposal agreement and
the County Solid Waste Management Plan.
(3) Collect or transport municipal waste generated within this
municipality without a valid county license.
(4) Hinder, obstruct, prevent or interfere with this municipality in the
performance its duties under this article, Act 101 or any
enforcement of this article.
(5) Act in any matter that is contrary to Act 101, the County Municipal
Waste Management Plan, County Ordinance No. 082092, this
article or any county or municipal rule or regulation promulgated
pursuant to this article or County Ordinance No. 082092 or the
terms of any licenses issued by the county.
B. Public nuisance. Any unlawful conduct set forth in § 184-31A hereof
shall constitute a public nuisance.
110. Editor's Note: The county ordinance is on file in the county offices.
§ 184-30 SOLID WASTE § 184-32
184:293
§ 184-32. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person who engages in unlawful conduct, as defined in this article, shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution and, in
default of payment thereof, imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
§ 184-33. Injunction; concurrent remedies.
§ 184-34. Construction.
The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally construed so as to
best achieve and effectuate the goals and purpose hereof. This article shall
be construed in para materia with the County Ordinance No. 082092 and
Act 101.
A. Restraining violations. In addition to any other remedy provided in this
article, the municipality may institute a suit in equity if unlawful
conduct or a public nuisance exists, as defined in this article, for an
injunction to restrain a violation of this article or rules, regulations,
orders issued pursuant to this article or County Ordinance No. 082092.
In addition to an injunction, the court may impose penalties as
authorized by § 184-32 hereof.
B. Concurrent remedies. The penalties and remedies prescribed by this
article shall be deemed concurrent, the existence or exercise of any
remedy shall not prevent the municipality from exercising any other
remedy provided by this article or otherwise provided at law or equity.
§ 184-32 MONACA CODE § 184-34
184:294
Chapter 188
SPEED-TIMING DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 225.
§ 188-1. Authority.
The Police Department of the Borough of Monaca is hereby authorized
to use the following devices to enforce the laws and regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the ordinances of the Borough of
Monaca:
Chapter 193
STORAGE AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Storage of vehicles— See Ch. 228.
Accumulation or dumping — See Ch. 184, Art.
II.
§ 193-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SALVAGE YARD — That area used for the saving on a permanent or
temporary basis of wrecked, damaged or abandoned vehicles.
STORAGE AREA — The exterior portion of property used for the depositing
of articles, including but not limited to building or construction materials,
motor vehicles or mechanical devices.
A. Excessive Speed Preventor (E.S.P.) equipment.
B. Radar devices and VasCar.
C. Any electronic or electrical-mechanical device which is used and
approved by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to enforce speed limits
and any and all electrical-mechanical and electronic devices approved
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Transportation,
for use of the same.
§ 184-34 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 193-2
188:295
§ 193-2. Screening requirements.
It shall be required that all open storage areas and open salvage yards
shall be completely obscured from surrounding streets and property by a
solid screen or opaque fence not less than six feet (1.83 millimeters in
height), which is to be locked at all times when unattended and to include
an unobstructed gate capable of admitting fire and emergency equipment.
§ 193-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any action by any person, firm, corporation or other entity which violates or
does not comply with any provision of this chapter or any regulation thereof
shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Code Enforcement.
Chapter 197
STORM SEWERS: MS4 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 177. Stormwater management — See Ch. 199.
§ 193-2 MONACA CODE § 193-3
193:296
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 197-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Monaca
MS4 Prohibited Discharge Ordinance."
§ 197-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
§ 197-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the municipality and its watershed by minimizing the harm and maximizing
the benefits described in § 197-2 of this chapter, through provisions
designed to:
A. Inadequate maintenance of stormwater facilities contributes to erosion
and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and
storm sewers, increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control
stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood control
efforts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge,
threatens public health and safety, and increases pollution of water
resources.
B. Reasonable regulation of connections and discharges to municipal
separate storm sewer systems is fundamental to the public health,
safety, and welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth,
their resources, and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to obtain a
permit for stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer
systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES). Permittees are required to enact, implement, and enforce a
prohibition of nonstormwater discharges to the permittee's regulated
small municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s).
A. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
B. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and
restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this
commonwealth.
C. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
§ 197-1 STORAGE AREAS § 197-3
193:297
§ 197-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality also is empowered to regulate land use activities that
affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,
The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.111
§ 197-5. Applicability.
All activities related to proper operation and maintenance of approved
stormwater management BMPs and all activities that may contribute
nonstormwater discharges to a regulated small MS4 are subject to
regulation by this chapter.
§ 197-6. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the municipality
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to
the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 197-7. Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or
provision of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 197-8. Compatibility with other requirements.
Actions taken under this chapter do not affect any responsibility, permit or
approval for any activity regulated by any other code, law, regulation, or
ordinance.
D. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface
water and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water
resources.
E. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
F. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all facilities and all SWM
BMPs that are implemented within the municipality.
111. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 197-3 MONACA CODE § 197-8
193:298
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 197-9. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 197-10. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter, nonstructural
BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A conservation district, as defined in Section
3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3 P.S. § 851(c)] that has the authority
under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to administer and enforce
all or a portion of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
102.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to: clearing
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
§ 197-9 STORAGE AREAS § 197-10
193:299
and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance;
building construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing
of soil, rock, or earth materials. Earth disturbance activity is subject to
regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, or the
Clean Streams Law.112
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of Monaca, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
NRCS — USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously SCS).
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any activities that may affect stormwater
runoff and any activities that may contribute nonstormwater discharges to
a regulated small MS4.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
112. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 197-10 MONACA CODE § 197-10
193:300
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Requirements
§ 197-11. General requirements.
A. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law.113 Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual), No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as
amended and updated. [NOTE: Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection. No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as
amended and updated. Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.]
B. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
notification of the adjacent property owner(s) by the developer. Such
stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
C. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be implemented, operated,
and maintained to meet the purposes and requirements of this chapter
and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code,
the Clean Streams Law,114 and the Storm Water Management Act.115
D. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP Manual
[NOTE: Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and updated.
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
Harrisburg, PA.]
113. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
114. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
115. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 197-11 STORAGE AREAS § 197-11
193:301

ARTICLE IV
Operation and Maintenance
§ 197-12. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
§ 197-13. Operation and maintenance agreements.
A. Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater management BMPs
shall be enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and
recorded as deed restrictions or conservation easements that run with
the land.
B. O&M plans for stormwater management approved pursuant to 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 102 after the date of this chapter shall be recorded as a
restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.
C. The municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for
any failure to satisfy the provisions of this chapter.
A. Prior to completing construction of an SWM site plan, the property
owner shall sign and record an operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement (See Appendix A.116) covering all stormwater control
facilities which are to be privately owned.
(1) The owner, successor and assigns shall operate and maintain all
facilities in accordance with the approved schedule(s) in the O&M
plan.
(2) The owner shall convey to the municipality conservation easements
to assure access for periodic inspections by the municipality and
maintenance, as necessary.
(3) The owner shall keep on file with the municipality the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or company
responsible for operation and maintenance activities. In the event
of a change, new information shall be submitted by the owner to
the municipality within 10 working days of the change.
B. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the
SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the
municipality may perform the services required and charge the owner
appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the
property.
116. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 197-12 STORAGE AREAS § 197-13
193:303

ARTICLE V
Prohibitions
§ 197-14. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter a regulated small MS4 or to enter
the waters of this commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated
small MS4 or discharges into waters of this commonwealth which are
not composed entirely of stormwater, except 1) as provided in
Subsection C below, and 2) discharges allowed under a state or federal
permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution of a regulated small MS4 or to
the waters of this commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including water line flushing.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Air-conditioning condensate.
(5) Springs.
(6) Water from crawl space pumps.
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(8) Diverted stream flows.
(9) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(10) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(11) Lawn watering.
(12) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(14)Water from individual residential car washing.
(15) Routine external building wash down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
D. In the event that the municipality or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection C significantly contribute pollutants
§ 197-14 STORAGE AREAS § 197-14
193:305
§ 197-15. Roof drains and sump pumps.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative
BMPs.
to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this commonwealth, the
municipality or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the
discharge.
§ 197-14 MONACA CODE § 197-15
193:306
ARTICLE VI
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 197-16. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the municipality may enter at
reasonable times upon any property within the municipality to inspect the
condition of the stormwater structures and facilities in regard to any aspect
regulated by this chapter.
§ 197-17. Inspection.
SWM BMPs should be inspected by the landowner, or the owner's designee
(including the municipality for dedicated and owned facilities), according to
the following list of minimum frequencies:
§ 197-18. Enforcement.
It is unlawful for any person to modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any
approved SWM BMPs, facilities, areas, or structures without the written
approval of DEP or a delegated County Conservation District, and the
municipality.
§ 197-19. Suspension and revocation.
A. Annually for the first five years following construction.
B. Once every three years thereafter.
C. During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the municipality may be suspended or
revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of an
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to a regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act which
constitutes or creates a hazard, nuisance or pollution, or endangers
the life or property of others.
B. A suspended approval may be reinstated by the municipality when:
(1) The municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension.
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
§ 197-16 STORAGE AREAS § 197-19
193:307
§ 197-20. Violations and penalties.
§ 197-21. Appeals.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
D. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the municipality may provide a limited
time period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the
municipality will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a
written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner
to correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation
within the allowed time period, the municipality may revoke or suspend
any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision
of this chapter.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $500 for each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day
that the violation continues shall be a separate offense and penalties
shall be cumulative.
B. In addition, the municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any
other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the
municipality within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality, relevant to
the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the County Court of
Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place within
30 days of the municipality's decision.
§ 197-19 MONACA CODE § 197-21
193:308
Chapter 199
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 92.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 107.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 131.
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
210.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
Fee schedule — See Ch. A256.
§ 197-21 STORAGE AREAS § 197-21
193:309

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 199-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Monaca Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
§ 199-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
A. Stormwater runoff from lands modified by human activities threatens
public health and safety by causing decreased infiltration of rainwater
and increased runoff flows and velocities, which overtax the carrying
capacity of existing streams and storm sewers and greatly increase the
cost to the public to manage stormwater.
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can
also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns, accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion
of streambeds and streambanks, thereby elevating sedimentation),
destroying aquatic habitat and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals
and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss
of recharge.
C. A program of stormwater management, including reasonable regulation
of land development and redevelopment causing loss of natural
infiltration, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare and the
protection of the people of the municipality and all the people of the
commonwealth, their resources and the environment.
D. Stormwater can be an important water resource by providing
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
E. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
F. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
G. Non-stormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth by the
municipality.
§ 199-1 STORAGE AREAS § 199-3
193:311
§ 199-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety and welfare within
the municipality and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing
the benefits described in § 199-2 of this chapter through provisions
designed to:
§ 199-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
stormwater impacts by the authority of the Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 199-5. Applicability; regulated activities.
A. Manage stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating
activities that cause the problems.
B. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
C. Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems as much as
possible.
D. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, which requires
a minimum of structures and relies on natural processes.
E. Focus on infiltration of stormwater to maintain groundwater recharge,
to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality and to
otherwise protect water resources.
F. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses.
G. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.4a to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality to support those
uses in all streams and to protect and maintain water quality in special
protection streams.
H. Prevent scour and erosion of streambanks and streambeds.
I. Provide for proper operations and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management BMPs that are implemented in the
municipality.
J. Provide a mechanism to identify controls necessary to meet the NPDES
permit requirements.
K. Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program to
address non-stormwater discharges into the municipality's separate
storm sewer system.
A. This chapter applies to any regulated earth disturbance activities
within the municipality and all stormwater runoff entering into the
§ 199-3 MONACA CODE § 199-5
193:312
§ 199-6. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulations of the municipality
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed
to the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 199-7. Severability.
In the event that any section or provision of this chapter is declared invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 199-8. Compatibility with other requirements.
municipality's separate storm sewer system from lands within the
boundaries of the municipality.
B. Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management
controls are also regulated under existing state law and implementing
regulations. This chapter shall operate in coordination with those
parallel requirements; the requirements of this chapter shall be no less
restrictive in meeting the purposes of this chapter than state law.
A. Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve
the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or
ordinance. To the extent that this chapter imposes more rigorous or
stringent requirements for stormwater management, the specific
requirements contained in this chapter shall be followed.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of the
municipality's requirements regarding stormwater matters which do
not conflict with the provisions of this chapter, such as local stormwater
management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection
system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.). Conflicting
provisions in other municipal ordinances or regulations shall be
construed to retain the requirements of this chapter addressing state
water quality requirements.
§ 199-5 STORAGE AREAS § 199-8
193:313

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 199-9. Definitions and word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of human activities and the natural
processes at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural
process alone.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application for approval to engage in any regulated earth disturbance
activity at a project site in the municipality.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated earth disturbance activities, to meet state water quality
requirements, to promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet
the purposes of this chapter. BMPs include but are not limited to
infiltration, filter strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds,
permeable paving, grassed swales, forested buffers, sand filters and
detention basins.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Beaver County Conservation
District.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DEVELOPER — A person that seeks to undertake any regulated earth
disturbance activities at a project site in the municipality.
DEVELOPMENT — See "earth disturbance activity." The term includes
redevelopment.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land where any earth
disturbance activities in the municipality are planned, conducted or
maintained.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
§ 199-9 STORAGE AREAS § 199-9
193:315
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road
maintenance, building construction and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including
channels, is worn away by water, wind or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan for a project
site which identifies BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and
sedimentation.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of
water into the ground. An impervious surface includes, but is not
limited to, any roof, parking or driveway area and any new street and
sidewalk. Any surface areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed
stone shall be assumed to be impervious surfaces.
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of Monaca, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water
Act, which is delegated to DEP in Pennsylvania.
OUTFALL — Point source as described in 40 CFR § 122.2 at the point
where the municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface
waters of the commonwealth.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation or a governmental unit, public utility or any other legal
entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated earth
disturbance activities in the municipality are designed, conducted or
maintained.
REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activities on land which has
previously been disturbed or developed.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Earth disturbance
activity of one acre or more with a point source discharge to surface
waters, or the municipality's storm sewer system, or five acres or more
regardless of the planned runoff. This includes earth disturbance on
any portion of, part or during any stage of a larger common plan of
development. This only includes road maintenance activities involving
25 acres or more or earth disturbance.
§ 199-9 MONACA CODE § 199-9
193:316
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road cross-section, such as grading and repairing existing
unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches and other similar activities.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under state
regulations, protection of designated and existing uses (See 25 Pa.
Code Chapters 93 and 96.), including:
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation
reaching the ground surface.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm
sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and all other
bodies or channels of conveyance of surface water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as
a stream or creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a designated use, such
as cold water fishery or potable water supply, which are listed in
Chapter 93. These uses must be protected and maintained under
state regulations.
(1)
Existing uses are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Regulated earth
disturbance activities must be designed to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to
protect those uses in all streams and to protect and maintain water
quality in special protection streams.
(2)
Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete, these characteristics can be
impacted by the addition of pollutants, such as sediment, and
changes in habitat through increased flow volumes and/or rates
as a result of changes in land surface area from those activities.
Therefore, permanent discharges to surface waters must be
managed to protect the streambank, streambed and structural
integrity of the waterway to prevent these impacts.
(3)
§ 199-9 STORAGE AREAS § 199-9
193:317

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management for Water Quality
§ 199-10. General requirements for stormwater management.
§ 199-11. Permit requirements by other government entities.
The following permit requirements may apply to certain regulated earth
disturbance activities and must be met prior to commencement of regulated
earth disturbance activities, as applicable:
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
be designed, implemented, operated and maintained to meet the
purposes of this chapter through these two elements:
(1) Erosion and sediment control during the earth disturbance
activities (e.g., during construction); and
(2) Water quality protection measures after completion of earth
disturbance activities (e.g., after construction), including
operations and maintenance.
B. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until the requirements of this chapter are met.
C. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth disturbance
activities shall be addressed as required by § 199-12.
D. Postconstruction water quality protection shall be addressed as
required by § 199-13. Operations and maintenance of permanent
stormwater BMPs shall be addressed as required by Article IV.
E. All best management practices (BMPs) used to meet the requirements
of this chapter shall conform to the state water quality requirements,
and any more stringent requirements as determined by the
municipality.
F. Techniques described in Appendix A (Low-Impact Development)117 of
this chapter are encouraged because they reduce the costs of
complying with the requirements of this chapter and the state water
quality requirements.
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by DEP under 25
Pa. Code Chapter 105.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands,
subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
117. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 199-10 STORAGE AREAS § 199-11
193:319
§ 199-12. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.
§ 199-13. Water quality requirements after completed regulated
earth disturbance activities.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state
highway right-of-way, or require access from a state highway, shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT).
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
105.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of an erosion and
sediment control plan for construction activities.
B. DEP has regulations that require an erosion and sediment control plan
for any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more under 25
Pa. Code § 102.4(b).
C. In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, a DEP NPDES construction
activities permit is required for regulated earth disturbance activities.
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or county
conservation district must be provided to the municipality. The issuance
of an NPDES construction permit [or permit coverage under the
statewide general permit (PAG-2)] satisfies the requirements
Subsection A.
E. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the project
site at all times.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of a plan which
demonstrates compliance with state water quality requirements after
construction is complete.
B. The BMPs must be designed, implemented and maintained to meet
state water quality requirements and any other more stringent
requirements as determined by the municipality.
C. To control postconstruction stormwater impacts from regulated earth
disturbance activities, state water quality requirements can be met by
BMPs, including site design, which provide for replication of
preconstruction stormwater infiltration and runoff conditions so that
postconstruction stormwater discharges do not degrade the physical,
§ 199-11 MONACA CODE § 199-13
193:320
chemical or biological characteristics of the receiving waters. As
described in the DEP Comprehensive Stormwater Management Policy
(No. 392-0300-002, September 28, 2002), this may be achieved by the
following:
(1) Infiltration: replication of preconstruction stormwater infiltration
conditions;
(2) Treatment: use of water quality treatment BMPs to ensure filtering
out of the chemical and physical pollutants from the stormwater
runoff; and
(3) Streambank and streambed protection: management of volume and
rate of postconstruction stormwater discharges to prevent physical
degradation of receiving waters (e.g., from scouring).
D. DEP has regulations that require municipalities to ensure design,
implementation and maintenance of best management practices
(BMPs) that control runoff from new development and redevelopment
after regulated earth disturbance activities are complete. These
requirements include the need to implement postconstruction
stormwater BMPs with assurance of long-term operations and
maintenance of those BMPs.
E. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office must be provided to
the municipality. The issuance of an NPDES construction permit [or
permit coverage under the statewide general permit (PAG-2)] satisfies
the requirements of Subsection A.
F. BMP operations and maintenance requirements are described in Article
IV of this chapter.
§ 199-13 STORAGE AREAS § 199-13
193:321

ARTICLE IV
Stormwater BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan Requirements
§ 199-14. General requirements.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of a BMP operations and
maintenance plan which describes how the permanent (e.g.,
postconstruction) stormwater BMPs will be properly operated and
maintained.
B. The following items shall be included in the BMP operations and
maintenance plan:
(1) Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the requirements
for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Beaver
County, shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch or
thirty-inch by forty-two-inch sheets. The contents of the maps(s)
shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater BMPs;
(b) The location of the project site relative to highways, municipal
boundaries or other identifiable landmarks;
(c) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet, or others as
appropriate;
(d) Existing streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within
the project site area;
(e) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, and areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved;
(f) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers and waterlines within 50 feet of property lines of the
project site;
(g) Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative
cover, including the type and amount of impervious area that
would be added;
(h) Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings;
and
(i) A fifteen-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater
BMPs that would provide ingress to and egress from a public
right-of-way.
§ 199-14 STORAGE AREAS § 199-14
193:323
§ 199-15. Responsibilities for operations and maintenance of BMPs.
§ 199-16. Municipality review of plan required.
§ 199-17. Adherence to approved plan required; exception.
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved BMP operations and maintenance plan, or to
allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to an
(2) A description of how each permanent stormwater BMP will be
operated and maintained, and the identity of the person(s)
responsible for operations and maintenance;
(3) The name of the project site, the name and address of the owner of
the property and the name of the individual or firm preparing the
plan; and
(4) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater BMPs are fixtures that can be altered or removed only
after approval by the municipality.
A. The BMP operations and maintenance plan for the project site shall
establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance
of all permanent stormwater BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements
are to be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater BMPs may also
be dedicated to and maintained by the municipality;
(2) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single
ownership, or if sewers and other public improvements are to be
privately owned and maintained, then the operation and
maintenance of stormwater BMPs shall be the responsibility of the
owner or private management entity.
B. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The municipality reserves
the right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance
responsibility for any or all of the stormwater BMPs.
A. The municipality shall review the BMP operations and maintenance
plan for consistency with the purposes and requirements of this chapter
and any permits issued by DEP.
B. The municipality shall notify the applicant, in writing, whether the BMP
operations and maintenance plan is approved.
C. The municipality may require an as-built survey of all stormwater BMPs
and an explanation of any discrepancies with the operations and
maintenance plan.
§ 199-14 MONACA CODE § 199-17
193:324
approved BMP operations and maintenance plan, unless an exception is
granted, in writing, by the municipality.
§ 199-18. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately
owned stormwater BMPs.
§ 199-19. Stormwater management easements.
§ 199-20. Recording of approved plan and related agreements.
§ 199-21. Municipal stormwater BMP operation and maintenance
fund.
A. The property owner shall sign an operations and maintenance
agreement with the municipality covering all stormwater BMPs that are
to be privately owned. The agreement shall be substantially the same as
the agreement in Appendix B118 of this chapter.
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of
all permanent stormwater BMPs. The agreement shall be subject to the
review and approval of the municipality.
A. Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for
off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the Municipal
Engineer.
B. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property
owner if necessary for access for inspections and maintenance or
preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration and
detention areas and other BMPs by persons other than the property
owner. The purpose of the easement shall be specified in any agreement
under § 199-18.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed,
constructed or implemented, as described in the BMP operations and
maintenance plan, shall record the following documents in the Office of
the Recorder of Deeds for Beaver County within 15 days of approval of
the BMP Operations Plan by the municipality:
(1) The Operations and Maintenance Plan, or a summary thereof;
(2) Operations and maintenance agreements under § 199-18; and
(3) Easements under § 199-19.
B. The municipality may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
this section.
118. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 199-17 STORAGE AREAS § 199-21
193:325
A. If stormwater BMPs are accepted by the municipality for dedication,
the municipality may require persons installing stormwater BMPs to
pay a specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater BMP operation
and maintenance fund to help defray costs of operations and
maintenance activities. The amount may be determined as follows:
(1) If the BMP is to be owned and maintained by the municipality, the
amount shall cover the estimated costs for operations and
maintenance for 10 years, as determined by the municipality.
(2) The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual
series values.
B. If a BMP is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility (e.g., ball
field, lake), the municipality may adjust the amount due accordingly.
§ 199-21 MONACA CODE § 199-21
193:326
ARTICLE V
Inspection and Right of Entry
§ 199-22. Inspections.
§ 199-23. Right of entry.
A. DEP, or its designees (e.g., county conservation districts), normally
ensures compliance with any permits issued, including those for
stormwater management. In addition to DEP compliance programs, the
municipality, or its designee, may inspect all phases of the construction,
operations, maintenance and any other implementation of stormwater
BMPs.
B. During any stage of the regulated earth disturbance activities, if the
municipality, or its designee, determines that any BMPs are not being
implemented in accordance with this chapter, the municipality may
suspend or revoke any existing permits or other approvals until the
deficiencies are corrected.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the municipality to inspect the implementation,
condition or operation and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs in
regard to any aspect governed by this chapter.
B. BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on behalf of the
municipality ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes
of determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any BMP in the municipality such devices as are
necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges
from such BMP.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the municipality access to a BMP is a
violation of this chapter.
§ 199-22 STORAGE AREAS § 199-23
193:327

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 199-24. Review fee.
The municipality may charge a reasonable fee for review of BMP operations
and maintenance plans to defray review costs incurred by the municipality.
The applicant shall pay all such fees.
§ 199-25. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter may cover:
A. Administrative/clerical costs.
B. The review of the BMP operations and maintenance plan by the
Municipal Engineer.
C. The site inspections, including, but not limited to, preconstruction
meetings, inspections during construction of stormwater BMPs, and
final inspection upon completion of the stormwater BMPs.
D. Any additional work required to monitor and enforce any provisions of
this chapter, correct violations and assure proper completion of
stipulated remedial actions.
§ 199-24 STORAGE AREAS § 199-25
193:329

ARTICLE VII
Prohibited Activities
§ 199-26. Prohibited discharges.
A. No person in the municipality shall allow, or cause to allow, stormwater
discharges into the municipality's separate storm sewer system which
are not composed entirely of stormwater, except as provided in
Subsection B below, and discharges allowed under a state or federal
permit.
B. Discharges which may be allowed, based on a finding by the
municipality that the discharge(s) do not significantly contribute to
pollution to surface waters of the commonwealth, are:
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities;
(2) Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains;
(3) Potable water sources, including dechlorinated waterline and fire
hydrant flushings;
(4) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(5) Lawn watering;
(6) Irrigation drainage;
(7) Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used;
(8) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds);
(9) Air-conditioning condensate;
(10)Water from individual residential car washing;
(11) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
(12) Springs;
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater;
(14)Water from crawl space pumps.
C. In the event that the municipality determines that any of the discharges
identified in Subsection B significantly contribute to pollution of waters
of the commonwealth, or is so notified by DEP, the municipality will
notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.
D. Upon notice provided by the municipality under Subsection C, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the
§ 199-26 STORAGE AREAS § 199-26
193:331
§ 199-27. Prohibited connections.
§ 199-28. Roof drains.
§ 199-29. Alteration of BMPs.
municipality and consistent with the degree of pollution caused by the
discharge to cease the discharge.
E. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
A. The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in
§ 199-26B above:
(1) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows any non-stormwater discharge, including sewage,
process wastewater and wash water, to enter the separate storm
sewer system, and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks; and
(2) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the separate storm sewer system which has
not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and
approved by the municipality.
A. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary sewers or storm
sewers or roadside ditches, except as provided in § 199-28B.
B. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm
sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be
permitted by the municipality.
C. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing
stormwater BMP, unless it is part of an approved maintenance program,
without the written approval of the municipality.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP or within a drainage easement which would limit or
alter the functioning of the BMP without the written approval of the
municipality.
§ 199-26 MONACA CODE § 199-29
193:332
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 199-30. Violations deemed public nuisances.
§ 199-31. Enforcement.
§ 199-32. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Whenever the municipality finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the municipality may
order compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such
notice may require, without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
(2) The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices or operations;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) The implementation of stormwater BMPs; and
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violations(s). Said notice
may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done
by the municipality or designee, and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Any building, land development or other permit or approval issued by
the municipality may be suspended or revoked by the municipality for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit;
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter; or
§ 199-30 STORAGE AREAS § 199-32
193:333
§ 199-33. Violations and penalties.
§ 199-34. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality, or its designee,
relevant the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the relevant judicial
or administrative body according to law within the time period allowed.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard
or nuisance; pollution or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the municipality
when:
(1) The Municipal Engineer or designee has inspected and approved
the corrections to the stormwater BMPs or the elimination of the
hazard or nuisance; and/or
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation of the ordinance, law
or rule and regulation has been corrected.
C. A permit or approval which has been revoked by the municipality
cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under
the procedures outlined in this chapter.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs, or
imprisonment of not more than 30 days, or both. Each day that the
violation continues shall be a separate offense.
B. In addition, the municipality, through its solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate
forms of remedy or relief.
§ 199-32 MONACA CODE § 199-34
193:334
Chapter 205
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement—See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Transient retail merchants — See Ch. 161,
Art. I.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
210.
Fee schedule — See Ch. A256.
§ 199-34 STORAGE AREAS § 199-34
193:335

ARTICLE I
Coasting or Sledding
[Adopted 11-12-1975 by Ord. No. 693]
§ 205-1. Prohibited acts; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person to coast or ride upon any sled or similar
conveyance upon any sidewalk in the Borough of Monaca or upon any
street or alley in said Borough, unless such street or alley shall have been
especially set apart and designated by the Mayor as a "play highway," for
the purpose of sledding. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $10 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof, to
imprisonment for not more than five days, provided that nothing herein
shall prohibit any adult from pulling or drawing a child upon a sled upon
any sidewalk or while crossing from one side of a street or alley to another
side thereof.
§ 205-1 STORAGE AREAS § 205-1
193:337

ARTICLE II
Sidewalk Construction and Repair
[Adopted 11-12-1975 by Ord. No. 691]
§ 205-2. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
DOWNTOWN MONACA BUSINESS DISTRICT SIDEWALKS — Includes all
sidewalks fronting on Pennsylvania Avenue from 4th Street to 17th Street,
all sidewalks fronting on 9th Street from Atlantic Avenue to Pennsylvania
Avenue, all sidewalks on 10th Street from Maple Alley to Pennsylvania
Avenue, all sidewalks on 11th Street from Maple Alley and Virginia Avenue
to Pennsylvania Avenue, all sidewalks on Wall Street from Pacific Avenue
to Pennsylvania Avenue, all sidewalks on 12th Street from Pacific Avenue
through Pine Alley, all sidewalks on 13th Street from Pine Alley to
Pennsylvania Avenue, all sidewalks on 14th Street from Spruce Alley to
Pennsylvania Avenue and all sidewalks on 16th Street from Pine Alley to
Pennsylvania.[Added 6-10-1985 by Ord. No. 756]
SIDEWALK — Includes any portion of a street or highway in the Borough
of Monaca located outside the cartway and may include a paved footway,
unpaved grassplot, curb and gutter or so much thereof as the Borough
Council shall in any instance stipulate, but in every case it shall include at
least the paved footway.
§ 205-3. Compliance required.
Every owner of property in the Borough of Monaca shall, on 30 days' notice
from the Borough Council, construct or reconstruct a sidewalk, which shall
conform to all applicable requirements of this article, in front of and/or
alongside such property.
§ 205-4. Responsibility for repairs.
Every owner of property in the Borough of Monaca shall, on 30 days' notice
from the Borough Council, repair the sidewalk, in the manner and to the
extent stipulated in such notice, in front of and/or alongside such property.
§ 205-5. Compliance with other provisions.
In new developments, located in the Borough of Monaca, sidewalks shall be
constructed, reconstructed and repaired in accordance with Chapter 210,
Subdivision and Land Development. The notice requirements in §§ 205-3
and 205-4 of this article shall be adhered to by the property owner in case
of reconstruction or repair of any such sidewalk.
§ 205-6. Construction standards and specifications.
§ 205-2 STORAGE AREAS § 205-6
193:339
§ 205-7. Lines and grades; curbs and gutters.
All sidewalks shall be laid in conformity with lines and grades given by the
Borough Engineer and shall have a rise of 1/4 inch to the foot from the outer
edge of the sidewalk to the inner edge thereof. The grassplot shall have a
fall of 1/2 inch to the foot. Curbs and gutters shall conform to specifications
adopted by the Borough Council from time to time.
§ 205-8. Duties of Borough Engineer; inspection.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Engineer to determine, in case of any
individual property, whether a sidewalk shall be reconstructed or whether
it shall be repaired and, in either case, the specific part or parts thereto
to be reconstructed or repaired. The Engineer may, at any time during the
course of constructing, reconstructing or repairing any sidewalk, visit the
site of such work to ascertain whether such work is being done according
to requirements; and he or one of his assistants shall visit such site for
such purpose, at any reasonable time, when so requested by the property
owner. Within two days after the completion of the work of construction,
A. All sidewalks shall be constructed, reconstructed and repaired of
concrete only, in conformity with specifications adopted by the Borough
Council from time to time. All sidewalks hereafter constructed shall be
paved to a width of five feet, provided that, on any street in the Borough
except Pennsylvania Avenue, Ninth Street and Indiana Avenue between
Ninth Street and the east Borough line, where a sidewalk shall have
been constructed of a width of eight feet or 10 feet, exclusive of
grassplot, and the property owner shall desire to reconstruct such
sidewalk or the Borough shall order the reconstruction thereof by
reason of its condition, such walks shall be relaid in such manner that
the paved portion shall be five feet wide, with curb and grassplot or
grassplots located as directed by the Borough Engineer.
B. Specifications for Downtown Monaca Business District sidewalks. In
addition to the foregoing requirements, the Downtown Monaca
Business District sidewalks shall be constructed, reconstructed and
repaired in accordance with the specifications set forth in Attachment
A, attached hereto, made part hereof and incorporated herein.119 Every
individual, business, corporation, public agency or public utility shall
apply for and be granted a permit, on a form prescribed by the Borough,
prior to undertaking any construction, reconstruction or repair of any
Downtown Monaca Business District sidewalk. The permit application
shall elicit information, including but not limited to the applicant's
name and address, the area to be constructed, reconstructed or
repaired and that the applicant is aware of and agrees to be bound by
the provisions of any and all ordinances relating to sidewalks generally
and sidewalks in the Downtown Monaca Business District. [Added
6-10-1985 by Ord. No. 756]
119. Editor's Note: Attachment A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 205-6 MONACA CODE § 205-8
193:340
reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk, it shall be the duty of the owner
of the property where such work was done to notify the Borough Engineer
of that fact, so that he may inspect such sidewalk to determine whether the
work was done in conformity with the requirements of this article.
§ 205-9. Repairs to sidewalks adjacent to property.
Any property owner, upon his initiative and without notice from any
Borough authority, may construct, reconstruct or repair a sidewalk in front
of or alongside his property, provided that such owner shall first make
application to the Borough Engineer for the line and grade and shall
conform to the requirements of this article as to line, grade and
specifications, and that he shall notify the Borough Engineer, as required by
§ 205-8 of this article, within two days after completion of the work.
§ 205-10. Failure to comply.
In any case where a property owner shall fail, neglect or refuse to construct,
reconstruct or repair a sidewalk as required by this article, within the time
limit stated in the notice to do such work, or when such work, whether done
upon notice by the Borough or upon the initiative of the property owner,
shall not be in conformity with the requirements of this article and/or the
notice to do such work, the Borough shall have the authority to cause such
work to be done or to be rectified in case of work improperly done and shall
collect the cost of such work or of such rectification, as the case may be,
with 10% additional, from such defaulting property owner in the manner
authorized by law.
§ 205-8 STORAGE AREAS § 205-10
193:341

ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Sales
[Adopted 11-12-1975 by Ord. No. 692]
§ 205-11. Definitions; word usage.
§ 205-12. Parking of vehicles for sale prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any portion of any street or
sidewalk in the Borough of Monaca for the storage, parking or display of any
motor vehicle that shall be for sale and shall bear a sign or other indication
of the fact that the same shall be for sale.
§ 205-13. Restricted activities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any portion of any sidewalk in
the Borough of Monaca with any goods, wares or merchandise or with boxes
or containers therefor or stands, tables or racks for the display thereof,
except that:
A. The following words, as used in this article, shall have the meanings
hereby respectively ascribed thereto:
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
STREET — The roadway or portion intended for vehicular use of any
street, highway, alley or other public way in the Borough of Monaca.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. Goods, wares or merchandise may be placed on the sidewalk for such
limited time as may be necessary for loading or unloading, removing or
storing away of the same.
B. The Borough Council, in its discretion, may establish a special sidewalk
sale day along specified portions of the sidewalks in the Borough. On
such days, any merchant having a place of business along such sidewalk
may display any of his goods, wares or merchandise and may set up
tables, stands and/or racks for the display thereof and signs relating
thereto, and such person may, individually and/or by his employees or
assistants, engage in the sale of such goods, wares or merchandise. In
establishing a special sidewalk sale day, the Council shall state the
hours when such sale shall be in effect and the portion of the width of
such sidewalk to be used for such display and sale purposes and/or the
portion to be kept free and open for pedestrian traffic, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to disregard any such direction.
§ 205-11 STORAGE AREAS § 205-14
193:343
§ 205-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be punishable
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Code Enforcement.
§ 205-14 MONACA CODE § 205-14
193:344
ARTICLE IV
Excavations
[Adopted 8-27-2019 by Ord. No. 965120]
§ 205-15. Definitions; word usage.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any person who makes application for a permit.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Monaca, Beaver County, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH DESIGNEE — A person who has the authority to act on behalf
of the Borough. Said person may be the Borough Manager, Public Works
Director or other employee authorized by Council to act.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance(s) or occurrence(s), the
existence of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to person(s) or
property(ies).
ENGINEER — The engineer employed as the Borough Engineer or his
authorized representative.
NEW IMPROVED STREET — Any street constructed or resurfaced within
five years of request for street opening.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been issued a permit and has agreed to
fulfill all the terms of this article.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
utility, corporation or authority created pursuant to an act of the
Pennsylvania General Assembly. Whenever used in any section prescribing
and imposing a penalty, the term "person," as applied to an association,
shall mean the partners or members thereof and, as applied to corporations,
the officers thereof.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY — Any cable television company or any
company subject to the jurisdiction of and control by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission.
STREET — A public street, public easement, right-of-way, public highway,
public alley, public sidewalk, public way or public road accepted or
maintained by the municipality or open for travel and use by the public,
whether or not so accepted or maintained, including the entire area within
the right-of-way thereof.
TEMPORARILY RESTORE OR RESURFACE — Provisions for maintaining
traffic flow over disturbed area by temporary bridges or by backfilling with
specified material to match existing road grade.
120. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Article IV, Excavations, adopted
12-7-1993 by Ord. No. 807, as amended.
§ 205-15 STORAGE AREAS § 205-16
193:345
§ 205-16. Permit required; emergency circumstances.
§ 205-17. Adherence to terms of permit.
No permittee shall perform any of the work authorized by such permit in
any amount greater than that specified in such permit, except that where
the permittee desires to perform additional work not in excess of an amount
greater than 10% of the amount specified in such permit, the permittee
may apply to the Borough of Monaca for an amended permit to permit the
additional work. If additional work desired to be performed by the permittee
exceeds 10% of the amount specified in the original permit, an application
for a new permit shall be deemed to cover any such additional work as may
be added pursuant to the issuance of an amended permit within the limit
specified herein.
§ 205-18. Time frame for commencement of work.
Work for which a permit has been issued shall commence within 30 days
after the issuance of the permit thereof. If not so commenced, the permit
shall be terminated automatically unless the permittee applies for an
extension of time within which to commence work. If such an extension is
granted, the original permit shall remain in force for the period of time
specified in the extension. Permits which terminate by reason of failure
to commence work within 30 days after issuance thereof or within any
extension of time granted hereunder may be renewed only upon the
payment of an additional permit fee as originally required.
§ 205-19. Permits nontransferable.
Permits are not transferable from one person to another, and the work
shall not be performed in any place other than the location specifically
designated in the permit.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any tunnel, opening or
excavation of any kind in or under the surface of any street without first
securing a permit from the Borough of Monaca for each separate
undertaking.
B. Any person maintaining pipes, lines or other underground facilities in
or under the surface of any street may proceed with an opening without
a permit when emergency circumstances demand the work to be done
immediately, provided that the permit could not have reasonably and
practically been obtained beforehand. In such cases where emergency
openings are necessary, the Borough of Monaca shall be notified prior
to such openings by either fax or telephone. The person shall thereafter
apply for a permit on the first regular business day on which the
Borough of Monaca office is open for business, and said permit shall be
retroactive to the date when the work was begun.
§ 205-16 MONACA CODE § 205-20
193:346
§ 205-20. Expiration of permits.
Every permit shall expire after 60 days from issuance date. If the permittee
shall be unable to complete the work within the specified time, he or she
shall, prior to expiration of the permit, present, in writing, to the Borough of
Monaca a request for an extension of time setting forth therein the reasons
for the requested extension. If the Borough of Monaca finds that the failure
to complete the work under the permit within the time specified therein
was due to circumstances reasonably beyond the control of the permittee
and that an extension of time to complete the work under the permit is
necessary and not contrary to the public interest, the permittee may be
granted additional time for the completion of the work.
§ 205-21. Cuts made by municipal utilities.
All street openings required by utilities owned and/or operated by the
Borough of Monaca shall be made and restored under the direction and
supervision of the Borough Designee or the Engineer. The permit, fee,
deposit, insurance and bond requirements of this article shall not be
applicable to any openings made by municipally owned and/or operated
facilities.
§ 205-22. State and county highways.
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable in those instances
where the street or highway is maintained by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by the County of Beaver; provided, however, that any
person applying for a permit to do work within the right-of-way of a street
or highway maintained by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by the
County of Beaver which would otherwise require a permit under the terms
of this article shall notify the Borough of Monaca at the time that said
application is made and at the time that the work under any permit issued
pursuant to said application is begun, so that proper safety precautions may
be taken by the Borough of Monaca during the continuation of said work.
§ 205-23. Right to use streets.
Every permit shall be granted subject to the right of the Borough of Monaca,
or of any other person entitled thereto, to use the street for any purpose for
which such street may lawfully be used not inconsistent with the permit.
§ 205-24. Revocation of permit.
A. Any permit may be revoked by the Borough of Monaca, after written
notice to the permittee, for:
(1) Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of this
article.
§ 205-20 STORAGE AREAS § 205-24
193:347
§ 205-25. Duties and responsibilities of applicant.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of any applicant to:
§ 205-26. Duties and responsibilities of permittee; fees.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of any person receiving a permit to:
(2) Violation of any other applicable provision of the Code of the
Borough of Monaca or any other applicable ordinance, regulation
or statute.
(3) The existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting
or creating a nuisance or endangering the life or property of others.
B. The permittee shall be granted a period of three days from the date of
the notice to correct the violation and to proceed with the diligent
prosecution of the work authorized by the permit before said permit is
revoked.
C. Written notice of any such violation or condition shall be served upon
the permittee or his or her agent engaged in the work. The notice shall
contain a brief statement of the reasons for revoking the permit. Notice
may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be
notified or by certified or registered United States mail addressed to
the person to be notified.
D. When any permit has been revoked and the work authorized by the
permit has not been completed, the Borough of Monaca shall do or
cause to be done such works as may be necessary to restore the street
or part thereof to as good a condition as before the opening was made.
All expenses incurred by the Borough of Monaca shall be recovered
from the deposit or bond the permittee has made or filed with the
Borough of Monaca.
A. Make written application for such permit with the Borough of Monaca
on such form as it shall prescribe. No work shall commence until the
Borough of Monaca has approved the application and plan and issued a
permit, and until the permittee has paid and provided all required fees,
deposits, certificates and bonds.
B. Furnish, in triplicate, a plan showing the work to be performed under
said permit. Two copies of such plan shall be returned to the applicant
at the time the permit is granted.
C. Agree to save the Borough of Monaca, its officers, employees and
agents harmless from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which
may accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of any work performed
under said permit and to indemnify the Borough of Monaca for any
losses, costs liabilities or damages it is called upon to pay. The
acceptance of a permit shall constitute such an agreement by the
applicant, whether the same is expressed or not.
§ 205-24 MONACA CODE § 205-26
193:348
§ 205-27. Regulations for openings and excavations.
A. Pay a permit fee in an amount established by resolution of the Borough
Council; provided, however, that public utility companies may elect to
be billed monthly for such fees as they accrue, upon written notice to
the Borough.
B. Make a deposit to cover any additional costs borne by the Borough of
Monaca specifically related to the work authorized by the permit and,
unless the permittee is granted permission to restore the street surface,
the cost of restoring the street surface removed or damaged by the
work done under such permit. The amount of such deposit shall be
computed by the Borough of Monaca in accordance with this article. In
the case of public utility companies, the Borough of Monaca may waive
the requirement of a deposit if said utility companies file with the
Borough of Monaca their corporate bond in a form satisfactory to the
Municipal Solicitor, conditioned upon the payment to the Borough of
Monaca of all costs which would otherwise be covered by and paid out
of such a deposit. In the event that such utility companies elect to file
such a bond, the Borough of Monaca shall bill such utility companies
monthly for such costs as they accrue.
A. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend beyond the center
line of the street before being backfilled and the surface of the street
temporarily restored.
B. No more than 250 feet measured longitudinally shall be opened in any
street at any one time, except by special permission of the Borough of
Monaca.
C. All utility facilities shall be exposed sufficiently or their definite location
shall be determined ahead of trench excavation work to avoid damage
to those facilities and to permit their relocation, if necessary.
D. Pipe drains, pipe culverts or other facilities encountered shall be
protected by the permittee.
E. Any person whose facilities are damaged or caused to be relocated by
the permittee shall notify the permittee and the Borough of Monaca of
such damage and thereafter may make the necessary repairs or
relocation and file a claim against the permittee with the Borough of
Monaca for the costs of such repairs or relocation. Public utility
companies concerned shall be notified by the Borough of Monaca in
sufficient time to determine the validity of the damage or relocation
claims. The cost of such repair work or relocation work may be withheld
by the Borough of Monaca from the deposit pending determination of
liability for the damage.
F. Monuments of concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the
purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property
subdivision or a precise survey reference point of a permanent survey
§ 205-26 STORAGE AREAS § 205-27
193:349
bench mark within the Borough of Monaca shall not be removed or
disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed unless permission to do
so is first obtained, in writing, from the Borough of Monaca. Permission
shall be granted only upon the condition that the permittee shall pay all
expenses incident to the proper replacement of the monument.
G. When work performed by the permittee interferes with the established
drainage system of any street, provision shall be made by the permittee
to provide proper drainage.
H. When any earth, gravel or other excavated material is caused to flow,
roll or wash upon any street, the permittee shall cause removal of the
same from the street within eight hours after deposit to permit safe flow
of traffic. In the event that the earth, gravel or other excavated material
so deposited is not removed as specified, the Borough of Monaca shall
cause such removal, and the cost incurred shall be paid by the
permittee or deducted from his or her deposit.
I. Every permittee shall place around the project such barriers,
barricades, lights, warning flags and danger signs as shall be
determined by the Borough of Monaca to be necessary for the
protection of the public. Additional safety requirements may be
prescribed by the Borough of Monaca and, where applicable, shall be in
conformance with the requirements set forth in PennDoT, 67 Pa. Code
§ 203.1 et seq.,121 as amended, dealing with work-zone traffic control.
Copies of the publication shall be made available in the office of the
Borough of Monaca for inspection by the public.
(1) Whenever any person fails to provide or maintain the required
safety devices, such devices shall be installed and maintained by
the Borough of Monaca. The amount of the cost incurred shall be
paid by the permittee or deducted from his or her deposit.
(2) No person shall willfully move, injure, destroy or extinguish any
barrier, warning light, sign or notice erected, placed or posted in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
J. Access to private driveways shall be provided except during working
hours when construction operations prohibit provisions of such access.
Free access must be provided at all times to fire hydrants.
K. Excavated materials shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench
and kept trimmed up so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible
to public travel. In order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate dirt or
dust nuisance, the Borough of Monaca may require the permittee to
provide toe boards or bins, and if the excavated area is muddy and
causes inconvenience to pedestrians, temporary wooden plank walks
shall be installed by the permittee as directed by the Borough of
Monaca. If the street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material
121. Editor's Note: 67 Pa. Code Chapter 203 was reserved by 36 Pa.B. 537, effective 2-4-2006.
See now Pa. Code § 212.401 et seq.
§ 205-27 MONACA CODE § 205-27
193:350
without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, the permittee shall keep
a passageway at least 1/2 the sidewalk width open along the sidewalk
line.
L. Work authorized to be performed by a permittee shall be performed
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, unless the permittee obtains written consent from the
Borough of Monaca to do the work at an earlier or later hour. Such
permission shall be granted only in the case of an emergency or in the
event that the work authorized by the permit is to be performed in
traffic-congested areas.
M. In granting any permit, the Borough of Monaca may attach such other
conditions thereto as may be reasonably necessary to prevent damage
to public or private property or to prevent the operation from being
conducted in a manner hazardous to life or property or in a manner
likely to create a nuisance. Such conditions may include, but shall not
be limited to:
(1) Limitations on the period of the year in which the work may be
performed.
(2) Restrictions as to the size, weight and type of equipment.
(3) Designation of routes upon which materials may be transported.
(4) Designation of the place and manner of disposal of excavated
materials.
(5) Requirements as to the laying of dust, the cleaning of streets, the
prevention of noise and other results offensive or injurious to the
neighborhood, the general public or any portion thereof.
(6) Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work.
N. Hydra-hammer, headache ball. The use of a mechanical device for the
breaking of pavement, such as a hydra-hammer, headache ball, etc., will
be permitted only under special written permission of the Borough of
Monaca.
O. Material specifications. All materials used in restoring openings shall
consist of, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Crushed aggregate. Crushed aggregate for surface restoration at
various locations as directed shall be crushed gravel meeting the
requirements of Section 350, Subbase, of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PennDOT) Specifications Manual
Form 408, most recent editions, for single-course gradation-band
option with one-inch-top size or approved alternate.
(2) Special trench backfill shall be crushed stone meeting or exceeding
the requirements of Section 677 of the PennDOT Specifications
§ 205-27 STORAGE AREAS § 205-27
193:351
Manual Form 408, most recent edition, for 2RC aggregate. Type A
or better, material.
(3) Asphalt pavement shall be based on the detail "Local Road
Bituminous Pavement Replacement Detail. (See § 205-27V.)
(4) Grass seed. Grass seed for surface restoration of all off-street,
private right-of-way areas shall meet or exceed the requirements of
Section 804 of PennDOT Specifications Manual Form 408, most
recent edition, for Formula B materials of the following mix by
weight or approved equal:
Type Percent
Perennial rye grass (Pennfine or
Manhattan)
20%
Pennlawn red fescue 30%
Kentucky bluegrass 50%
(5) Concrete shall be Class A, minimum mix of six bags per cubic yard,
for a compressive strength of 2,750 pounds per square inch (psi) at
seven days and 3,300 psi at 28 days and flexural strengths of 500
psi at seven days and 600 psi at 28 days.
P. Use of streets. During the progress of work, the permittee shall
accommodate both vehicular and pedestrian traffic and shall provide
unobstructed access to fire hydrants and water and gas valves. Gutters
and waterways must be kept open, or other provisions made for the
removal of stormwater. Street intersections may be blocked 1/2 at a
time, and the permittee shall lay and maintain temporary driveways,
bridges, and crossings as, in the opinion of the Engineer, are necessary
to reasonably accommodate the traveling public.
Q. Existing utilities.
(1) The permittee will be required, at his own expense, to protect,
support and sustain all sewers, water, gas or service pipes and
electric, light, power, telephone or telegraph poles, conduits and
other fixtures laid across or along the line of the utility, whether
such facilities are public or private. Damage to any private sewer
will be repaired by the permittee.
(2) The Engineer, as well as the company or corporation owning any
municipal or utility company pipes, poles or conduits, must be
notified by the permittee before any such facilities are removed or
molested. In case any water or sewer lines or any utility company
gas or electric facilities, including service connections and/or
appurtenances, are damaged, they shall be repaired by the
authorities having control of the same, and the expense of said
repaired shall be paid by the permittee directly. Existing private
sewer service lines damaged, disrupted or taken up by contractor's
§ 205-27 MONACA CODE § 205-27
193:352
operations shall be reconnected and restored to full service by
and at the expense of the permittee. The permittee shall also be
responsible for maintenance of damaged sections of private service
aterals for the terms of the warranty period.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to ascertain and verify
the actual location and elevation of existing pipelines or buried
conduits in the path of the work before commencing excavation.
R. Shoring, sheeting and bracing. All excavations which are five feet or
more in depth or which exceed any state or federal regulatory agency's
stipulated maximum depth for unshored excavations or are in unstable
material and shoring is necessary to facilitate proper and safe working
conditions, excavations shall be shored. All shoring shall meet or
exceed OSHA or State Labor Department requirements. Shoring shall
consist of timber or metal sheeting supported by a sound system of
cross jacks acting against a sheeting whaler grid. As an alternate to
shoring by sheeting, the permittee may employ an approved-type
trench box of reinforced-steel construction, and workmen shall conduct
work from within such box.
S. Construction methods. Excavation involving the removal of bituminous
or concrete paving in streets, private drives and parking area trenching
situations shall be accomplished by sawing or cutting the improved
surface at the edges of the proposed trench at points one foot on either
side of the trench opening at ground surface. Sawing or cutting shall
extend to the full depth of the existing surface. Where existing surfaces
are damaged, taken up, undercut or unraveled by construction
excavation operations which extend beyond the original saw or cut
marks for removal, the permittee, in restoring such bituminous or
concrete surfaces to original condition, shall resaw or cut the surface to
a straight and even line six inches beyond the furthest point of damage
from the trench center line.
T. Work in freezing weather. When temperatures fall to 32° F., all grouting
and concrete materials entering into the construction are to be
preheated and used while warm. When any mortar or cement concrete
work is carried out under freezing conditions, the heated area must be
maintained for at least 24 hours or the installation shall be protected
from frost by covering with hay or straw; and where it is impractical to
completely cover the work area with an enclosure and heat the work
area to at least 40° F., the work shall be suspended.
U. Trench excavation. The trench shall be excavated along the lines
proposed by the permit holder and approved by the Borough Designee
or Engineer. All trenches shall have vertical sides. No tapering of sides
shall be permitted unless approved in writing. The width of the trench,
unless otherwise approved, shall be six inches minimum and 18 inches
maximum on each side of the utility pipe. The bottom of the trench shall
be hallowed out so as to allow the body of the pipe to have a bearing
throughout on the trench bottom. Ground adjacent to all excavations
§ 205-27 STORAGE AREAS § 205-27
193:353
§ 205-28. Backfilling and restoration.
shall be graded to prevent water running in. Any accumulated water in
the excavation shall be removed by pumping or other means approved
by the Engineer, prior to the placement of pipes or utilities and before
backfill is begun.
V. The attached details labeled SD-1 through SD-2T and Local Road
Bituminous Pavement Replacement detail are merged herein, made a
part hereof and shall be the standards to follow and comply with for and
during street opening work.122
A. All pavement cuts, openings, and excavations shall be made properly
and backfilled properly by the permittee according to Borough of
Monaca specifications, including but not limited to the details attached
hereto and incorporated herein at the appendix to this chapter. If
conditions are such as to prevent the completion of permanent
restorations of the street surface at the time backfilling is completed,
the permittee shall install a temporary surface in accordance with
municipal specifications until such time as weather conditions will
permit permanent restoration of the street surface.
B. The Borough of Monaca shall be notified by the permittee 48 hours in
advance of backfilling and restoration. Such notice shall provide the
approximate time each will begin.
C. No backfilling or restoration shall be accomplished unless or until the
Borough designee or Engineer is present or permission has been
granted for backfilling or restoration after inspection by the Borough
designee or Engineer.
D. If the Borough designee or Engineer finds that paving surfaces adjacent
to the street openings may be damaged where trenches are made
parallel to the street or where a number of cross trenches are laid in
proximity to one another or where the equipment used may cause such
damage, he or she may require negotiated contribution from the
permittee for the resurfacing in place of patching of such street if the
total area of the proposed patch or damaged area exceeds 25% of the
total pavement surfacing between curb faces or between concrete
gutter edges. Such negotiations shall be carried on and contributions
agreed upon prior to issuance of a permit.
E. After excavation is commenced, the work of making and backfilling the
same shall be prosecuted with due diligence. Unless the provisions of
Subsection A of this section apply, the permittee is required to complete
permanent restoration of the street surface in accordance with
municipal specifications within seven days after repairs and/or
installation are completed. Furthermore, the permittee shall be
122. Editor's Note: Said details and specifications are included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 205-27 MONACA CODE § 205-28
193:354
§ 205-29. Restoration guarantee.
required to install and maintain a temporary surface in accordance with
municipal specification during:
(1) The period between the completion of repairs and/or installation
and the commencement of final restoration; and
(2) The periods during the actual work when workers do not require
access to the excavation.
F. Inspections of all work authorized by a permit shall be made by the
Borough designee or Engineer at such times and in such manner as
required to assure compliance with provisions of the article. If the
nature of the work to be performed under any permit is such as to
require the services of a full-time inspector, the Borough designee or
Engineer shall provide the services of such inspector.
G. All costs of inspection shall be borne by the permittee. Such costs shall
be based upon a schedule of charges on file in the office of the Borough
of Monaca.
H. Upon completion of all work accomplished under the provisions of a
permit, the permittee shall notify the Borough of Monaca, in writing. A
certificate of final inspection shall be issued by the Borough designee or
Engineer to each permittee no sooner than one year and not later than
18 months after the permanent restoration of the excavation has been
made, provided that the work authorized by the permit has been
performed according to municipal specifications. Prior to the issuance
of a certificate, the Borough Designee or Engineer shall make a final
inspection of the restoration to determine whether municipal
specifications have been adhered to and/or whether the restoration
work was otherwise adequately and properly performed.
I. If any settlement in a restored area occurs within a period of two years
from the date of completion of the permanent restoration and the
permittee fails to make such correction after notification, any expense
incurred by the Borough in correcting such settlement shall be paid by
the permittee or recovered from his or her bond, unless the permittee
submits proof, satisfactory to the Borough of Monaca, that the
settlement was not due to defective backfilling.
J. In no case shall any opening made by a permittee be considered in the
charge or care of the Borough of Monaca or any of its officers or
employees, and no officer or employee of the Borough of Monaca, or its
agents, is authorized in any way to take or assume any jurisdiction over
any such opening, except in the exercise of the police power when it is
necessary to protect life and property.
A. Computation of guarantee. The Borough of Monaca, upon receipt of a
properly completed application, shall determine the amount of the
guarantee to be made by the permittee in accordance with the schedule
§ 205-28 STORAGE AREAS § 205-29
193:355
of charges established pursuant to Subsection E of this section. The
guarantee shall be paid at the time the permit is issued, and the
guarantee shall be used to reimburse the Borough of Monaca for the
cost of any work and/or materials furnished by it in connection with
work authorized by the permit, to cover the cost of all necessary
inspections of said work or any other expenses incurred by the Borough
of Monaca in carrying out the provisions of this article. In the case of
a public utility company, the requirement of such guarantee may be
waived if such public utility company files with the Borough of Monaca
its corporate bond.
B. Form of guarantee. The guarantee may be either in the form of a
certified treasurer's or cashier's check or in lawful money of the United
States.
C. Insufficient deposit. If any guarantee is less than sufficient to pay all
costs, the permittee shall, upon demand, pay to the Borough of Monaca
an amount equal to the deficiency. If the permittee fails or refuses to
pay such deficiency, the Borough of Monaca may institute an action to
recover the same in the Court of Common Pleas of Beaver County,
Pennsylvania. Until such deficiency is paid in full, no additional permits
shall be issued to such permittee.
D. Yearly guarantee. Whenever any public utility company shall anticipate
applying for permits for more than one street opening or excavation per
calendar year and does not elect to file a corporate bond as
hereinbefore provided, such public utility company may post one
guarantee in an amount and form as hereinbefore provided for the
calendar year or part thereof to cover the cost of guarantees which
would otherwise be required for the anticipated permits.
E. Guarantee and fee schedules. The Borough of Monaca shall establish a
schedule of charges for inspections, labor, materials and other such
expenses as may be incurred by the Borough in carrying out the
provisions of this article. This schedule shall be established by the
Borough of Monaca in accordance with the reasonably anticipated costs
to be incurred by the Borough making such inspections, including
reasonable administrative and overhead expenses, and in accordance
with the currently prevailing costs in the area for any labor and
materials which may be provided by the Borough. The Borough of
Monaca shall revise said schedule from time to time to reflect any
increase or decrease in the costs used to establish said charges. The
schedule shall be open to public inspection in the Borough of Monaca
Administrative office.
F. Decision on costs. The decision of the Borough of Monaca as to the cost
of any work done or repairs made by the Borough of Monaca, pursuant
to the provisions of this article, shall be final and conclusive as to such
cost, subject to such rights of appeal as may exist by statute.
§ 205-29 MONACA CODE § 205-29
193:356
§ 205-30. Bond requirements.
G. Refund of guarantee. Upon notification by the permittee that all work
authorized by the permit has been completed, and after restoration of
the opening, the Borough of Monaca shall refund to the permittee his or
her deposit, less all cost incurred by the Borough of Monaca in
connection with said permit. In no event shall the permit fee be
refunded.
A. Performance bond. Each applicant or permittee, upon receipt of a
permit, shall provide the Borough of Monaca with financial security, in a
form acceptable to the Municipal Solicitor, to guarantee faithful
performance of work authorized by a permit granted pursuant to this
article. The amount of the financial security shall be 100% of the
estimated cost of restoring the street opening. The term of the financial
security shall begin upon the date of posting thereof and shall
terminate upon the receipt by the permittee of a certificate of final
inspection from the Borough of Monaca. If the permittee anticipates
requesting more than one permit per year, as required by this article,
the permittee may furnish a single financial security to guarantee
faithful performance in such amount as the Borough of Monaca deems
necessary. The amount of such bond shall be in relation to the cost of
restoring pavement cuts to be made by the permittee throughout the
year. In the case of a public utility company, its corporate bond, in a
form satisfactory to the Municipal Solicitor, may be accepted in lieu of
the corporate surety bond required by this section.
B. Maintenance bond. Each applicant, upon the receipt of a permit, shall
provide the Borough of Monaca with financial security, in a form
acceptable to the Municipal Solicitor, to guarantee the maintenance of
the work authorized by a permit granted pursuant to this article, as well
as compliance with the street opening specifications of the Borough of
Monaca and the provisions of this article. The Borough of Monaca shall
determine the amount of the bond, and it shall be in relation to the cost
of restoring the pavement cuts to be made by the permittee; provided,
however, that the minimum amount of the bond shall not be less than
$2,000. The term of each bond shall begin from the completion date of
permanent restoration of the opening by the Borough of Monaca and
shall terminate upon the receipt by the permittee of a certificate of final
inspection from the Engineer. If the permittee anticipates requesting
more than one permit a year, he or she may file a single financial
security to guarantee maintenance of the work authorized by a permit
granted under this article, as well as compliance with the specifications
of the Borough of Monaca and the provisions of this article, in such
amount as the Borough of Monaca deems necessary. The amount of
such bond shall be in relation to the cost of restoring pavement cuts to
be made by the permittee throughout the year. In the case of a public
utility company, its corporate bond, in a form satisfactory to the
Municipal Solicitor, may be accepted in lieu of the corporate surety
bond required by this section.
§ 205-29 STORAGE AREAS § 205-30
193:357
§ 205-31. Liability insurance.
C. Default in performance. Whenever the Borough of Monaca shall find
that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition
of the permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the principal and
to the surety on the bond. Such notice shall state the work to be done,
the estimated cost thereof and the period of time deemed by the
Borough of Monaca to be reasonably necessary for the completion of
such work.
D. Completion of work. After receipt of such notice, the surety must,
within the time therein specified, either cause the required work to be
performed or, failing therein, indemnify the Borough of Monaca for the
cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice.
A. Each applicant, upon the receipt of a permit and prior to performing
work under the permit, shall procure and maintain adequate insurance
in an amount of at least $2,000,000 to protect it from claims for
damages because of bodily injury, including death, and from claims for
damages to property which may arise out of or be related to the
performance of work under the permit, whether such performance is by
the applicant or the applicant's subcontractor or anyone directly or
indirectly employed by the applicant. Such insurance shall cover
collapse, explosive hazards, underground work and work by equipment
on the street and shall not include protection against liability arising
from completed operations.
B. The specific amount of the insurance shall be prescribed by the
Borough of Monaca in accordance with the nature of the risk involved;
provided, however, that the liability insurance for bodily injury shall be
in an amount not less than $1,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000
for each accident, and for property damage in an amount not less than
$500,000 with an aggregate of $1,000,000 for all accidents.
C. A certificate of insurance, in the amount required by this section and in
a form acceptable to the Municipal Solicitor, shall be filed with the
Borough of Monaca prior to commencement of work under the permit.
This certificate of insurance shall also state that the Borough of Monaca
shall be given written notice at least 60 days prior to cancellation of
such insurance.
D. The Borough of Monaca shall be listed as an additional insured and/or
loss payee on all policies of insurance described in this section.
E. Public utility companies and authorities may be relieved of the
obligation of submitting such a certificate if they submit satisfactory
evidence, in a form acceptable to the Municipal Solicitor, that they are
insured in accordance with the requirements of this article or have
adequate provision for self-insurance. Public utility companies may file
an annual certificate of insurance in lieu of individual certificates for
each permit.
§ 205-30 MONACA CODE § 205-32
193:358
§ 205-32. Openings in new streets.
§ 205-33. List of facilities beneath streets to be furnished to
Borough.
A. Notice of proposed improvement. When the Borough of Monaca shall
improve or pave any street, the Borough of Monaca first shall give
notice to all persons owning property abutting on the street about to be
paved or improved and to all public utility companies and authorities
operating in the Borough of Monaca, and all such persons, public utility
companies and authorities shall make all connections, as well as any
repairs thereto, which would necessitate excavation of the street,
within 30 days from the giving of such notice. The time shall be
extended if permission is requested, in writing, and approved by the
Borough of Monaca after consultation with the Engineer.
B. Restriction upon opening newly improved street. No permit shall be
issued by the Borough of Monaca which would allow an excavation or
opening in a paved and improved street surface less than five years old
unless the applicant can demonstrate clearly that public health or
safety requires that the proposed work be permitted, or unless an
emergency condition exists, or unless approved by the Borough of
Monaca governing body subject to the applicant's compliance with
§ 205-32C hereof.
C. Requirements for opening newly improved street. If by special action of
the Borough of Monaca governing body a permit is issued to open any
paved and improved street surface less than five years old, then the
applicant for such permit shall improve the opening and/or excavation
for the entire distance from curb-to-curb of the subject street and
otherwise comply with the Borough of Monaca Construction and Design
Specifications, attached hereto and incorporated herein at the appendix
to this chapter,123 in a manner acceptable to the Engineer. These
requirements may be waived by action of the Borough of Monaca
governing body.
A. Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in pipes,
conduits, ducts or other structures under the surface of any street used
for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, electricity,
communication impulses, water or steam to or from the Borough of
Monaca or to or from premises of its inhabitants or for any other
purposes shall file with the Borough of Monaca, within 120 days after
the adoption of this article, a written statement containing the names of
the Borough streets wherein the aforementioned facilities owned by
such person are located.
B. Within 90 days after the first day of January of each and every year,
such person shall notify, in writing, the Borough of Monaca of the
123. Editor's Note: Said details and specifications are included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 205-32 STORAGE AREAS § 205-33
193:359
§ 205-34. Abandoned facilities.
§ 205-35. Notice to abutting owners and tenants.
§ 205-36. Notice to police and fire authorities.
The Borough of Monaca shall notify, in writing, municipal police and fire
authorities of all street opening permits it grants of a nature that would
require a street being closed. Such notification shall state the nature of
the work to be done, the proposed beginning and completion dates and the
location of such project.
§ 205-37. Violations and penalties.
changes necessary to maintain the street list required under Subsection
A above.
A. Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure located
under the surface of any street is abandoned or the use thereof is
abandoned, the person owning, using, controlling or having an interest
therein shall, within 30 days after such abandonment, file with the
Borough of Monaca a statement, in writing, giving detail of the location
of the structure so abandoned. Whenever there are manholes or tunnels
associated with any abandoned underground facilities, such manholes
or tunnels shall be filled in at the time of abandonment and the Borough
of Monaca notified thereof in writing.
B. When the Borough of Monaca plans to pave or improve streets in which
there are abandoned facilities, the owner of such facilities shall be
notified to remove them if, in the opinion of the Borough of Monaca and
Engineer, their removal is in the best interest of the Borough of
Monaca. If the owner shall refuse to remove such abandoned facilities,
the Borough of Monaca shall remove the abandoned facilities and the
owner shall reimburse the Borough of Monaca for removal.
A. If the work to be undertaken by the permittee is such that it will affect
the use of properties abutting or adjoining the project, the Borough may
require the permittee to submit a list of owners and/or tenants and/or
addresses of all properties abutting the area where the work authorized
by the permit is to be performed. Upon receipt of such list, the Borough
shall notify the affected property owners and/or tenants of the proposed
work to be done.
B. If the work to be undertaken by a permittee will affect other subsurface
installation(s) in the vicinity of the proposed opening, the Borough of
Monaca shall notify the owner(s) of such facilities of the proposed work.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who violates a provision of this article,
or who fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements
thereof shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each violation, plus costs, and
§ 205-33 MONACA CODE § 205-37
193:360
in default of payment of said fine and costs, to imprisonment to the
extent permitted by law for the punishment of summary offenses.
B. A separate offense shall arise for each day or portion thereof in which a
violation is found to exist or for each section of this article found to have
been violated. All fines and penalties for the violation of this article shall
be paid to the Municipal Treasurer.
C. The Borough of Monaca may also commence appropriate actions in
equity, at law or other, to prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin, or abate
violations of this article.
§ 205-37 STORAGE AREAS § 205-37
193:361
Chapter 210
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 46.
Building construction — See Ch. 92.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 94.
Fences, hedges and walls — See Ch. 120.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 131.
Plumbing — See Ch. 165.
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 199.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
Fee schedule — See Ch. A256.
§ 205-37 MONACA CODE § 205-37
210:362
ARTICLE I
Authority and Purpose
§ 210-1. Authority.
Pursuant to the authority contained in Pennsylvania Act 247 of 1968,
Section 501 et seq., (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.), known as the "Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code," and in accordance with the conditions and
procedures set forth in said Act No. 247, the Borough Council of the
Borough of Monaca, Beaver County, Pennsylvania, does hereby adopt,
ordain and enact the following rules and regulations governing subdivision
and land development in said Borough of Monaca.
§ 210-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance of Monaca Borough."
§ 210-3. Purposes.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Monaca, County of Beaver and
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, enacts this chapter to govern subdivision
and land development for the following purposes:
A. To assure sites suitable for subdivision, land development, building
purposes and human habitation.
B. To assure and create conditions favorable to the health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the citizens of Monaca Borough by providing for
the harmonious and coordinated development of the Borough, adequate
open spaces, adequate traffic movement, adequate, recreational and
park facilities, adequate light and air and proper distribution of
population.
C. To provide for a uniform method for the submittal and processing plats
and plans, including uniform specifications for such plats and plans,
uniform provisions for preliminary and for final approvals and uniform
processing of final approval by sections and stages of development.
D. To provide for regulations ensuring that the layout or arrangement of
the subdivision or land development shall conform to the General
Development Plan of the Borough and to any ordinances, regulations or
maps adopted in furtherance thereof; streets in and bordering a
subdivision or land development shall be coordinated and be of such
widths and grades and in such locations as deemed necessary to
accommodate prospective traffic and facilitate fire and police
protection and other municipal and community services; adequate
easements or rights-of-way shall be provided for utilities, stormwater
drainage, sanitary sewage facilities and public water facilities, any
areas reserved by the developer and designated for use as public or
common grounds shall be suitable in size and in location for their
§ 210-1 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-3
210:363
§ 210-4. Applicability.
§ 210-5. Exemptions.
The subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of
more than 10 acres, not including any new streets or easements of access
or residential dwellings, shall be exempt from this chapter.
§ 210-6. Coordination with utility, state and federal requirements.
designated uses; land which is subject to flooding, environmental noise,
slides, subsidence or underground fires either shall be made safe for
the purpose for which such land is proposed to be used or such land
shall be set aside for uses which shall not endanger life or property or
further aggravate or increase the existing menace.
E. To encourage and promote flexibility, economy and ingenuity in the
layout and design of subdivisions and land developments through
provisions authorizing the Planning Commission to recommend and
Borough Council to approve modifying the site planning and
construction requirements in accordance with modern and evolving
principles of site planning and development.
F. To encourage the use of renewable energy systems and energy
conserving building design.
A. Subdivision or land development. No subdivision or land development
of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be made and no street, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, water main or other improvements in connection
with the subdivision or land development shall be laid out, constructed,
opened or dedicated for public use or travel or for the common use of
owners or lessees of land and/or the occupants of buildings or
structures abutting thereon, except in strict accordance with the
provisions, rules and regulations of this chapter for the subdivision of
land and for land development.
B. Sale or transfer of land. No lot, tract or parcel in a subdivision or land
development shall be sold or ownership transferred unless and until a
detailed plan and description of such subdivision or land development
has been submitted to the Borough in accordance with the procedures
of this chapter and the same has received final plan approval by the
Borough Council.
A. Prior to approval of a final plan the applicant shall have obtained all
necessary and required utility, state and federal approvals, permits and/
or recommendations. Copies of all utility, state and federal approvals,
permits and/or recommendations shall be submitted by the applicant to
the Borough. The Borough may issue a conditional preliminary plan
approval and/or a conditional final plan approval if such approval is
prerequisite to obtaining the necessary utility, state and/or federal
approvals, permits and/or recommendations.
§ 210-3 MONACA CODE § 210-6
210:364
§ 210-7. Conflict with other provisions.
Where a conflict arises between Borough ordinances, the Borough Council
may waive requirement(s) to resolve the conflict in accordance with the
procedure set forth in this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in all
cases involving matters pertaining to and regulated by the provisions of the
Borough Zoning Ordinance,124 the Zoning Hearing Board shall be the final
authority.
§ 210-8. Final approval of plans.
No final approval for recording a subdivision or acceptance of a land
development plan will be given by the Borough Council until all plans
and construction documents of the proposed and required improvements
have been approved by the Borough, a developers' agreement between
the Borough and the applicant has been executed and the applicant has
provided performance/improvement guaranty(ies) acceptable to the
Borough insuring that the improvements will be completed. (See Article VI
of this chapter.)
B. Coordination with county requirements and with other Borough
ordinances, authorities and agencies. Prior to approval of a final plan,
the applicant shall have obtained all necessary and required approvals
from all applicable county and Borough agencies and authorities and
shall have met the requirements of all Borough ordinances.
124. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 210-6 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-8
210:365

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 210-9. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms and words herein shall be
interpreted as follows unless otherwise expressly stated:
§ 210-10. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for purposes
of this chapter, have the meaning herein indicated:
ACCESS — A dust-free improved way permitting vehicular approach to a
building, structure, land or water area from the public street.
ACCESS DRIVE — The principal means of vehicular approach from a public
street to an off-street parking area with over 25 parking spaces and to
loading and unloading areas. Said access drive shall be a private street.
Each access drive shall be designed and constructed to meet this chapter's
requirements.
ALLEY — A way providing secondary vehicular access to the side or rear of
two or more properties. Alleys shall not be permitted. See "access drive" or
"driveway."
APPLICANT — The legal landowner who has submitted an application for a
subdivision or land development. See "landowner."
BLOCK — A land area bounded on all sides by streets or other public
transportation facilities.
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
B. Words used in the singular shall include the plural.
C. Words used in the plural shall include the singular.
D. The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land, water or
building shall include the words "intended," "arranged" or "designed" to
be used or occupied.
E. The word "building" shall include the word "structure" and shall be
construed as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof."
F. The word "lot" shall include a plot, parcel or tract of land.
G. The word "street" shall include "highway" and "road."
H. The words "shall" and "will" are always mandatory.
I. The word "may" is permissive.
J. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally.
§ 210-9 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-10
210:367
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Monaca,
Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
BUILDING — A habitable or occupied structure. See "structure."
BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF — The line of that face of the building nearest
the front line of the lot. This face includes covered or roofed patios, porches
or entranceways whether enclosed or unenclosed but does not include
steps, stoops or entrance walks.
BUILDING LINE — A line located on the lot or parcel at a fixed distance
from the public street right-of-way line/front lot line and interpreted as
being the nearest point that a building may be constructed to a public street
right-of-way. The building line shall limit the location of porches, patios and
facilities and similar construction to the face of this line, excluding steps,
stoops, entrance walks, ground level parking areas, driveways and access
drives.
BUILDING, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the
primary use or uses of the lot on which it is located.
CARTWAY or ROADWAY — The portion of the street right-of-way surfaced
for vehicular use. Width is determined from one edge of driving surface to
the other edge of driving surface and shall exclude stormwater gutter, curb
or any portion thereof.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE (INTERSECTION OF A DRIVEWAY WITH A
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE STREET) — The triangular area formed by an
intersecting street center line with the driveway center line and a line
interconnecting points established on each of the center lines, a distance
of 40 feet from intersection of the street center line/driveway center lines.
This entire area is to remain clear of visual obstructions above a plane
established at 3 1/2 feet in elevation and below a height of 10 feet, all as
measured from grade level at the street center line/driveway center line
intersections.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE (INTERSECTION OF AN ACCESS DRIVE OR
A PUBLIC OR PRIVATE STREET WITH ANOTHER ACCESS DRIVE OR
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE STREET) — The triangular area formed by two
intersecting street and/or access drive center lines and a line
interconnecting points established on each (street and/or access drive)
center line, a distance of 75 feet from the point of intersection with an
access drive, local street or collector street or at a distance of 150 feet
from the point of intersection with a principal arterial or minor arterial.
This entire area is to remain clear of visual obstructions above a plane
established at 3 1/2 feet in elevation and below a height of 10 feet, all as
measured from grade level at the intersection of the street and/or access
drive center lines.
CLUSTER HOUSING LAND DEVELOPMENTS — A subdivision in which
individual lots are designated in somewhat tighter arrangements than a
conventional subdivision so that a significant percentage of the total
development area can be dedicated and held as common open space.
§ 210-10 MONACA CODE § 210-10
210:368
COLLECTOR STREET — See "street classifications, functional/public."
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land, an area of water
suitable for recreational purposes or a combination of such land and water
within a development site designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of
residents of the development who maintain and jointly or commonly own the
land and/or water areas. The common open space shall not include streets,
off-street parking areas and areas set aside for public facilities. Common
open space shall be substantially free of structures but may contain such
improvements as are in the development plan as finally approved and as are
appropriate for the recreation of the residents.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL — The positive action of the Planning
Commission or Borough Council approving an application for a preliminary
plan or a final plan, however, establishing restrictions to said approval to
which the applicant has agreed to in writing or which are recorded in the
official minutes of said Commission or Council.
CONTOUR — A line on a plan or exhibit defining and identifying ground
elevations.
CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION — A subdivision in which all or most of a
plot or parcel is divided into lots having, at a minimum, the lot area and
lot width required by the Zoning Ordinance125 for the use proposed by the
subdivision plan. Little or no area(s) within this type of development is set
aside for common open space.
CORNER LOT — A lot or land parcel abutting upon two or more intersecting
streets or public spaces and on which the building line of both streets must
be observed.
COVENANT — A legal obligation or limitation defined within a written
agreement, the violation of which can be restrained by court action.
CUL-DE-SAC — The vehicular turnaround facility at the one end of a street,
circular in design.
DEVELOPER — A landowner who makes or causes to be made a subdivision
or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT or IMPROVEMENT — Any man-made change to improved
or unimproved lands, watercourses or water bodies.
DRIVEWAY — The improved vehicular access from a public street to a
single-family detached residential dwelling and to an off-street parking area
of one to 25 parking spaces.
DWELLING — A building or other structure used primarily for human
habitation.
DWELLING TYPE — All dwelling types shall be classified as either a mobile
home, single-family (detached) dwelling, duplex dwelling, conversion
apartment or multifamily dwelling and all as defined in the Borough Zoning
Ordinance.126
125. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 210-10 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-10
210:369
DWELLING UNIT — Any structure or portion thereof which is designed
and used exclusively for the residential purposes of one family and includes
a minimum of three habitable rooms and a bathroom, has separate and
private cooking and sanitary facilities and has a separate entrance. A studio
apartment unit shall be a dwelling unit in all respects except that said
unit may contain a minimum of two habitable rooms and a bathroom, has
separate and private cooking and sanitary facilities and has a separate
entrance and is located only within a multifamily dwelling.
EARTHEN EMBANKMENT — An earthen mound being in less than tenpercent
slope and covered with a Borough-approved vegetative ground
cover.
EARTH-SHELTERED DWELLING — A dwelling unit having the required
minimum interior floor area constructed beneath the exterior surface grade;
having, at a minimum, one side of the dwelling unit with its floor(s) at the
level of the exterior grade and being the main entrance to the dwelling; and
having one window per room in at least 50% of the rooms in the dwelling
unit. Each window area shall be a minimum of 10% of the floor area of
the room within which said window is located. Habitable rooms without
windows shall have approved ventilation. All windows or glazed areas,
with the exception of clerestory windows or other glazing areas which are
typically fixed, shall be openable.
EASEMENT — The right granted by a landowner for the use of another
person or persons for a specific purpose on a designated part of said
landowner's property.
ENGINEER, BOROUGH — The Engineer of Monaca Borough.
ENTRANCE WALK — A walkway for pedestrian use leading to a building or
structure. Said access may be dedicated to public use.
ERECTED — Includes "built," "constructed," "reconstructed," "moved upon"
or any physical operations or work required for the creation or the locating
of the building or structure. Excavation, filling, grading, drainage and the
like shall be considered part of the erection.
ESSENTIAL SERVICE — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities, cable television, or Borough agencies or
authorities of underground or overhead water, sanitary or storm sewers,
gas, electrical and telephone transmission or distribution systems, including
poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, towers, storage
facilities, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar equipment
and accessories in connection therewith and where reasonably necessary
for the furnishing of adequate service, including buildings or structures.
EXCEPTED PARCEL(S) — Land area(s) within or adjacent to and part of the
original tract but not included within the subdivision or land development.
126. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 210-10 MONACA CODE § 210-10
210:370
FINAL PLAN — The mandatory submission, including all required exhibits,
as established by this chapter, representing the complete and exact
arrangement and design of the subdivision and/or land development.
FLOOD, FLOODED or FLOODING — A temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry areas from the overflow of rivers,
streams, watercourses or other inland water bodies.127
FLOODPLAIN; FLOODWAY; FLOOD-PRONE AREA — A land area adjoining
a river, stream, water body or watercourse which is likely to be flooded
as established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Monaca
Borough.128
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The Comprehensive Plan of the
Borough of Monaca, 1971, as amended.129
GRADE, FINISHED — The gradient of the completed surface of the
improvement.
GRADE or GRADIENT — The vertical rise or fall as a percentage of or ratio
with the horizontal distance; inclination with the horizontal.
GRADING — The excavating and/or filling of earth materials and conditions
resulting from excavation and/or filling.
HALF STREET — See "street, half or partial."
IMPROVEMENT — Same as "development." See "development."
INTERIOR WALK OR CROSSWALK — An easement or right-of-way for
pedestrian use extending from a public street or public sidewalk into,
through or across a block to another public street or publicly owned facility.
Said walk may be dedicated to public use and shall be maintained by the
adjacent property owner(s).
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:[Amended
9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential buildings, whether proposed
initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot
or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
127. Editor's Note: See also Ch.131, Flood Damage Prevention.
128. Editor's Note: See also Ch.131, Flood Damage Prevention.
129. Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 210-10 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-10
210:371
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.[Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
LANDSLIDE — The movement of a mass of rock or soil, artificial fill or a
combination of these materials.
LANDSLIDE AREA or LANDSLIDE-PRONE AREA — An area characterized
by unstable slopes and land surfaces whose history, geology, soil, bedrock
structure and climate indicate a potential for landslides as identified by the
United States Geological Survey or Monaca Borough.
LANE — See "street classifications, functional/public."
LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE — A space not less than 12 feet wide
and 45 feet deep with an overhead clearance of 14 feet six inches. This
space may be inside, enclosed or outside of a structure and shall be used
exclusively for the temporary standing of a motorized vehicle while loading
or unloading merchandise or materials. This space shall be located off or
beyond the public right-of-way and shall have direct access to a public street
without the use of parking spaces.
LOT — Land and/or water area to be occupied by a building and its
accessory buildings or by a dwelling or group of structures and its accessory
buildings, together with such open spaces as are required, having not
less than the minimum area and width required by the Borough Zoning
Ordinance130 for a lot in the zoning district which such is situated and
having its principal frontage on a public street or on such other means
of access as may be determined in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter to be adequate as a condition of the approval of a plan. A lot may
also be a tract or parcel.
LOT AREA — The area of a horizontal plane measured at grade and bound
by the front, side and rear lot lines. The lot area shall be measured to the
street right-of-way line only and shall not include any part of an area or way
used in common with the owner or occupier of other lots. Minimum lot area
shall also be defined to include minimum parcel or tract area.
LOT DEPTH — The average horizontal distance between the front line and
the rear lot line.
LOT, FRONT LINE — The right-of-way line of the public street on which the
lot fronts.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE, EXTERIOR — Any property line that divides said lot from a
public right-of-way.
C. Development in accordance with 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
130. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 210-10 MONACA CODE § 210-10
210:372
LOT LINE, INTERIOR — Any property line that divides said lot from another
lot. Said lot line may be a side or rear lot line.
LOT LINES — The lines bounding a lot.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance across the lot between the side lot
lines. In the case of an irregularly shaped lot, the minimum required lot
width shall be measured at the building line. Minimum lot width shall also
be defined to include minimum parcel or tract width.
MASTER PLAN — The mandatory submission required by this chapter for
a land development for the preapplication conference indicating the future
arrangement of structures and uses, alternate layouts, proposed staging of
development and the maximum/ultimate level of development.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.[Amended 9-10-1996 by
Ord. No. 822]
OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS — Any development or improvement which is
located outside of or beyond the subdivision or land development.
OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water suitable
for recreational purposes or a combination of such land and water within
a development site designed and intended for the residents or users of the
development. The open space shall not include streets or parking areas. The
open space shall be substantially free of structures except those appropriate
for recreational purposes properly landscaped and appropriately
maintained.
PARCEL — A large division of land or water area and shall also be the tract
or lot.
PARKING AISLE — That portion of the improved parking facility which
is intended to be used exclusively for providing vehicular access from an
access drive to individual parking spaces.
PARKING AND/OR LOADING AND UNLOADING AREA — The total
composite of all facilities used for off-street parking, loading and unloading.
PARKING AND/OR LOADING/UNLOADING FACILITIES — The total
composite of all structures and improvements for a parking area and/or
parking aisles, standby/stacking lanes, driveways, access drives, loading/
unloading spaces and all related facilities.
PARKING SPACE — A space not less than nine feet wide and 18 feet long,
whether inside or outside of a structure, used exclusively for the temporary
standing of a motorized vehicle. The parking space shall be located off or
beyond the public right-of-way.
PENNDOT FORM 408 — Standard specifications for construction developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PLAN — A set of exhibits and related documents representing the intended
arrangement and design of a subdivision and/or land development.
§ 210-10 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-10
210:373
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Monaca
Borough, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.131
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An integrated arrangement
of dwelling units and compatible nonresidential buildings satisfying the
definition, policy and requirements of Article VII of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.132
PLANTING STRIP — An area of yard properly landscaped and clear of
foreign debris to serve as a buffer area between uses or properties. A visual
screen may be within the planting strip.
PLAT/RECORDING PLAT — A complete and exact plan of subdivision or
land development, prepared for recording as required by statute, to define
property right and proposed public or common streets and other public or
common improvements.
POSITIVE DRAINAGE — Drainage of stormwater or underground water
away from any improvement to prevent damage to life and property and to
minimize disruption of land use.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — The mandatory submission, including all required
exhibits as established by this chapter, representing the tentative
arrangement and design of a subdivision and/or land development.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING, USE OR STRUCTURE — Same as "building, main or
principal."
PROOF OF PROPRIETARY INTEREST, OTHER — Any contract or covenant
recognized by the Borough Solicitor or a certificate of title whereby a
person shall have the legal rights of the landowner.
PUBLIC HEARING — A meeting open to the general public held pursuant to
proper public notice.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any development, offered for dedication and
accepted by the Borough Council, other public bodies or authorities.
PUBLIC LANDS — Lands owned by the Borough, county, state or federal
government, their agencies or authorities.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature
of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall
be not more than 30 days or less than seven days from the date of the
hearing.[Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved by way of public ownership or
dedication for use as a road, street, alley, crosswalk, pedestrianway or other
public purpose.
PUBLIC STREET — See "street, public."
131. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 46, Planning Commission.
132. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10701 et seq.
§ 210-10 MONACA CODE § 210-10
210:374
RESERVE STRIP — A strip of land adjacent to a street the purpose or intent
of which is to limit, control or obstruct the access to said street from an
adjacent property.[Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot or parcel of land having frontage on a
major traffic street and extending back therefrom to and having frontage on
a minor street, with the access by vehicular traffic to said lot being solely
by way of the frontage on the minor traffic street.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land dedicated for a specific public or common use or
purpose.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — A line identifying the limits of a right-of-way.
ROAD — Same as "street." See "street."
SIDEWALK — A developed right-of-way for pedestrian use, constructed to
Borough standards, dedicated for public use and maintained by the adjacent
property owner(s).
SITE DISTANCE — The maximum extent of unobstructed vision along a
street from a vehicle located at any given point on the street.
SLOPE — Same as "grade or gradient." See "grade or gradient."
STORM SEWER/STORMWATER FACILITY — A natural or man-made
improvement or structure that will collect, convey, control, discharge, store,
retain or absorb stormwater.133
STORMWATER/STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flowing over a surface
during and immediately following a rainfall that may be augmented by
groundwater flow and melting ice and snow.134
STORMWATER SYSTEM — A management system of natural and man-made
elements that contain, convey, absorb, use, store or absorb stormwater to
prevent damage to life and property and to minimize disruption of land use
as a result of stormwater runoff.135
STREET — All land, including the entire length and width of a right-of-way,
intended for use or future use of a motorized vehicle.
STREET CLASSIFICATIONS, FUNCTIONAL/PUBLIC —
The following functional street classification shall apply to existing
public streets in the Borough, as identified on the Monaca Borough
General Development Plan Map,136 and shall apply to public streets
and, in some cases, service roads and access drives that are
constructed after the date of this chapter.
EXPRESSWAY — A road to function as a limited-access road
carrying through traffic, to and from points outside the community,
(1)
A.
133. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 199, Stormwater Management.
134. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 199, Stormwater Management.
135. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 199, Stormwater Management.
136. Editor's Note: General Development Plan Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 210-10 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-10
210:375
STREET, HALF OR PARTIAL — A street, generally parallel and adjacent to
a property line, having a lesser right-of-way width than is normally required
for satisfactory improvement, use, acceptability and dedication of the same
as a public street.[Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
STREET, PRIVATE — A developed way intended for vehicular use; however,
not maintained by the Borough or other governmental agency and shall be
classified as either an access drive, driveway or, in some cases, a service
road. Classification is to be determined by the Borough.
STREET, PUBLIC — A developed right-of-way constructed to Borough
standards, dedicated to and accepted by the Borough or other governmental
agency and maintained by the Borough or other governmental agency. See
"street classifications, functional/public."
STREET, SERVICE ROAD — A street parallel and adjacent to an arterial
street or collector street providing access to adjoining properties and
serving to control the number and location of intersections with the arterial
or collector street. A service road is classified as having a collector street
function but may be a public or private street. A service road shall be
designed and constructed to the level of a collector street.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected with a fixed or permanent
location on the ground and being a combination of materials that form an
has no local traffic interference and performs no access service to
immediately adjacent lands.
ARTERIAL — A street or road to move traffic within and through
the community. Providing service to adjacent land areas is only a
secondary function of this street or road.
(2)
COLLECTOR — A class of street that serves the internal traffic
movement within the Borough and connects developed areas to the
arterial roads. This road does not accommodate long through trips.
The collector road is intended to simultaneously serve abutting
property as well as local internal traffic movements. A street
serving up to a projected average daily traffic of 3,000 vehicles per
day may be classified as a collector.
(3)
LOCAL — A class of street to provide access to immediately
adjacent land. To be classified as a local street, said street shall
serve a maximum of 500 dwelling units or have a maximum
projected average daily traffic of 2,000 vehicles per day, whichever
is less.
LANE — A street that functions as a local street but provides
access to a maximum of 25 dwelling units, that is looped or
dead-ended with a cul-de-sac or tee turnaround and that shall
never be extended or expanded to serve more than 25 dwelling
units.
(a)
(4)
See "access drive," "street, service road" and "driveway" for functional
street classification of private streets.
B.
§ 210-10 MONACA CODE § 210-10
210:376
independent edifice that is safe and stable. The term "structure" shall also
include a structure that is in the course of construction, alteration or repair
but does not include building materials or supplies unless such materials or
supplies are within an enclosed building. The paved area of a ground level
parking area or sidewalk is not a structure, unless covered by a roof, canopy
or similar structure.
SUBDIVIDER — A landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into or between two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines or street lines for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership
or lot development.
SURVEY — The establishment of locations on the ground and recorded on
the final site plan/recording plat.
TRACT — The whole or original land and water area under consideration for
a subdivision and/or land development and shall also be the lot or parcel.
UNDERDRAINAGE FACILITY/SYSTEM — An improvement, structure and
system specifically constructed to collect, convey, control, discharge, store,
retain or absorb groundwater from springs or soil with poor drainage
conditions.
USGS — United States Geological Survey.
U.S. SIC CODE — Uses, establishments or economic activities defined and
described within the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, and
as amended in the 1977 supplement, United States Office of Management
and Budget, United States Executive Office of the President.
UTILITIES — Those facilities and installations rendering a public service,
such as electrical service, gas service, telephone service, water service,
sewer collection service or cable television service.
VISUAL SCREEN — A masonry wall, landscaped earthen embankment, solid
board fence (finished side toward adjacent use) or a screen planting used
to buffer the view of the occupants of an adjoining use from the use on the
premises on which the visual screen is located.
WALKWAY — An area utilized for pedestrian access.
WATER BODY — Includes any natural or man-made water storage or
impoundment area.
WATERCOURSE — Includes a stream of water, creek, brook, ditch, drain,
channel or bed of a stream, dry run, naturally formed drainageway or
swale or a man-formed or -constructed drainageway, swale or similar and
associated facilities.
§ 210-10 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-10
210:377

ARTICLE III
Application, Review and Plan Requirements
§ 210-11. General procedures.
A. Preapplication conference. Prior to submitting a preliminary plan
application, the applicant may present general information and data as
described in § 210-12 to obtain a general review and to obtain
information on the ordinance requirements. The preapplication
conference is voluntary for a subdivision. The preapplication
conference is mandatory for a land development.
B. Preliminary plan/final plan applications. For proposed subdivision and/
or land development, the applicant shall be required to file a
preliminary plan application and a final plan application in accordance
with this chapter. (See §§ 210-13, 210-14 and 210-15.)
C. Filing of an application. Filing of a preliminary or final plan application
for a subdivision and/or a land development along with the required
exhibits shall strictly conform to the procedures and requirements as
set forth in this chapter.
(1) Application form. An application for a subdivision and/or land
development shall be submitted upon the standard forms furnished
by the Borough and shall be completely filled out, including all
required information, exhibits and plans, and shall be accompanied
by the required filing fee made payable to the Borough of Monaca.
(2) Application deadline. To be considered at the regular meeting of
the Borough Planning Commission, all applications shall be
submitted to the Borough Secretary at the Borough office, during
normal office hours, not later than 10 days prior to the regular
monthly meeting of the Planning Commission.
(3) Officially received application. The Borough Secretary shall
consider as officially received only those applications that are
completed, signed, that have attached the correct number of copies
of all the exhibits and data as further specified by the provisions of
this chapter and for which the filing fee has been paid. Only an
officially received application shall be referred to the county, the
applicable review agencies and to the Planning Commission and
the Borough Council. An incomplete application shall be rejected
and will be referred back to the applicant by written notice,
identifying what items are not complete and what required plans,
data, exhibits and/or fee shall be submitted prior to the application
being designated as officially received.
(4) Number of exhibits and plans for Borough review.
(a) All applications for a resubdivision or replatting and/or for a
subdivision of three lots or less shall be accompanied by 14
copies (prints) of a final site plan/recording plat as well as the
§ 210-11 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-11
210:379
original recording plat as required under § 210-15 of this
chapter.
(b) All applications for a land development and/or for a subdivision
which involves more than three lots shall be accompanied by
the following number of exhibits and plans:
[1] For preliminary plan application, 14 scale copies (prints)
of Exhibit Nos. 1 through 17137 as applicable and as
required in § 210-13 of this chapter and five half-size
copies (prints) of the proposed site plan, Exhibit No. 4.
[2] For final plan application, 14 full-scale copies (prints) of
Exhibit Nos. 1 through 14 as applicable and as required in
§ 210-14 of this chapter. The original recording plat, if
applicable, shall also be submitted. Also required are five
half-size copies (prints) of the final site plan/recording
plat, Exhibit No. 1.
(c) Additional exhibits and plans or additional copies of the
exhibits and plans may be required after initial review of the
application due to the type of development proposed, the
physical conditions of the site or as required for review by
additional review agencies.
(5) Exhibits and plans for utilities, state, federal and other authorities
review. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to deliver the
required exhibits and plans plus the correct number of copies of
said exhibits and plans to the appropriate utilities, state, federal
and other authorities.
D. Application review.
(1) Borough agency review.
(a) After the Borough Secretary has officially received an
application for a preliminary or final plan, said application and
the required copies of exhibits and plans shall be submitted by
the Borough to all or some of the following for their review:
[1] Borough Solicitor.
[2] Borough Engineer.
[3] Borough planning consultant.
[4] Borough Zoning Officer.
[5] Borough Sewage Enforcement Officers.
[6] Borough Fire Marshal.
137. Editor's Note: The exhibits are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 210-11 MONACA CODE § 210-11
210:380
[7] Beaver County Planning Commission.
(b) The above-noted agencies shall submit their reviews and
recommendations in writing to the Borough within 45 days of
the application being officially received. If said agencies fail to
submit a written review and recommendation within 45 days, it
shall be deemed a consent thereto.
(2) Utilities, state, federal and other authorities. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to obtain the required reviews,
approvals and/or permits from applicable utilities, state and federal
agencies or other authorities prior to final approval being granted
by the Borough Council.
(3) Borough Council's review. All applications officially received,
whether preliminary or final, shall be acted upon by the Borough
Council, who shall render its decision not later than 90 days
following the date of the next regular meeting of the Planning
Commission following the date when the application was officially
received; or should the next regular Planning Commission meeting
occur more than 30 days following the date the application was
officially received, said ninety-day period shall be measured from
the 30th day following the date the application was officially
received.
(4) Extension of the review time limit. In order for the applicant to
submit additional data, plans and exhibits to meet the requirements
of this chapter and other applicable ordinances, the applicant may
request in writing an extension of time. Said written request shall
specify a specific time extension of the review time limit and specify
the reasons for the request. If within the standard ninety-day
review time limit, the applicant fails to provide the requested data,
exhibits and plans and fails to request in writing an extension of the
review time limit, the Borough Council may disapprove the
application for failure to provide requested information. Said
disapproval shall require the applicant to reapply as per the
preliminary plan application procedure. (See § 210-13.)
E. Waiver and modification requirements. Where it is found that, because
of unusual physical conditions at the proposed site, difficulties may
arise in complying with the rules and regulations; where it is proposed
to use special design features in the development, such as the use of
earth-sheltered housing, solar-collection or other energy-related design
or cluster design to preserve unique physical features or to preserve
open space; where noise barriers may or will be required; where
flexibility, economy and unique design requirements are proposed;
where a subdivision of three lots or fewer or a resubdivision is
proposed; or where a regulation is not applicable to the proposed
subdivision and/or land development, the applicant may request in
writing that the rules and regulations be waived or modified. Such
written request shall be accompanied by statements explaining and
§ 210-11 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-11
210:381
§ 210-12. Preapplication conference; fee.
justifying the waiver or modification. This request shall be submitted
with the application and be reviewed with and in conjunction with the
overall plan. The Borough Council may grant a waiver or modification.
In granting the waiver or modification such will be considered the
minimum waiver or modification that will afford relief and will
represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue.
Such waiver or modification shall not nullify the interest and purpose
of the Borough General Development Plan,138 this chapter or other
ordinances of the Borough, nor shall it affect the health, safety and
welfare of the general public. The Borough Council may attach and
the applicant shall agree to conditions to the granting of a waiver
or modification. The reasons for granting the waiver or modification
shall be recorded in the Borough Council official records. Such waiver
or modification shall apply to only the specific application under
consideration and is not transferable to other plans, proposals or
applications. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in all cases involving
matters pertaining to and regulated by the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance,139 the Zoning Hearing Board shall be the final authority.
F. Public hearing. Before acting on an officially received application,
whether preliminary or final, the Borough Council and/or Planning
Commission may hold a public hearing within the required ninety-day
review period.
G. Borough Council's decision. The decision of the Borough Council shall
be in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or
mailed to the applicant at the last known address not later than 15 days
following the decision. When the plan, whether preliminary or final, has
not been approved, the decision shall specify the defects found in the
application and describe the requirements which have not been met
and shall, in each case, site the provision of the statute or ordinance
relied upon.
H. Conditions of acceptance and recording. No plan shall be finally
approved or no plat recorded until a developer's agreement and a
performance/improvement guaranty is filed as per the requirements of
this chapter. (See Article VI.)
A. Procedure. The applicant of a potential subdivision is encouraged or a
land developer is required under this section to file a request for a
preapplication conference on a form furnished by the Borough and to
present the required exhibits (information and plans) at said
conference. There may be a fee for this preapplication conference. The
Planning Commission shall review the exhibits and provide to the
applicant, at said prearranged conference, general information relative
to the requirements of this chapter and other Borough ordinances.
138. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
139. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 210-11 MONACA CODE § 210-12
210:382
§ 210-13. Preliminary plan application; fee.
(1) In reviewing the proposed subdivision or land development
consideration will be given to the requirements of the Borough's
General Development Plan, Zoning Ordinance140 and other
regulations of the Borough.
(2) The Borough will also discuss possible utility, county, state and
federal agency reviews which may be necessary.
(3) The Borough will also discuss with the applicant whether the land
is possibly within a floodplain, subject or susceptible to landslides,
subject to poor soil conditions or steep slope which may affect the
proposed development. The applicant will be referred to the
appropriate utility, county, state and/or federal agency for further
information.
(4) Every effort shall be made to generally inform the applicant of
regulations which may affect the proposed plans.
B. Exhibits. The exhibits and data to be submitted with the request for a
preapplication conference include the following and shall be prepared
as specified on the request form:141
(1) Exhibit No. 1: Proof of Proprietary Interest.
(2) Exhibit No. 2: Existing Conditions.
(3) Exhibit No. 3: General Proposed Master Plan.
A. Procedure. The following application procedures and requirements for
submitting preliminary plans shall apply to all subdivisions and all land
developments. [NOTE: Applicant(s) may request a waiver of this section
for resubdivisions or replatting or subdivisions of three lots or less. (See
§ 210-15 of this chapter.)]
(1) Procedures for filing of preliminary plan applications shall be as
per § 210-11 of this chapter.
(2) Nature of preliminary approval.
(a) Approval of a preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of
a final plan but rather an expression of the layout submitted on
the preliminary plan as a guide to the preparation of the final
plan.
(b) Granting a preliminary plan approval shall not qualify a plan
for recording nor authorize development or the issuing of any
building permit.
140. Editor's Note: The General Development Plan is on file in the Borough offices. See Ch.
245, Zoning.
141. Editor's Note: The exhibits are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 210-12 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-13
210:383
(c) In the case where a subdivision and/or land development is
projected over a period of years, the Borough Council may
approve the overall preliminary plan and then may authorize
submission of final plans by sections or stages of development.
Submission of final plans shall be subject to such requirements
or improvement guaranties that the Borough Council finds
essential for the protection of the overall plan of development.
(d) All final plan applications and all exhibits required for approval
shall be submitted to the Borough within five years after
approval of the preliminary plan. Otherwise, the preliminary
plan approval shall become null and void. If necessary for
staging of development, an extension of time may be applied
for and granted by the Borough Council.
(3) Filing fee. At the time of submitting the application for preliminary
plan review, the applicant shall pay to the Borough, for the use by
the Borough, a filing fee to defray the cost of processing the
preliminary plan documents. The fee shall be that required in
accordance with the established Borough fee schedule. Said filing
fee shall be a deposit only. For additional fees, see Article VII of this
chapter.142
B. Preliminary plan application requirements. The preliminary plan
application of subdivision and/or land development shall include the
following exhibits and data and said exhibits and data shall be prepared
as specified on the preliminary plan application form:
(1) Proof of proprietary interest. Applicant shall submit a certificate of
title or other proof of proprietary interest in the land. If none is
provided, the Borough shall not consider the application officially
received until such submission is made.
(2) Exhibits.143 The application for a preliminary plan shall include, but
not be limited to, the following exhibits:
(a) Exhibit No. 1: Location Map.
(b) Exhibit No. 2: Existing Topography and Physical Features.
(c) Exhibit No. 3: Existing Land Survey and Land Use.
(d) Exhibit No. 4: Proposed Site Plan.
(e) Exhibit No. 5: Proposed Grading Plan.
(f) Exhibit No. 6: Proposed Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Plan.
142. Editor's Note: See Ch. A256, Fee Schedule.
143. Editor's Note: The exhibits are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 210-13 MONACA CODE § 210-13
210:384
§ 210-14. Final plan application; fee.
(g) Exhibit No. 7: Proposed Stormwater Drainage and
Underdrainage Plan.
(h) Exhibit No. 8: Proposed Circulation/Parking Plan.
(i) Exhibit No. 9: Proposed Water Supply and Distribution Plan.
(j) Exhibit No. 10: Proposed Sanitary Sewage Collection and
Treatment Plan.
(k) Exhibit No. 11: Proposed Underground Utilities Plan.
(l) Exhibit No. 12: Proposed Recreational Site and Facilities.
(m) Exhibit No. 13: Proposed Plan of Off-Site Improvements and
Facilities.
(n) Exhibit No. 14: Preliminary Draft of Deed Restrictions and/or
Protective Covenants.
(o) Exhibit No. 15: Preliminary Draft of the Declaration Plan for a
Condominium.
(p) Exhibit No. 16: Preliminary Draft of the Owners' Association,
Including Membership, Bylaws and Management Plan.
(q) Exhibit No. 17: Additional Information.
A. Procedure. The following application procedure and requirements for
submitting final plans shall apply to all subdivisions and all land
developments:
(1) Procedures for submitting and filing of final plan applications shall
be as per requirements of § 210-11 of this chapter.
(2) Nature of final approval.
(a) Upon receipt of the final plan application and all required
exhibits, the Borough shall refer such to the Planning
Commission and the Beaver County Planning Commission for
their final review and, as applicable, execution of the recording
plan/plat.
(b) The Borough Council may grant a conditional approval of the
final plan in order to enable the preparation and execution of
the required final documents.
(c) Said final documents shall include, but not be limited to, a
developer's agreement and a performance/improvement
guaranty.
§ 210-13 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-14
210:385
(d) The procedure for final approval, recording and conditions of
acceptance of the improvements shall be as per Article VI of
this chapter.
(3) Filing fee. At the time of submitting the application for final plan
review, the applicant shall pay to the Borough, for use by the
Borough, a filing fee to defray the cost of processing the final plan
documents. The fee shall be that required in accordance with the
established Borough fee schedule.144 Said filing fee shall be a
deposit only. For additional fees, see Article VII of this chapter.
B. Final plan application requirements. The final plan application of
subdivision and land development shall include the following final
exhibits (information, permits, approvals and plans), and said exhibits
shall be prepared as specified on the final plan application form.
(1) Proof of proprietary interest. A certificate of title or other proof of
proprietary interest in the land. If none is provided, the Borough
shall not consider the application officially received until such
submission is made.
(2) Exhibits. The application for a final plan shall include, but not be
limited to, the following exhibits145 (information, permits, approvals
and plans):
(a) Exhibit No. 1: Final Site Plan/Recording Plat.
(b) Exhibit No. 2: Final/Approved Grading Plan and/or Permit.
(c) Exhibit No. 3: Final/Approved Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Plan and/or Permit.
(d) Exhibit No. 4: Final/Approved Stormwater Drainage and
Underdrainage Plan and/or Permit.
(e) Exhibit No. 5: Final/Approved Circulation/-Parking Plan,
Including Lighting Plan.
(f) Exhibit No. 6: Final/Approved Water Supply/-Distribution Plan.
(g) Exhibit No. 7: Final/Approved Sanitary Sewer Collection and
Treatment Plan and/or Permit and/or Planning Module.
(h) Exhibit No. 8: Final/Approved Underground Utility Plan and/or
Permit(s).
(i) Exhibit No. 9: Final Plans for Recreation Site(s) and Facilities.
(j) Exhibit No. 10: Final Plans for Off-Site Improvements.
144. Editor's Note: See Ch. A256, Fee Schedule.
145. Editor's Note: The exhibits are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 210-14 MONACA CODE § 210-14
210:386
§ 210-15. Resubdividing, replatting or subdivision of three lots or
less.
(k) Exhibit No. 11: Final Draft of Deed Restrictions and/or
Protective Covenants.
(l) Exhibit No. 12: Final Draft of Declaration Plan for a
Condominium.
(m) Exhibit No. 13: Final Draft of Owners' Association Plan.
(n) Exhibit No. 14: Other Plans and Exhibits Required by the
Borough.
A. Procedure. The Borough Council may waive some or all of the
requirements of §§ 210-13 and 210-11 for resubdividing, replatting or
when subdividing where such involves three lots or less and where such
requires no additional streets or street openings upon application of the
applicant for waiver of said requirements. In the case where a waiver is
granted, an application for a subdivision of three lots or less or for a
resubdivision shall be filed with the Borough along with the exhibits
required under this section and shall be processed according to
procedure established under § 210-11.
B. Exhibits. Plat/plans approved for processing under the provisions of this
section shall include but not be limited to the following information:
(1) A certificate of title or other proof of proprietary interest in the
land. If none is provided, the Borough need not consider the
request for a review until such submission is made.
(2) A final site plan/recording plat as per the final plan application,
Exhibit No. 1, requirements of this chapter. (See § 210-14.) [NOTE:
If the recording plat is no larger than 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches,
drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch and involving
no dedication of roads, streets or public facilities, said plat may be
submitted without the required certificates, affidavits and
endorsements. The Borough shall prepare a resolution of approval
signed by the applicant and thus recorded by the Borough through
the Beaver County Recorder of Deeds office.]
(3) Any other data requested by the Planning Commission or Borough
Council.
§ 210-14 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-15
210:387

ARTICLE IV
Site Plans, Improvements and Construction Requirements
§ 210-16. Applicability of standards and requirements.
§ 210-17. Land suitability.
A. The following site planning standards, required on-site and off-site
improvements and construction requirements shall be considered as
minimum standards and requirements by the Planning Commission and
Borough Council in their review, evaluation, recommendation and
decision concerning a plan for subdivision and/or land development,
authorization to record a plat/plan, authorization for construction of
improvements, release from performance/improvement guaranty and
maintenance bond and acceptance of public improvements.
B. In addition to those standards, improvements and requirements
included within this Article IV, the Borough shall require that all site
planning standards, required on-site and off-site improvements and
construction requirements shall be developed and constructed as per
the requirements of other applicable articles of this chapter and its
appendices, the requirements of the responsible public authority
affected, the requirements contained within the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Design Manual and Specifications Form
408 (latest edition) and Associated Standard Construction Drawings
(latest edition) and other applicable Borough, county, state and federal
ordinances, rules or regulations.
C. All public improvements where required by the Borough, whether onsite
or off-site, shall be offered for public dedication to the appropriate
public body.
D. During construction, no deviation from the Borough finally approved
plans shall be permitted without the prior written approval of the
Borough Engineer. Prior to granting approval of said deviation, the
Borough Engineer shall provide written notification to the Borough
Secretary. Borough-approved deviations shall be recorded by the
applicant on a set of approved plans and submitted as as-built drawings
to the Borough prior to the Borough accepting the improvement.
A. Any land or water body shall be suitable for the purpose for which it is
to be subdivided, developed and used and, further, shall be in
compliance with the Borough's General Development Plan.
B. When a building or structure is intended to be constructed, at present
or in the future, within a proposed subdivision or land development, the
subdivision or land development shall be without danger from any
natural or man-made hazard or shall be made safe from said hazard.
C. The preliminary plan application and its accompanying exhibits for a
subdivision or a land development shall illustrate and document how all
§ 210-16 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-17
210:389
hazards to life, health and safety from flooding, landslide, subsidence,
underground fire or other hazard shall be eliminated or mitigated or
shall illustrate and document that the area(s) affected shall be set
aside for a use which shall not endanger the life or property or further
aggravate or increase an existing menace.
(1) The preliminary plan application and its accompanying exhibits
shall identify and illustrate any federally identified floodplain or
floodway and any other areas subject to flooding, including those
areas which may be subject to flooding due to stormwater runoff or
poor groundwater drainage conditions.
(a) Any development within a flood-prone area shall meet the
requirements of Chapter 131, Flood Damage Prevention.
(b) All stormwater drainage systems and underground drainage
systems shall be designed and constructed as per the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The preliminary plan application and its accompanying exhibits
shall identify and illustrate any area identified by the USGS as
being subject to landsliding or any other area known to be
susceptible to landsliding.
(a) In the event that the proposed subdivision or land development
is located within an area identified as being susceptible to
landsliding or if, in the judgment of the Borough Engineer, the
area is not reasonably safe from the hazards of landslides, the
applicant shall provide and shall agree to comply with the
provisions of a study prepared by a Pennsylvania registered
engineer experienced in soil and foundation engineering. Prior
to preliminary plan approval, the applicant shall provide to the
Borough, without charge, two copies of said study. Said study/
report shall include but not be limited to:
[1] A complete geotechnical investigation to determine the
existing character and physical properties of the surface
and subsurface features, hydrologic features, groundwater
measurements and a full description of the field
exploration methods used to carry out this investigation.
[2] Location of unstable soils or areas of landslide potential.
[3] Assessment of the short-term and long-term stability of the
entire site of the proposed subdivision and/or land
development.
[4] Assessment of the possible effect of the proposed
development, in terms of landslide potential, upon the site
and upon adjacent properties.
§ 210-17 MONACA CODE § 210-17
210:390
§ 210-18. Grading, soil erosion and sedimentation control.
[5] Recommendation of grading, drainage, erosion controls,
foundation design, vegetation planting and other design
and construction methods necessary to mitigate any
potential landslide activities and to comply with the other
requirements of this chapter.
[6] Recommendation/identification of areas within the
proposed site of subdivision and/or land development that,
because of their landslide potential, should be set aside
and not developed.
(b) The Borough Council reserves the right to retain, at the
expense of the Borough, a qualified geologist or soils engineer
to perform such further review and/or furnish additional advice
or recommendations in this matter.
(3) The preliminary plan application and its accompanying exhibits
shall identify and illustrate any area identified by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Mine
Subsidence Regulations, as being previously affected by mining or
quarrying.
(4) Within the subdivision and/or land development any other land or
water area having other natural or man-made hazards to life,
health and safety shall be identified. How those hazards shall be
eliminated or mitigated shall be explained and plans prepared. Said
plans shall be prepared by a Pennsylvania registered engineer who
is retained by the applicant.
A. All clearing, stripping and grading shall be in accordance with the
guidelines, requirements and standards of this chapter and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection as per the latest
edition of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual.
(1) The grading plan for a proposed subdivision and/or land
development shall be submitted with the preliminary plan
application as Exhibit No. 5: Proposed Grading Plan, and submitted
with the final plan application as Exhibit No. 2: Final/Approved
Grading Plan and/or Permit.
B. All construction procedures, erosion and sedimentation control
methods and all ground cover shall be completed in accordance with
this chapter and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection as per the latest edition of the Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Manual.
(1) The erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be submitted
with the preliminary plan application as Exhibit No. 6: Proposed
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan, and with the final
§ 210-17 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-18
210:391
plan application as Exhibit No. 3: Final/Approved Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Plan and/or Permit.
C. Standards for excavation. All grading shall comply with the following
maximum/minimum slope requirements and associated requirements:
(1) Existing landslide-prone soils with slopes steeper than 25% shall
have cut slopes no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical or
33%.
(2) Existing landslide-prone soils with slopes less than 25% shall have
cut slopes no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical or 50%.
(3) Soils which are not or have a low probability of being landslideprone
shall have a slope no steeper than 1 1/2 horizontal to one
vertical or 60%.
(4) Cut slopes which are steeper than those specified above may be
allowed, provided that one or both of the following is satisfied:
(a) The material in which the excavation is made is sufficiently
stable to sustain a slope steeper than the slope specified above
for recognized soil conditions on the site. A written statement,
signed and sealed by a Pennsylvania registered professional
engineer, stating that the steeper slope will have sufficient
stability and that the risk of creating a hazard will be slight,
must be submitted with the preliminary application.
(b) A retaining wall or other approved support, designed by a
Pennsylvania registered professional engineer and approved
by the Borough Engineer, is provided to support the face of
excavation.
(5) The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be set back from the
adjacent property lines or street right-of-way lines in order to
permit the normal rounding of the edge without encroaching on the
abutting property or street.
(6) Guidelines for cuts in the latest edition of the Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Manual shall be followed.
D. Standards for fill. All fills shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) No fill shall be placed over trees, stumps or other material which
could create a hazard.
(2) All fills shall be compacted to provide stability of fill material and to
prevent settlement or slippage.
(3) The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be set back from adjacent
property lines or street right-of-way lines to permit the normal
rounding of the edge without encroaching on the abutting property
or street.
§ 210-18 MONACA CODE § 210-18
210:392
§ 210-19. Monuments.
(4) No fill slopes shall have a slope steeper than two horizontal to one
vertical.
(5) Guidelines for fills in the latest edition of the Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Manual shall be followed.
E. Standards for retaining walls. The following standards shall be
complied with:
(1) A retaining wall is a structure composed of concrete, steel or other
Borough-approved building materials, constructed for the purpose
of supporting a cut or filled embankment which would otherwise
not comply with the requirements of the standards set forth in this
chapter and which is more than four feet in height as measured on
the exposed vertical surface of the wall.
(2) A retaining wall must be constructed in accordance with sound
engineering practice. The design and construction plans for the
retaining wall shall be prepared by and plans bear the seal of a
Pennsylvania registered professional engineer.
(3) The backfilling of a retaining wall and the insertion of subterranean
drainage facilities shall be completed as per the Borough-approved
design and construction plans.
(4) Where a wall is replacing an exposed slope, the vertical face of the
wall shall be five feet back from the property line. This requirement
may be waived when the proposed retaining wall is a joint venture
between adjacent property owners and appropriate documents so
stating are filed with the preliminary plan application.
F. Standard for drainage provisions. Drainage shall be in accordance with
Chapter 199, Stormwater Management. [Amended 9-10-1996 by
Ord. No. 822]
G. All grading and improvements shall be constructed to the grades,
profiles and cross-sections in accordance with the Borough-approved
plans for such activities.
(1) All improvements shall be graded to their full width.
(2) All grading shall be completed so as to preserve the existing slope
and terrain of adjacent lands, including those not under the control
or ownership of the applicant/owner of the subdivision or land
development.
H. Before any improvement, building or structure is placed on or within a
subdivision or land development, all grading activity associated with
said individual improvement, building or structure shall have received
the written approval of the Borough Engineer.
§ 210-18 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-19
210:393
§ 210-20. Easements or rights-of-ways.
A. The location of monuments shall be indicated on Exhibit No. 1: Final
Site Plan/Recording Plat, and shall be accurately set at the following
locations in a subdivision and a land development:
(1) At the intersections of all outside boundary lines of the original
tract or land parcel.
(2) At the beginning and end of all curves, other deflection points or
points of curvatures in the boundary lines and right-of-way lines.
(3) At such other critical points as are necessary or as required by the
Borough to establish property lines within a subdivision or land
development.
B. Standard surveyor's iron pins, being iron pipe of a minimum length of
24 inches, shall be used as the monuments unless concrete monuments
are required by the Borough Engineer.
C. The monuments shall be placed prior to the recording of the plan/plat,
or the placement of said monuments shall be part of the developer's
agreement and performance/improvement guaranty.
A. Easements and dedications of rights-of-ways shall be provided for in
each subdivision and/or land development for provision of existing,
proposed or future public utilities, essential services, drainage,
circulation, access or any other necessary public or governmental
function to ensure the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
B. The use or purpose of each easement and each right-of-way shall be
designated on the preliminary plan, Exhibit No. 4: Proposed Site Plan,
and the final plan, Exhibit No. 1: Final Site Plan/Recording Plat.
(1) Rights-of-way to be dedicated to the Borough shall be clearly
designated and differentiated from the easements and so
illustrated on Exhibit No. 4 and Exhibit No. 1.
(2) The maintenance responsibility of each easement or right-of-way
after completion of the development shall be clearly designated
and so illustrated on Exhibit No. 4 and Exhibit No. 1.
C. No structure, facility or any obstruction of any kind shall be placed by
the property owner or allowed to be placed where it will interfere in any
way with the use of an easement or right-of-way.
D. Location of utilities.
(1) The location of all utilities within a public street right-of-way plus
easements or rights-of-way for utilities not within a public street
right-of-way shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Borough prior to preliminary plan approval. All public utilities for a
subdivision and/or land development shall be located, wherever
§ 210-19 MONACA CODE § 210-20
210:394
feasible, within a street right-of-way. If it is determined by the
applicant or by the Borough that a utility cannot physically be
located within a public street right-of-way, then a separate utility
easement or right-of-way shall be provided by the applicant for said
utility(s). All required public street rights-of-way and additional
utility easements and rights-of-way shall be adequate for all of the
necessary utilities that are to be provided. All utility easements or
rights-of-way shall be a minimum width of:
(a) Ten feet each, on both sides of the public street, beyond the
street right-of-way.
(b) Ten feet each, on both sides of a private access drive.
(c) When required, 20 feet on or adjacent to the side and rear lot
lines and having access from a public street or road. In
addition, a construction easement may be required by the
Borough.
(2) Where a proposed subdivision and/or land development abut an
existing utility easement of sufficient width, no additional easement
or right-of-way dedication will be required except where necessary
to serve the subdivision or land development.
(3) Where a proposed subdivision and/or land development abut an
existing utility easement of insufficient width, additional easement
or right-of-way dedication will be required to make such existing
easement or right-of-way the adequate width is required for a new
utility easement or right-of-way.
E. Easements and in some cases rights-of-way shall be provided where
necessary for stormwater or groundwater drainage purposes. All
proposed easements/rights-of-way shall meet the requirements
established by and obtain the approval from the Borough prior to
preliminary plan approval.
(1) Necessary easements/rights-of-way for groundwater or stormwater
storage or drainage shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide and of such
additional width as will be adequate to provide for positive
drainage and for maintenance purposes. In addition, a construction
easement may be required by the Borough.
(2) Stormwater drainage facilities or underdrainage facilities included
within the public street right-of-way or utility easement/right-ofway
are excluded from this additional requirement unless so
directed by the Borough.
F. For an existing intermittent or perennial watercourse which traverses
or abuts a proposed subdivision or land development, there shall be
provided the requirements of Ch. 199, Stormwater Management.
[Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
§ 210-20 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-20
210:395
§ 210-21. Groundwater and surface water drainage.
G. Easement and right-of-way requirements for access and circulation
facilities shall be as per the requirements in §§ 210-22, 210-26 and
210-27.
H. Water sanitary sewer lines may be located within the easement or rightof-
way for access and circulation. Where said utilities are outside of an
existing easement or proposed right-of-way, the additional easement
shall meet the Borough's requirements.
I. If and where applicable, anchor easements shall be required and shall
be as directed by the Borough.
J. If and where applicable, aerial easements shall be required and shall be
as directed by the Borough.
A. Each subdivision and/or land development shall have provided a water
drainage management plan so as to prevent any damage or injury to
health, safety or property from stormwater or groundwater. Said plan
shall be prepared as per the requirements of this section.
(1) All water drainage management plans shall assure that the
maximum rate of stormwater runoff is no greater after
development than such rate prior to development.
(2) All drainage management measures shall include such actions as
are required to manage the quantity, velocity and direction of
resulting groundwater and/or stormwater runoff in a manner which
protects health and property from injury.
(3) Natural runoff flow characteristics shall be maintained either by
augmenting natural infiltration processes or by physically
controlling the release of development-related stormwater flow
increases through structural means.
(4) The water drainage management plan shall be submitted with the
preliminary plan application as Exhibit No. 7: Proposed
Stormwater Drainage and Underdrainage Plan, and submitted with
the final plan application as Exhibit No. 4: Final/Approved
Stormwater Drainage and Underdrainage Plan and/or Permit.
B. Positive drainage is required in all areas of development.
(1) A stormwater system shall be planned and designed for every
subdivision and/or land development to direct stormwater runoff
away from all structures, buildings and development areas.
(2) A stormwater drainage system shall provide drainage facilities at
all points along public streets and sidewalks, including other
access and circulation systems.
§ 210-20 MONACA CODE § 210-21
210:396
(3) Underdrainage shall be provided in all areas where springs, wetweather
springs or poor soil drainage conditions exist or result
from the development. During construction of any improvement, if
springs or any other poor drainage conditions are encountered or
when construction of any improvement has or will alter the natural
groundwater flow, the Borough shall be notified. Underdrainage
shall be provided by the applicant, as directed by the Borough, to
correct said poor drainage condition.
C. The stormwater system, including downspouting and other forms of
rainwear which are utilized upon any structure within the subdivision
and/or land development, and the underdrainage system shall be
designed to convey, contain, store, absorb and/or use the surface or
underground waters without damage to life or property and to minimize
disruption of land usage.
(1) The stormwater drainage system and underground drainage
system shall be designed to prevent the discharge of stormwater or
underground water onto adjacent facilities or properties.
(2) Natural drainage routing shall be preserved where feasible. No
discharge of on-site stormwater or underground water runoff into a
natural drainage routing shall be permitted when such discharge
will damage adjacent or downstream property.
(3) No stormwater drainage system or underground drainage system
shall be permitted to discharge into any sanitary sewer system.
D. The stormwater system shall be designed to assure that the maximum
rate of stormwater runoff for the subdivision or land development is no
greater after development than such rate prior to development.
(1) Stormwater runoff and design calculations to meet this
requirement shall be submitted to the Borough for approval prior
to preliminary plan approval.
(2) Stormwater runoff and design calculations shall be prepared by a
qualified Pennsylvania registered engineer, architect, landscape
architect or land surveyor.
(3) Stormwater facilities shall be in accordance with Chapter 199,
Stormwater Management. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
(4) Additional analysis, calculations and design criteria may be
required for both the on-site and off-site stormwater systems where
it has been determined by the Borough that further study is
necessary.
(5) Upon Borough request, stormwater runoff calculations shall be
made available:
§ 210-21 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-21
210:397
(a) For the outlet and inlet sides of all stormwater drainage and
storage facilities and structures;
(b) At points in a public street with a change of grade; or
(c) Where water from a proposed structure, facility or
vehicularway is to enter an existing public street, existing
storm sewer, existing drainage ditch or existing stormwater
storage facility.
E. The stormwater drainage system for the subdivision and land
development and, where required, the underdrainage system for a
subdivision and/or land development shall be designed for compatibility
with the watershed stormwater management system and any Borough
or adjacent-municipality-planned or proposed change to this system.
(1) The design shall anticipate and provide for potential effects of
upstream development; determination of such development being
based on the Borough's General Development Plan.
(2) The design shall anticipate and provide for impact(s) on
downstream areas and maintenance of existing downstream flow
conditions and water quality.
(3) Off-site stormwater drainage and underdrainage facilities and
improvements shall be provided by the applicant/owner of the
proposed subdivision and/or land development where needed and
where requested by the Borough.
(4) Where required, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection approval shall be furnished by the applicant/owner of
the subdivision and/or land development. All drainage facilities
must finally be approved by the Borough Council.
F. The installation, ownership and maintenance responsibilities after
completion of the development for all stormwater drainage and storage
facilities and all underdrainage facilities shall be identified on the
preliminary plans and exhibits. All stormwater drainage or storage
facilities or underdrainage facilities to be publicly dedicated shall be
located in a right-of-way, a drainage easement or in a location as
required by the Borough.
G. The design and specifications for all public stormwater drainage and
storage facilities shall be in accordance with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Design Manual, Part 2,
latest edition, and of this chapter.
(1) Plans and profiles shall be provided prior to preliminary plan
approval. Cross-sections and specifications shall be provided,
showing complete construction details for all stormwater drainage
and storage facilities prior to final plan approval.
§ 210-21 MONACA CODE § 210-21
210:398
(2) The access control for any storage facility shall be approved by the
Borough prior to preliminary plan approval.
(3) The design of all retention dams shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Borough Engineer and, where applicable, by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, including
where road fill may be used as a retention dam.
(4) Where open stormwater drainage and/or storage facilities are to be
constructed, the access control measures, erosion control
measures, capacity protection measures, flood protection
measures, stagnant water control measures and appearance
control measures shall be presented for Borough approval with the
preliminary plans and exhibits.
H. The design of stormwater drainage and storage facilities shall be
closely correlated with the design of public streets.
(1) The depth of flow in gutters and allowable spread across the
pavement shall be closely correlated with the street classification
and approved by the Borough Engineer.
(2) Free flow of stormwater runoff shall not be permitted onto the
cartway of any public street from a private driveway, access drive
or any other vehicular right-of-way.
I. Stormwater inlets shall normally be spaced a maximum of 300 feet
apart where pipe sizes of 24 inches or less are used and not over 450
feet where large pipe sizes are installed.
(1) Grate inlets shall be depressed below the plane of the gutter.
(2) Curb inlets/openings shall have a maximum permitted height of six
inches unless otherwise provided with a protective barrier.
J. Manholes shall normally be spaced a maximum of 300 feet apart where
pipe sizes of 24 inches or less are used and not over 450 feet where
larger pipe sizes are installed. If approved by the Borough, inlets may
be substituted for manholes.146
K. Enclosed stormwater drainage courses shall be required at intersecting
streets and elsewhere, as may be deemed necessary by the Borough.
Stormwater shall be collected in stormwater culverts or similar
enclosed components.
(1) Stormwater culverts, bridges and similar structures serving public
streets, access drives or any other vehicular right-of-way as may be
designated by the Borough shall be designed to support HS-20
loading and any other imposed loadings necessary without
structurally damaging the drainage system. The stormwater
culverts, bridges and similar structures shall be constructed to the
146. Editor's Note: See also Ch. A252, Manholes.
§ 210-21 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-21
210:399
full width of the right-of-way plus additional length as deemed
necessary by the Borough Engineer to satisfy a local drainage
pattern.
(2) Stormwater culverts in areas other than those noted above shall be
designed to support the necessary loading (existing and potential)
and any other imposed loadings without structurally damaging the
pipe or affecting its capacity for drainage. Said design shall be
approved by the Borough.
(3) Conduit size of culverts or other enclosed components of a
stormwater drainage system shall be based on computed
hydrologic and hydraulic data and computations shall be approved
by the Borough. Minimum size of any enclosed structure to be
privately maintained shall be 15 inches in diameter unless design
calculations are provided that can justify a lesser size.
(4) The design of the enclosed drainage course shall provide a
minimum cleaning velocity of three feet per second. When the
design provides for a maximum velocity greater than 10 feet per
second, the enclosed components shall be lines or protected to
prevent scour.
(5) The design of headwall and endwall structures for enclosed
stormwater facilities shall be approved by the Borough.
(6) Energy dissipators shall be required at the outlet side of all
enclosed culverts or similar components.
(7) No stormwater facility shall be enclosed or covered over until the
Borough has inspected and approved said facility.
L. Open stormwater drainage courses shall be designed for a maximum
velocity of not to exceed 10 feet per second and a minimum velocity of
five feet per second. A minimum velocity of three feet per second may
be permitted where a greater slope cannot be achieved to permit the
standard required minimum velocity. An open stormwater drainage
course shall include a lining (rip-rap, concrete or bituminous) to
prevent erosion. Any required approval of the Beaver County Soil
Conservation Service shall be obtained by the applicant.
M. Stormwater drainage facilities shall be placed at each private driveway
or private access drive intersection with a public street.
(1) The design of the stormwater drainage facility shall be approved by
the Borough and placed as to maintain the flow line of the
stormwater drainage facility being served.
(2) Where an apron gutter (curb gutter) is to be utilized, said apron
gutter design shall be approved by the Borough.
(3) Where reinforced-concrete, metal or tile pipe is to be used beneath
the driveway, said pipe shall not be less than 15 inches in diameter
§ 210-21 MONACA CODE § 210-21
210:400
§ 210-22. Vehicular circulation and access system.
and shall extend the full width of the driveway structure and
beyond driveway as necessary and determined by the Borough. The
pipe shall be installed with flared end sections. The pipe shall be
designed to support H-15 loading and any other imposed loadings
necessary without structurally damaging the drainage system.
A. Each subdivision or land development shall have provided a vehicular
circulation and access system. The vehicular circulation and access
system plan shall be submitted with the preliminary plan application as
Exhibit No. 8: Proposed Circulation and Parking Plan, and with the final
plan application as Exhibit No. 5: Final/Approved Circulation/Parking
Plan, Including Lighting Plan.
(1) No preliminary plan for a subdivision or a land development shall
be approved by the Borough without a plan to permit adequate
vehicular circulation within and access into the subdivision and
land development. Said plan shall be prepared as per the
requirements of this section.
(2) Conformance with plans. A proposed vehicular circulation and
access plan for a subdivision or land development shall conform to
the Borough, county and state major thoroughfare and highway
plan.
(3) Conformance with existing circulation system. The proposed
vehicular circulation system of public streets, service roads and
private access drives shall be located, aligned and coordinated with
the existing system of streets and highways in the Borough
regardless of whether such streets and highways are Borough,
county or state streets or highways.
B. Functional class identification requirements. The Borough shall assign
to each vehicular circulation and access facility within a subdivision or
land development one of the following functional street classifications:
driveway, access drive, service road, lane, local street, collector street,
arterial or expressway. (See § 210-10.)
(1) The assignment of one of the functional street classifications to
each proposed vehicular circulation and access facility shall be
based on the definitions of public or private streets in § 210-10 of
this chapter, existing development service demands, anticipated
development service demands, ultimate development service
demands and service demands that may be placed upon the facility
by off-site uses whether or not such use is under the ownership of
the applicant for the subdivision of land development.
(2) The assigned functional street classification shall be identified by
the applicant on Exhibit No. 8 of the preliminary plan application.
§ 210-21 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-22
210:401
Such street classification shall be approved by the Borough prior to
approval of the preliminary plan application.
(3) The requirements for site planning, design improvement and
construction of the vehicular system shall be based on the assigned
functional class for each street.
C. Vehicular access requirements. Each land tract, parcel or lot shall have
access to a public street.
(1) Each lot shall abut by the full lot width on a public street when used
for a mobile home, a single-family dwelling or a duplex dwelling or
when one multifamily dwelling is on an individual and separate lot.
The following two exceptions to this requirement may be
permitted:
(a) Existing private street exception. A lot may be approved on a
private street only if said private street was lawfully in
existence prior to enactment of this chapter and only if said lot
will be used and is permitted by the Zoning Ordinance147 for
only one mobile home, one single-family detached dwelling or
one duplex dwelling. However, said private street may not be
extended to permit additional lot development. [Amended
9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
(b) Rear lot exception. one rear lot may be approved when the use
is for one mobile home, one single-family detached dwelling or
one duplex dwelling where said use is permitted by the
Borough Zoning Ordinance148 and where the following
conditions are met:
[1] The depth of the original parcel from which the rear lot is
to be subdivided has a lot depth greater than 100 feet.
[2] The forward lot shall be used by only one mobile home, one
single-family detached dwelling or one duplex dwelling.
[3] The forward dwelling lot shall abut by its full lot width on a
public street.
[4] Both the forward and rear lots shall meet the minimum lot
area, lot width and yard requirements for the zoning
district in which the property is situated.
[5] A permanent private right-of-way shall be provided, being
a minimum of 15 feet wide, over an unoccupied strip of
land, from the public street to the rear lot, and said rightof-
way shall be part of the rear lot.
147. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
148. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 210-22 MONACA CODE § 210-22
210:402
(2) A lot to be used, for one multifamily dwelling structure or for one
structure used for commercial (retail or service), nonprofit or
industrial/manufacturing use shall abut by its full lot width on a
public street. The following exception to this requirement may be
permitted:
(a) Land development exception. Where a land development that
includes those uses listed in Subsection C(2) above is
permitted by the Zoning Ordinance149 and approved by the
Borough, individual structures within the land development
may have access to a public street by means of a private
service road, access drive or driveway. Said service road,
access drive or driveway shall be designed and constructed to
meet the minimum requirements of this chapter. A suitable
covenant assuring perpetual maintenance of said service road,
access drive or driveway shall be submitted to and approved by
the Borough prior to final approval. Nevertheless, the overall
land development shall have the minimum lot width as
required by the Zoning Ordinance150 on a public street.
(3) Emergency access/fire lanes. With the exception of a mobile home,
a single-family dwelling or a duplex dwelling on an individual lot,
all structures that are located more than 250 feet from a public
street shall have an emergency access from the public street to said
structure(s) to permit rapid and safe movement of public
emergency, health and safety vehicles from the public street to the
entrance of principal structure(s). Each emergency access shall
meet the site planning, improvement and construction
requirements for a collector street as contained within this chapter.
An access drive to a parking area may also be designated as an
emergency access. However, an emergency access shall not be
used for and shall be posted to prohibit the parking or standing of
vehicles except for emergency purposes.
D. Street layout requirements. The following principles shall be the
required minimum when planning the vehicular circulation and access
facilities:
(1) Driveways, access drives, lanes and local streets shall be laid out to
discourage through traffic.
(2) Driveways and access drives may be laid out in a loop or dead-end
arrangement. However, when said facilities are dead-ended, a
functional turnaround or cul-de-sac shall be provided.
(3) A lane or local street may be looped. A lane or local street may be
dead-ended with a cul-de-sac or a tee turnaround. A lane or local
street which is looped shall have its two intersections with another
149. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
150. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 210-22 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-22
210:403
local street. A lane or local street that is dead-ended with a tee
or cul-de-sac shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length. The cul-desac
turnaround and tee turnaround shall be designed as per this
chapter and as required by the Borough.
(4) When a public street system is to be constructed, the street
network shall provide adequate access to a collector street and to
adjacent areas of existing development as well as to adjacent areas
of potential development.
(a) Within an area having a maximum development potential of 99
dwelling units or a maximum projected average daily traffic of
400 vehicles per day, a subdivision or a land development shall
have a public street system designed and constructed to the
level of a local street which shall meet the requirements of this
chapter and shall provide one access route to or an
intersection with a collector street.
(b) Within an area having a maximum development potential from
100 to 200 dwelling units or a maximum projected average
daily traffic from 401 to 800 vehicles per day, a land
development or subdivision shall have a public street system
designed and constructed as per the following requirements:
[1] Where two access routes to or intersections with a
collector street are provided, the public street system
within the subdivision or land development shall be
designed and constructed to meet the requirements for a
local street as contained within this chapter.
[2] Where two access routes to or intersections with a
collector street cannot be obtained, the public street
system within the subdivision or land development shall be
designed and constructed to meet the requirements for a
collector street as contained within this chapter.
(c) Within an area having a maximum development potential from
201 to 500 dwelling units or a maximum projected average
daily traffic from 801 to 2,000 vehicles per day, a subdivision or
a land development shall have a public street system designed
and constructed as per the following requirements:
[1] Where three access routes to or intersections with a
collector street are provided, the public street system
within the subdivision or land development shall be
designed and constructed to meet the requirements for a
local street as contained within this chapter.
[2] Where three access routes to or intersections with a
collector street cannot be obtained, the public street
system within the subdivision or land development shall be
§ 210-22 MONACA CODE § 210-22
210:404
designed and constructed to meet the requirements for a
collector street as contained within this chapter.
(d) Within an area having a maximum development potential in
excess of 500 dwelling units or a projected average daily traffic
in excess of 2,000 vehicles per day, a subdivision or land
development shall have a public street system within the
subdivision or land development designed and constructed to
meet the requirements contained within this chapter for a
collector street and shall provide a minimum of one access
route to or intersection with another collector street without
the use of an existing local street.
(5) A collector street, arterial or expressway shall provide throughtraffic
connections and shall not be dead-ended.
(6) Where an existing street and a street extension adjoin, there shall
be a smooth transition of all like improvements. Design of the
transition shall be approved by the Borough.
(7) Reserve strips of land shall be prohibited which restrict, block or
control access to adjacent streets, lots, parcels or tracts of land.
(8) Half streets shall be prohibited except to complete an existing half
street.
(9) When a subdivision or land development contain, adjoin or abut a
collector street, arterial or expressway, the Borough may require
development of traffic controls and service roads to reduce the
number of intersections and to separate through traffic from local
and land access traffic.
(10) When a proposed subdivision or land development abut one side of
an existing public street which has less than the required right-ofway
width, the Borough may require the dedication for public use
of 1/2 of the additional right-of-way necessary to bring the existing
street right-of-way width into compliance with the minimum
requirements of this chapter.
(a) The required cartway, sidewalk and curb/gutter improvements
to an existing street in a residential zoning district shall be
identical to the immediately adjacent property.
(b) The required cartway, curb/gutter, sidewalk, intersections,
service roads and additional necessary improvements within a
commercial or industrial zoning district shall be as required by
the Borough to preserve the traffic-carrying capacity of the
street.
(11) When a proposed subdivision or land development abuts both sides
of an existing public street which has less than the required rightof-
way width, the Borough may require the dedication for public
§ 210-22 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-22
210:405
use of the total additional right-of-way necessary to bring the
existing street right-of-way width into compliance with the
minimum requirements of this chapter. The allocation of right-ofway
shall be determined by the Borough Engineer.
(a) The required cartway, sidewalk and curb/gutter improvements
to an existing street in a residential zoning district shall be
identical to the immediately adjacent property.
(b) The required cartway, sidewalk, curb/gutter, intersections,
service roads and additional necessary improvements within
commercial or industrial zoning district shall be as required by
the Borough to preserve the traffic-carrying capacity of the
street.
E. Width requirements. Except for private streets in mobile home park
developments which shall be as required in § 210-37, the required
street right-of-way, cartway and curb/gutter width shall be as follows:
[Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
Class of
Street
Type of
Development
Use
Required
Right-of-
Way1
(feet)
Minimum
Cartway1
(feet)
Minimum
Gutter/
Curb
(feet)
Driveway To serve 1 to 25
parking spaces
None None2
Residential 10
Commercial 24
Access drive To serve
parking areas
in excess of 25
spaces and
major land
developments
None 243 None2
Lane To serve a
maximum of 25
dwelling units
33 20 2
Local street To serve a
maximum of
500 dwelling
units or a
projected
average daily
traffic of 2,000
per day
50 24 2
§ 210-22 MONACA CODE § 210-22
210:406
Class of
Street
Type of
Development
Use
Required
Right-of-
Way1
(feet)
Minimum
Cartway1
(feet)
Minimum
Gutter/
Curb
(feet)
Collector To serve over
500 dwelling
units or a
projected
average daily
traffic of up to
3,000 vehicles
per day
60 48 2
Arterial As per the
requirements of
the
Pennsylvania
Department of
Transportation
Expressway As per the
requirements of
the
Pennsylvania
Department of
Transportation
NOTES:
1 In cases where a subdivision is planned to join the street system
of an existing subdivision, the above minimum requirements shall
apply except where the existing cartway and rights-of-way are
larger than required. In this event, the Borough shall require that
the cartways and rights-of-way be as large as the existing. Private
covenants may apply if their provisions are in excess of this
chapter.
2 No gutter/curb is required unless so directed by the Borough
Engineer for purposes of traffic or stormwater drainage control.
3 Minimum cartway width of 12 feet is for each directional lane of
traffic.
F. Turnaround requirements.
(1) Cul-de-sac turnarounds shall have a minimum right-of-way
diameter of 100 feet and a minimum cartway diameter of 80 feet
except when a landscaped island within the cul-de-sac is to be
developed, then the cartway width around the island shall be
approved by the Borough to assure proper width and turning
§ 210-22 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-22
210:407
radius. Landscaping of the cul-de-sac shall be of a low-maintenance
variety and approved by the Borough.
(2) For development of tee turnarounds, an additional 10 feet of rightof-
way shall be provided beyond the normal right-of-way width.
Said tee turnaround arms shall extend 15 feet beyond the normal
cartway width.
G. Design speeds.
(1) For the purpose of these regulations and to establish a minimum
design criteria for various classes of vehicular streets, the
minimum design speeds are as follows:
Type
Speed
(mph)
Expressway 60
Arterial 60
Collector streets, service roads and, in some
cases, access drives
45
Local streets or access drives designed to the
level of a local street
30
(2) Higher design speeds shall be established where conditions
warrant the same. Likewise, lower design speeds may be
established, as approved by the Borough Engineer, if existing
topography causes undue hardship in achieving the required
alignments for streets.
H. Alignment criteria.
(1) The following are considered to be the minimum/maximum centerline
finished-grade alignment criteria for all public streets subject
to further requirements of the Borough Engineer.
Requirement as per
Design Speed (mph)
of New Vehicular Street
Center Line
Finished Grade
Alignment Criteria 30 mph 45 mph 60 mph
Minimum radius (feet) 250 650 1,200
Maximum grade (percent) 12 8 5
Minimum grade (percent) 0.5 0.5 0.5
§ 210-22 MONACA CODE § 210-22
210:408
(2) Reverse curves shall have a minimum connecting tangent distance
of:
(a) Expressways: 300 feet.
(b) Arterials: 300 feet.
(c) Collector streets: 100 feet.
(d) Local streets and lanes: 100 feet.
I. Vertical curves.
(1) Vertical curves shall be installed on all street grade changes.
(2) Adequate sight distance on vertical curves shall be provided for
stopping and passing conditions.
(3) K-values.
(a) K-values for minimum vertical curve lengths are established as
follows:
Requirement as per Design Speed
(mph)
of New Vehicular Street
K-Value 30 mph 45 mph 60 mph
For stopping sight
distance
Crest curves 28 70 160
Sag curves 35 65 105
For passing sight
distance
Crest curves 365 835 1,340
(b) Multiply K-value by algebraic differences in grades to obtain
minimum length of vertical curve in feet, which will provide
minimum sight distance.
J. Intersections.
(1) The location of street intersections shall be carefully selected to
avoid sharp horizontal curvature and steep profile grades and to
ensure adequate sight distances particularly for motorists who are
stopped on the cross route. The alignment of intersecting roadways
shall be as straight and gradients shall be as low as practical.
(2) Where the grade of any street at the approach to a public street
intersection exceeds 5%, a leveling area shall be provided with a
transitional grade not to exceed 2% for a distance of 50 feet from
the nearest right-of-way line of the intersection.
§ 210-22 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-22
210:409
(3) Intersections of more than two public streets shall not be permitted
except where such avoidance proves impossible. Said intersections
shall be designed in accordance with the Borough Engineer's
recommendations. Public streets entering opposite sides of another
public street shall be laid off directly opposite one another or else
shall have a minimum offset of 125 feet. Public street offsets of less
than 125 feet are not permitted. The offset of public streets with
access drives or the offset between access drives shall be a
minimum of 125 feet.
(4) Street intersection angles shall be 90°. Where a modification of this
requirement is necessary, the street intersection angle shall be no
less than 60° and only when approved by the Borough Engineer.
(5) The minimum corner, curb or pavement radii at intersections with
the following streets shall be as follows:
Intersection With
Required Radius
(feet)
Expressway 50
Arterial 50
Collector street 40
Local street 351
Access drive
Minimum 15
Maximum 25
Driveway
Minimum 10
Maximum 15
NOTE:
1 Twenty-foot corner radii are permitted in developed
residential areas.
(6) The clear sight triangles as defined in this chapter shall be
maintained at all public street intersections and at the intersection
of an access drive, driveway or private street with a public street.
(7) The minimum horizontal visibility (sight distance) at all
intersections with the following streets shall be maintained. Sight
distances shall be measured horizontally on the center line of the
street, five feet above grade.
§ 210-22 MONACA CODE § 210-22
210:410
Requirement as per
Design Speed (mph)
of New Vehicular Street
Intersection With 30 mph 45 mph 60 mph
2-LANE STREETS
Collector street or
service road or, in some
cases, access drive
300 450 600
Local street or access
drive designed to the
level of a local street
300 450 600
4-LANE STREETS
Expressway and arterial 590 880 1,125
Collector street or
service road or, in some
cases, access drive
350 525 710
Local street or access
drive when designed to
the level of a local street
350 525 710
K. Driveways.
(1) Prior to constructing a driveway and its intersection with or
opening onto a public street, the landowner shall obtain Borough
approval.
(2) Driveways shall be so constructed as not to interfere with public
street and roadway drainage. Cross drains or apron gutters shall be
constructed beneath or across the driveway where required to
provide adequate drainage. See § 210-21, Groundwater and
surface water drainage.
(3) The grade line of the driveway shall be sloped to meet the edge of
the roadway shoulder or top of the depressed curb so that the
slopes between the driveway and cross slope of the shoulder do not
exceed 8%. If the driveway is placed prior to curb construction, the
driveway finished grade shall be raised to meet the curb grade.
L. Subsurface investigation.
(1) A subsurface report prepared by a Pennsylvania registered
engineer in accordance with the latest edition of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Design Manual and Form 408 shall
be submitted for Borough approval on all street construction in
which:
(a) The total length of the public street exceeds 1,200 feet.
§ 210-22 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-22
210:411
(b) The total number of lots exceeds 50 or the total number of
dwelling units to be served by the street exceeds 50 dwelling
units.
(c) The street would be constructed in landslide-prone areas.
(d) The street would be constructed in flood hazard, swampy or
wet areas.
(2) The subsurface report shall be based upon adequate field
investigations and/or subsurface borings and shall include
recommendations for roadway stability, subsurface drainage,
undercutting, benching, slopes, erosion control and any other
recommendations necessary for sound construction.
(3) For all street construction not meeting the requirements of
Subsection L(1) above, the applicant shall take the necessary steps
to see that sound engineering judgment is incorporated into street
construction to provide a quality product.
M. Grading.
(1) All streets (including the total right-of-way) shall be graded in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, state and federal
law and shall also be graded to aesthetically blend with the natural
lay of the land preserving as many trees as possible where required
by the Borough. All scrub brush shall be cleared the full width of
the right-of-way.
N. Paving material. Paving material requirements shall be as set forth in
§§ 205-18 and 205-19 of Chapter 205, Streets and Sidewalks, Article III,
regarding excavations of streets. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
O. Curbing.
(1) Curbing shall be either bituminous concrete or cement concrete
and of the following types as applicable. The design of curbing shall
be subject to the approval of the Borough.
(a) Wedged curb and gutter.
(b) Extruded curb.
(c) Full-depth concrete curb.
(2) Curbs and associated stormwater gutters shall be required on all
public streets and on access drives and service roads where it is
determined by the Borough to be necessary for stormwater
drainage or traffic control.
(3) If a certain type of curbing exists on abutting streets, the Borough
will ordinarily require its extension along the street extension
throughout the proposed subdivision or land development.
§ 210-22 MONACA CODE § 210-22
210:412
(4) Curbing may also be required by the Borough to define traffic
areas, driving lanes, parking areas or elsewhere as deemed
necessary for safety.
(5) When curbed streets are constructed, the space behind the curb
shall be filled and graded to drain to the street at a minimum rate/
slope of 1/4 inch per foot.
P. Structures.
(1) Bridge structures for all classes of streets shall meet the following
design criteria:
(a) The design of all bridge structures shall be prepared by a
Pennsylvania registered engineer, and all plans shall bear the
seal of said engineer.
(b) The design and construction shall be in accordance with the
latest edition of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Design Manual and Form 408.
(c) Minimum vertical clearance shall be 14 feet six inches except
over interstate roadways and other locations set by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation at 16 feet six
inches.
(d) H-15 loading capacity shall be provided for a private driveway.
(e) HS-20 loading capacity shall be provided for all public streets,
access drives and service roads.
(f) Minimum width for two-lane roadways is as follows:
Type
Minimum Width
(feet)
Expressway and arterial As required by PennDOT
Collector street 40
Local street 32
(g) Sidewalks on approaches should be carried across all new
structures.
(h) Where required by the Borough, there shall be at least one
sidewalk on all bridges.
(2) Wall structures for all classes of streets shall meet the following
criteria:
(a) Wall structures shall be sufficient to support the street or
adjacent lands, as may be the case. Wall structures shall be
outside of the public right-of-way.
§ 210-22 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-22
210:413
(b) Design and construction plans shall be prepared by and bear
the seal of a professional engineer registered to practice in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(c) The design and construction shall be in accordance with the
latest edition of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Design Manual and Form 408.
Q. Guardrail.
(1) Guardrail protection shall be provided where the height of
embankment exceeds or equals the limits shown below:
Embankment Slope
(Horizontal/Vertical)
Embankment Height
(feet)
2:1 10
21/2:1 18
3:1 28
4:1 45
(2) The length of guardrail for embankment protection shall include a
fifty-foot extension beyond the point of need for the trailing end and
a minimum seventy-five-foot flare on the approach end of the
guardrail.
(a) The approach flare offset shall be a minimum of four feet.
Larger offsets are desirable where conditions warrant.
(b) Flares shall be provided on both the approach and trailing ends
of guardrail on two-lane facilities with two-way traffic.
(3) Where consecutive installations of guardrail are required and the
points of need are 200 feet or less apart, the guardrail protection
shall be made continuous between the points of need.
R. Construction plans. Construction plans for all street construction must
be submitted to the Borough for approval prior to beginning
construction.
S. Streetlighting.
(1) Requirements for installation of streetlighting:
(a) Along an existing public street, the installation of streetlighting
for a subdivision or a land development may be required by the
Borough as recommended by the Duquesne Light Company.
(b) Along a newly constructed public street or a service road, the
installation of streetlighting shall be a mandatory requirement
for a land development or subdivision containing more than
three lots.
§ 210-22 MONACA CODE § 210-22
210:414
§ 210-23. Utilities.
(c) Lighting of access drives and driveways shall be in accordance
with § 210-27 of this chapter.
(2) The lighting system shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the specifications and requirements of the
Duquesne Light Company.
(3) Prior to finalization of the developer's agreement for a subdivision
or land development of over three lots, the applicant shall submit to
the Borough documentation of approval by Duquesne Light
Company of the streetlighting plan.
(a) The underground wiring and necessary appurtenances shall be
installed at the same time that the general distribution
underground electrical supply lines are being installed.
(b) The applicant shall present a plan bearing certification by
Duquesne Light Company that such an installation as indicated
in the above section has been made.
T. Traffic control requirements. Appropriate lane marking, traffic
separations, traffic control signs and signalizations for intersections
with public streets shall be provided by the applicant for a subdivision
and/or land development as required by the Borough and/or the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
U. Street names and sign requirements.
(1) Street name signs shall be furnished and installed by the Borough,
at the applicant's expense, at each public street intersection with
another public street and at each intersection of a public street
with an access drive and as required by the Borough.
(2) No street, other than an extension of an existing street, shall be
given the name or be similar to the name of an existing street in the
Borough.
(3) The applicant may submit a name for the proposed street; however,
the final choice or approval of a name to identify a street or right-ofway
shall be that of the Borough. Approval of said name shall be
part of the preliminary plan approval.
V. Street tree requirements.
(1) Should the applicant plan to provide street trees or other
landscaping, the location, spacing and species shall be approved by
the Borough prior to preliminary plan approval.
(2) Trees will not be permitted within the right-of-way but are to be
placed inside the property line.
§ 210-22 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-23
210:415
§ 210-24. Water supply/distribution system; fire hydrants.
A. Each subdivision or land development shall have provided an
underground utilities plan.
(1) No preliminary plan for a subdivision or land development shall be
approved by the Borough without a plan to provide adequate
utilities.
(2) The utilities plan shall be submitted with the preliminary plan
application as part of Exhibit No. 11: Proposed Underground
Utilities Plan, and with the final plan application as part of Exhibit
No. 8: Final/Approved Underground Utility Plan and/or Permit(s).
B. Underground utilities to serve the proposed subdivision or land
development, including natural gas, electric and telephone plus cable
televisions, if applicable, shall be located within the utility easement or
right-of-way in accordance with the applicable utility company practice
and the Borough-approved final plans. The applicant shall notify the
Borough inspector once the utility is in place and prior to covering over.
The applicant shall not cover over utility lines until inspected by the
Borough.
A. Each subdivision or land development shall have provided an adequate
and potable water supply and distribution system.
(1) No preliminary plan for a subdivision and/or land development
shall be approved by the Borough without a proposed and Boroughapproved
water supply and distribution system plan.
(2) The water supply and distribution plan shall be submitted with the
preliminary plan application as Exhibit No. 9: Proposed Water
Supply and Distribution Plan, and with the final plan application as
Exhibit No. 6: Final/Approved Water Supply/Distribution Plan.
B. Where the Borough's water distribution lines abut, adjoin or are within
a reasonable distance (1,000 linear feet) from the subdivision or land
development and adequate public water supply is available, it shall be
required of the applicant that said subdivision or land development be
provided with a water distribution system and fire hydrants in
accordance with the requirements of the Borough and said system be
connected into the water distribution lines.
C. As determined by the Borough, where the public water supply and
distribution system could be extended in the future but immediate
connection to the Borough's utility easements, rights-of-way plus water
mains, fire hydrants and other necessary construction be completed in
accordance with the Borough's requirements within the subdivision
and/or land development to provide for eventual connection into the
Borough's water supply and distribution system.
§ 210-23 MONACA CODE § 210-24
210:416
§ 210-25. Sanitary sewage collection and treatment systems.152
D. All water mains and associated construction to be used in a system that
will be served by the Borough or by a centralized water supply shall be
in accordance with the Borough and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection requirements. The applicant shall notify the
Borough once the waterlines are in place and prior to covering over.
The applicant shall not cover over any water mains or laterals until
inspected by the Borough.
E. In areas where the Borough has determined that immediate connection
to the Borough's water supply and distribution facilities is not feasible,
individual water supply or, in some cases, a centralized well shall be
required.
(1) Centralized wells shall be approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection as well as by the Borough.
(2) Where individual wells are to provide the water supply and where,
in the opinion of the Borough or as required by federal, state or
county regulations, the scope of the subdivision and/or land
development is sufficiently great or where the underground water
supply is known to be inadequate or water quality is known to be
hazardous for human consumption, the Borough may require the
applicant to drill a test well and submit plans, provisions and
written agreements guaranteeing the construction of an adequate
and potable water supply and distribution system for the proposed
land development or subdivision, including, if necessary, complete
treatment facilities, all in accordance with the requirements of and
subject to the approval of the Borough, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and any other agency
having regulations with which compliance is required.151
A. Each subdivision or land development shall have provided a sanitary
sewage collection and treatment system as per the requirements of the
Borough and the Borough's Sewage Enforcement Officer.
(1) No preliminary plan for a subdivision and/or land development
shall be approved by the Borough without a proposed and Boroughapproved
sanitary sewage collection and treatment system plan.
(2) The sanitary sewer collection and treatment system plan shall be
submitted with the preliminary plan application as Exhibit No. 10:
Proposed Sanitary Sewage Collection and Treatment Plan, and with
the final plan application as Exhibit No. 7: Final/Approved Sanitary
Sewer Collection and Treatment Plan and/or Permit and/or
Planning Module.
151. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 233, Water.
152. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 177, Sewers.
§ 210-24 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-25
210:417
§ 210-26. Pedestrian circulation and access system.
B. Where the Borough's sanitary sewer lines abut, adjoin or are within a
reasonable distance (1,000 linear feet) and where the Borough has
treatment capacity available, it shall be required of the applicant that
said subdivision and/or land development be provided with a system of
sewer mains and service lateral connections to each lot or building, as
applicable, and this system shall be connected into the Borough's
sanitary sewer collection system all in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Borough. The owner/applicant of the proposed
subdivision and/or land development may be responsible for off-site
improvements to the sanitary sewer system.
C. In those areas where the Borough's sanitary sewer system is not yet
available due to lack of treatment capacity or availability of collection
facilities but additional/extended facilities are planned by the Borough
though not yet constructed, the Borough shall require of the applicant
that laterals shall be extended to the right-of-way and trunklines
provided to the edge of the subdivision or land development closest to
the municipal trunk location. The end of said lines shall be capped.
(1) Until such time as the Borough's sanitary sewer system becomes
available, individual on-site disposal systems or a centralized
treatment and disposal system shall be installed as per the
requirements of and being approved by the Borough's Sewage
Enforcement Officer and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection. To the extent that an interim sewer
system may be designed for eventual integration into or connection
with the municipal sanitary sewer system, said interim system shall
be reviewed and approved by the Borough.
D. In areas where the Borough's sanitary sewer system is not available,
the proposed subdivision and/or land development shall be provided
with an individual on-site sewage disposal system or a centralized
treatment and disposal system with an adequate collection system, all
subject to the approval of the Borough, the Borough's Sewage
Enforcement Officer and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, all in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act 537, as amended,153 this chapter and the Borough
Zoning Ordinance.154
A. Each subdivision or land development shall have provided a pedestrian
circulation and access system.
(1) No preliminary plan for a subdivision or land development shall be
approved by the Borough without a plan to permit adequate
pedestrian circulation and access into and within the subdivision or
153. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
154. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 210-25 MONACA CODE § 210-26
210:418
land development. Where necessary or required, pedestrian and
vehicular circulation and access shall be separated.
(2) The pedestrian circulation and access system plan shall be
submitted with the preliminary plan application as part of Exhibit
No. 8: Proposed Circulation/Parking Plan, and with the final plan
application as part of Exhibit No. 5: Final/Approved Circulation/
Parking Plan, Including Lighting Plan.
B. Location requirements along public streets.
(1) Sidewalks or other pedestrian circulation facilities adjacent to a
public street or any other vehicular circulation facility classified as
an expressway or arterial shall be safely separated from the
vehicular movements. The design of said separation shall be
approved by the Borough.
(2) A sidewalk shall be provided on both sides of a street which is an
extension to an existing street having sidewalks on both sides. The
sidewalk shall align with the existing sidewalk.
(3) A sidewalk shall be provided on the same side of a street which is
an extension to an existing street having a sidewalk on one side.
The sidewalk shall align with the existing sidewalk.
(4) Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of, adjacent to and
parallel with a public street classified as a collector street. The
sidewalks shall be required along the total length of the subdivision
or land development where such fronts on, abuts or is adjacent to
an existing collector street.
(5) In areas without existing sidewalks, sidewalks shall be provided on
both sides of, adjacent to and parallel with a public street classified
as a local street when said local street presently serves or has the
future potential of serving 50 or more dwelling units. The sidewalks
shall be required along the total length of the subdivision or land
development where such land development or subdivision fronts
on, abuts or is adjacent to the local road which meets this present
and/or anticipated service qualification.
(6) Sidewalks shall be provided in land developments along public
streets which have existing sidewalks.
(7) A sidewalk shall be within the roadway right-of-way and shall abut
on property lines, unless otherwise authorized by the Borough.
Sidewalks may be located within the interior of a subdivision and
shall abut the side and rear lot lines when the design of subdivision
has made provisions for interior sidewalks. Upon specific request
to the Borough, the requirement for sidewalks adjacent to a
collector or a local street may be waived when sidewalks shall be
provided within the interior of a subdivision, provided that said
subdivision has sidewalks that intersect with existing public
§ 210-26 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-26
210:419
sidewalks or other pedestrian facilities and when the interior
sidewalk design meets the Borough standards. Sidewalks at the
side and rear lot line shall be within a twenty-foot wide easement.
C. Minimum width requirements along public streets.
(1) A sidewalk serving a residential subdivision or land development
shall be a minimum of five feet wide.
(2) A sidewalk located within a commercial or industrial zoning district
or a sidewalk which fronts on or abuts a commercial use, an
industrial use, a public school, a church, a governmental use, a
recreational use or a public service use shall be a minimum of six
feet wide except sidewalks within the Downtown Monaca Business
District.
(3) The Downtown Monaca Business District sidewalks shall be as
required within the Monaca Borough Code, Chapter 205, Article II,
as amended.
(4) The Borough may require greater sidewalk width where it is
determined that the potential volume of pedestrian traffic requires
increased widths or where vehicular parking may permit
automobiles to overlap the sidewalk.
D. For local streets which presently serve or have the future potential of
serving less than 50 dwelling units, pedestrian circulation and access
may be combined with the cartway of such local street when pavement
marking and street signage is provided to control and, where necessary,
to separate pedestrian and vehicular movements.
E. As determined by the Borough Council, an interior pedestrian
accessway within a minimum twenty-foot right-of-way shall be provided
from a public street to any facility that requires public access. A lighting
system for this interior accessway shall be required. The design of this
interior accessway shall be approved by the Borough.
F. Entrance walks and other pedestrian walkways shall be provided within
a land development when said development is without public streets.
(1) A minimum of one separate and defined entrance walk, designed
and constructed to the level of a sidewalk, may be required to
permit pedestrian access from the adjacent or abutting public
street or sidewalk to the entrances of the principal land use(s)
within the land development.
(2) A defined pedestrian walkway may be required to channelize
pedestrian movement from a parking facility with more than 25
parking spaces to the entrance(s) of the building(s) or structures.
The design of the pavement markings and parking signage for the
pedestrian walkway shall be approved by the Borough.
G. Pedestrian circulation facilities design/construction requirements.
§ 210-26 MONACA CODE § 210-26
210:420
(1) Plans and profiles for all pedestrian circulation facilities shall be
provided prior to preliminary plan approval. Cross-sections and
specifications shall be provided showing complete construction
details for all pedestrian circulation facilities prior to final plan
approval.
(2) The maximum gradient of any pedestrian circulation facilities
adjacent to a street shall be 10%; a maximum gradient of 8% will
apply to interior pedestrian facilities. The minimum gradient shall
be 1% for any pedestrian facility.
(3) Where a pedestrian walkway requires steps to maintain the
maximum grades, said steps shall have a maximum rise of eight
inches, with all rises being even. Handrails shall be required for
every set of steps with more than two treads. The design and
construction of said steps shall be approved by the Borough.
(4) Curb ramps to pedestrian walkways shall be constructed where
necessary to provide barrier-free access to public sidewalks or
elsewhere as required by the Borough. The design of the curb
ramps shall be approved by the Borough.
(5) All sidewalks and all interior walks, entrance walks or other
walkways which may be required to be designed to the level of a
sidewalk shall be constructed as per the following except for
sidewalks within the Downtown Monaca Business District, which
shall be designed and constructed as per the Monaca Borough
Code, Chapter 205, Article II, as amended:
Required Design Detail for Sidewalks
4 inches of concrete
Welded-wire fabric, No. 6 x 6 (gage)
4 inches minimum crushed aggregate base
(6) The surface of any pedestrian walkway, other than sidewalks and
those walkways which are required to be constructed to the level of
a sidewalk, shall be stable, durable, dustless and have a nonslip
quality. Maintenance responsibilities shall be clearly identified on
the preliminary plan (Exhibit No. 8) and Final Plan (Exhibit No. 5).
Design details of pedestrian walkways shall be approved by the
Borough prior to construction.
(7) A sidewalk not located within the public street right-of-way shall
have provided a lighting system to produce a minimum average
maintained light level of 0.5 footcandle on the horizontal surface of
the entire facility.
(a) No lighting system shall be designed to illuminate (direct or
reflected) onto adjacent or adjoining properties, resulting in a
minimum average maintained light level of more than 0.2
footcandle on such properties.
§ 210-26 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-26
210:421
§ 210-27. Off-street parking, loading and unloading facilities.
(b) The design of the lighting system, including lamp-type fixture
and pole standards, shall be approved by the Borough prior to
installation.
(c) The ownership and maintenance of the lighting system shall be
identified on the preliminary plan.
A. Each subdivision or land development shall have provided an off-street
parking, loading and unloading plan.
(1) No preliminary plan for a subdivision or land development shall be
approved by the Borough without a plan to permit adequate offstreet
parking, loading and unloading facilities.
(2) The number of off-street parking, loading and unloading spaces
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the
Monaca Borough Zoning Ordinance.155
(3) The required site planning, construction and improvement
requirements for the off-street parking, loading and unloading
facilities shall be as specified within this chapter.
(4) The plan for off-street parking, loading and unloading facilities
shall be submitted with the preliminary plan application as part of
Exhibit No. 8: Proposed Circulation/Parking Plan, and with the final
plan application as part of Exhibit No. 5: Final/Approved
Circulation/Parking Plan, Including Lighting Plan.
B. Availability of facilities. The off-street parking, loading and unloading
facilities shall be available throughout the hours of operation of the
land use and/or activity for which such facilities are provided. In
addition, off-street space(s) shall be provided for the parking of delivery
vehicles awaiting loading or unloading and arriving after the hours of
operation of the land use or activity for which such facility be provided.
C. Parking space.
(1) Size. The minimum parking space per motorized vehicle, whether
inside or outside a structure, shall be not less than nine feet wide
and 18 feet long. All parking space(s) shall be ample in size for the
type of motorized vehicle for which it is intended.
(2) Use. The parking space shall be used exclusively for the temporary
standing of a motorized vehicle.
(3) Location. The parking space shall be located off or beyond the
public right-of-way.
155. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 210-26 MONACA CODE § 210-27
210:422
(a) No parking space shall be so located as to cause any vehicle to
be backed out onto any public street.
(b) The parking space(s) shall be on the lot or development site of
the use for which the space is being provided.
(c) The minimum required parking spaces shall be located no
more than 200 feet, pedestrian travel distance, from the
entrance to the use which it is intended to serve.
(4) Parking spaces for handicapped persons. Designated parking
spaces for disabled persons shall be provided within off-street
parking facilities in such a manner as to provide a choice of
locations and the shortest travel distance possible to the main
entrances of the buildings or structures which the parking facility
is intended to serve. Parking for handicapped persons shall be
designed in accordance with the following:
(a) Size. The minimum parking space per motorized vehicle,
whether inside or outside of a structure, shall be not less than
14 feet wide and 20 feet long. All parking spaces shall be ample
in size to allow for the opening of vehicle doors fully to permit
the loading and unloading of wheelchairs and the safe ingress
and egress of the vehicle's passengers.
(b) Each parking space reserved for handicapped persons shall be
clearly designated by a sign bearing the International Symbol
of Access.
(c) There shall be an accessible and barrier-free path, with curb
cuts at appropriate points and without stairs or abrupt grade
changes, from each reserved parking space to the accessible
entrance to the buildings or structures which the parking
facility serves. Curb ramps shall be provided as necessary at
grade changes.
(d) The number of required parking spaces reserved for
handicapped persons shall be as follows:
Total Parking
Spaces in Lot
Minimum Number of
Accessible Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
100 plus At a rate of 1 per 25 spaces
D. Loading and unloading space.
§ 210-27 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-27
210:423
(1) Size. The minimum loading and unloading space, whether inside,
enclosed or outside of a structure, shall not be less than 12 feet
wide and 45 feet deep, with a minimum overhead clearance of 14
feet six inches. All loading and unloading space(s) shall be ample in
size for the largest type of motorized vehicle for which it is
intended.
(2) Use. The loading and unloading space shall be used exclusively for
the temporary standing of a motorized vehicle while loading or
unloading merchandise or materials.
(3) Location. The loading and unloading space shall be located off or
beyond the public right-of-way.
(a) The loading and unloading space shall have direct access to a
public street without the use of parking spaces.
(b) No loading and unloading space shall be so located as to cause
a vehicle to be backed out onto any public street.
(c) The loading and unloading space shall be on the lot or parcel of
the use for which the loading/unloading space is being
provided.
(d) The loading and unloading space shall be immediately adjacent
to the loading dock or similarly designed facility for the loading
and unloading of materials associated with the use.
E. Layout requirements for parking, loading and unloading areas. All offstreet
parking or loading/unloading area(s) shall be so arranged as to
provide for orderly and safe parking, loading and unloading of vehicles.
(1) All spaces shall be independently accessible such that a vehicle
may enter or exit any parking, loading or unloading space without
the necessity of moving another vehicle.
(2) In parking areas of one to six parking spaces, an additional 90
square feet per parking space shall be required for turning and
access.
(3) In parking areas containing more than six parking spaces, parking
aisles shall be required. The width of the aisle between parking
spaces which provides access to individual parking spaces shall be
sized in accordance to the degree of parking angle provided in such
parking spaces as follows:
Minimum Required Aisle Width
Parking Angle
(degrees)
1-Way Traffic
(feet)
2-Way Traffic
(feet)
30 10 20
45 12 Not permitted
§ 210-27 MONACA CODE § 210-27
210:424
Minimum Required Aisle Width
Parking Angle
(degrees)
1-Way Traffic
(feet)
2-Way Traffic
(feet)
60 18 Not permitted
70 19 22
90 24 24
(a) Additional aisle width shall be required where the aisle serves
as a principal means of access (access drive) to on-site
buildings or structures.
(b) Where parking angles of 45° to 60° are planned, one-way
traffic on aisles shall be provided.
(c) One-way parking aisles shall not be dead-ended. A functional
exit shall be provided.
(d) All parking aisle widths shall be so sized as to provide the
maneuvering space necessary to permit the safe convenient
parking of motor vehicles.
F. Additional facilities. To facilitate the proper functioning of parking,
loading and unloading areas, the following additional facilities shall be
provided:
(1) Standby/stacking lane(s). Adequate standby/stacking lane(s) to
serve as reservoir capacity into parking areas or to drive-in service
areas shall be provided adjacent to but separate from the parking
aisles and access drives.
(a) Specifications. Specifications shall be as follows:
Facility Use
Reservoir Capacity of
Standby/Stacking Line(s)
(spaces)
Drive-in banks or similar
financial uses
3 per auto teller station
Drive-in theaters or similar
amusement, entertainment
and recreational uses
15% of theater parking space
capacity
Drive-in retail trade or
services
3 per attendant station
Mechanical car washes or
similar uses
6 per attendant station
Gasoline service stations
or similar uses
6 per gasoline pump
§ 210-27 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-27
210:425
Facility Use
Reservoir Capacity of
Standby/Stacking Line(s)
(spaces)
Parking lots and/or
garages or similar uses
With free-flow entry 1 per entry drive
With automatic ticket
dispensing
2 per entry drive
With manual ticket
dispensing
3 per entry drive
With attendant parking 10% of the parking space
capacity served by that entry
drive
NOTE: "Space," as used above, shall be defined as being the
minimum parking space specified by the terms of this chapter.
(b) To assure that vehicles waiting for entrance into facilities do
not obstruct the public street, the Borough reserves the right
to assign additional requirements or requirements for
reservoir capacity of standby/stacking lanes to uses not
specifically mentioned in Subsection F(1)(a) but of a similar
nature.
(2) Driveways and access drives to off-street parking and loading/
unloading facilities. There shall be provided adequate ingress and
egress to all parking spaces and loading/unloading spaces designed
for use by residents, employees, customers, delivery services, sales
people and, where applicable, the general public. Driveways and
access drives shall consist of well-defined separate or common
entrances/exits and separate pedestrian ways and shall comply
with the following provisions:
(a) A parking area for one to 25 parking spaces shall be provided
with a driveway of not less than 10 feet in cartway width.
(b) A parking area for more than 25 parking spaces shall be
provided with an access drive of not less than 12 feet in
cartway width per lane of traffic. Each access drive for a
parking area for more than 25 parking spaces shall have, at a
minimum, one entrance lane and one exit lane. For a parking
facility with over 200 parking spaces, two entrance lanes and
two exit lanes shall be required.
(c) The width of an entrance/exit lane for any driveway or access
drive at its intersection with a public street shall not exceed 48
feet.
§ 210-27 MONACA CODE § 210-27
210:426
(d) Loading and unloading areas shall be provided with an access
drive of not less than 48 feet in width.
(e) Whenever an access drive extends into a land development for
more than 100 feet from the public street with which it
intersects, no parking or loading/unloading space or parking
aisle or any other access drive or driveway shall take direct
access from the access drive for said 100 feet. A physical
barrier, design of which shall be approved by the Borough,
shall be provided to meet this requirement.
(3) Intersection of an access drive or a driveway with the public street
or public road.
(a) Access drives shall not open upon any public street or public
road where the sight distance in either direction will be less
than that specified in § 210-22J(7) of this chapter. A driveway
for a single-family, two-family or duplex dwelling on a separate
lot in a development of two lots or less is excluded from this
requirement; however, driveway location shall be approved by
the Borough.
(b) At the intersection of an access drive or driveway with a public
street or road, the clear sight triangle shall be maintained.
(c) Where traffic utilizing an access drive will interfere with or
restrict the existing or projected traffic flow on the adjoining
public street(s), additional public right-of-way, roadway,
turning lanes, traffic signalization and other off-site
improvements shall be provided by the developer to eliminate
any potential interference with or restriction of the public
street or public road's capacity to function.
G. Design and construction requirements.
(1) All parking spaces, parking areas, parking aisles, standby/stacking
lanes, loading and unloading spaces and areas and access drives
and driveways shall be graded and drained in such a manner that
there will be no free flow of water onto either adjacent property,
sidewalks or public streets.
(2) All grading and soil erosion or sedimentation control shall be as per
the requirements of this chapter.
(3) All driveways and parking spaces shall be surfaced so as to provide
a durable and dustless surface, such as gravel, slag, concrete or
bituminous materials.
(4) For parking facilities of over 25 spaces, the parking aisles shall be
paved with concrete or bituminous materials and the maximum
permitted finished grade slope of the parking spaces and aisles
shall be 5%.
§ 210-27 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-27
210:427
(5) All fire lanes, access drives and loading and unloading areas for
over 25 spaces shall be paved with concrete or bituminous
materials, and the maximum permitted finished grade slope shall
be 10%.
H. Lighting requirements. The lighting of any parking spaces, parking
areas, parking aisles, standby/stacking lanes, loading and unloading
spaces and areas, access drives and driveways shall be required if such
facilities are open and accessible to the general public when or where
there is no natural light.
(1) The lighting system shall be so designed to produce a minimum
average maintained light level of from one to two footcandles on
the horizontal surface of the entire parking, loading or unloading
facility. The entire facility shall include parking spaces, parking
areas, parking aisles, standby/stacking lanes, loading and
unloading spaces and areas, access drives and driveways. A
parking facility for a single-family, two-family or duplex dwelling on
an individual lot shall be excluded from this requirement.
(2) No lighting system shall be designed to illuminate (direct or
reflected) adjacent or adjoining properties which results in a
lighting level in excess of more than 0.5 minimum average
maintained horizontal footcandle on the adjacent or adjoining
properties.
(3) Lighting standards shall not be located on parking stall lines or in
areas hazardous to traffic movements, nor shall they exceed the
height of 35 feet.
I. Signing requirements. All traffic movements (vehicular and pedestrian)
and parking movements shall be controlled and/or separated, utilizing
signing (on pole standards or pavement marking), different surface
types and/or various forms of curbing. Standard Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation signage may be required. The movement
patterns and control on movement separations shall be approved by the
Borough.
J. Visual screen requirements. Off-street parking, loading and unloading
facilities shall be provided with visual screens as per the following:
(1) A parking, loading and unloading facility or area of a nonresidential
use shall provide a visual screen where said area of facility adjoins
a residential lot, a residential use, a residential zoning district or lot
used for school, church or public building.
(2) A loading and unloading facility for a retail sales, wholesale or
manufacturing use shall be visually screened from a public street
or public road.
K. Required planting strip. A landscaped planting strip of a minimum of
five feet shall be maintained between the parking, loading and
§ 210-27 MONACA CODE § 210-27
210:428
§ 210-28. Lots.
unloading facilities and any front lot line (i.e., public street right-ofway).
L. Wheel-stop requirement. Wheel stops, curbing or other suitable barrier
shall be required by the Borough when the parking, loading or
unloading facility may permit vehicle encroachment beyond any
planting strip, yard and/or property line.
M. Maintenance of off-street parking and loading areas:
(1) Owners of all parking and loading/unloading facilities shall be
required to maintain both the number and the quality of such
parking and/or loading/unloading facilities, parking aisles, standby/
stacking lanes, driveways and access drives in accordance with the
conditions, standards and requirements set forth in this chapter for
as long as the principal use for which these facilities are required is
in existence.
(2) The owner of all parking and loading/unloading facilities shall be
required to keep these areas free of trash, debris, vehicle repair
operations or display and advertising uses.
A. No preliminary plan for a subdivision shall be approved without the
applicant providing the location, dimensions, gross area, proposed use
and proposed restrictions for each division of real estate on Exhibit No.
4: Propoxisting topography, physical features, property lines and land
use shall be provided by the applicant on Exhibit 2: Existing
Topography and Physical Features, and on Exhibit 3: Existing Land
Survey and Land Use. The applicant shall also provide as part of the
final plan application Exhibit No. 1: Final Site Plan/Recording Plat.
B. Lot layout requirements. In preparing the preliminary and final plans
and exhibits for a subdivision, the following requirements shall apply:
(1) The minimum lot area, minimum lot width and maximum lot
coverage of the Borough's Zoning Ordinance156 shall apply to a
proposed subdivision and/or land development.
(2) All lot lines shall be set perpendicular or radial to the center line of
the street. All nonradial lines shall require Borough approval and
shall be denoted as such on the plat.
(3) No lot may be created or resubdivided nor may a lot area be
reduced in any configuration that shall reduce the minimum lot
area and lot width required by the regulations of the Zoning
Ordinance.157 Lots created for use of an essential service are
156. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
157. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 210-27 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-28
210:429
§ 210-29. Building lines, height and yard regulations.
The building line, front yard, side yard, rear yard and height regulations
shall be as per the Borough Zoning Ordinance.159
§ 210-30. Blocks.
§ 210-31. Preservation of existing natural conditions.
In wooded areas or where other natural conditions, such as water bodies
or watercourses, hillsides and scenic vistas, exist in such a manner that
their presence adds to the desirability of a land area, the Borough may
require that the applicant/owner preserve as much of the original trees and
natural conditions as is economically feasible and require that a minimum of
grading be done other than that grading and excavating which is required in
the construction of the improvements in accordance with the improvement
standards contained within this chapter.
excluded from this requirement; however, other regulations of the
Zoning Ordinance158 may apply.
(4) No lot shall be approved on which the elevation of the final grade at
the building line is more than eight feet below or above the
established grade of the adjoining street unless it can be
established to the satisfaction of the Borough that vehicular access
to the off-street parking area on the lot can be accomplished by the
construction of a driveway not exceeding twelve-percent slope with
reasonable transition areas from the street to the proposed
building or structure.
(5) A reserved and/or excepted area, lot, tract or parcel in a
subdivision or land development shall be prohibited which restricts
access to public streets from within the subdivision or land
development or which may restrict access to public streets from
adjacent property.
(6) A reserved and/or excepted area, lot, tract or parcel shall be
prohibited which may make an area, lot, tract or parcel
undevelopable for a permitted use within the zoning district in
which it occurs or which may revert to an untended nuisance area
because of an existing or potential man-made or natural hazard.
A. Land areas within a subdivision shall be divided into block areas with
lengths of not less than 500 feet nor more than 1,200 feet.
B. Blocks shall be at least two lots in depth except for reverse-frontage
lots.
158. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
159. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 210-28 MONACA CODE § 210-32
210:430
§ 210-32. Refuse collection facility.160
§ 210-33. Open space and recreation.
A. Within a multifamily residential land development and for each
multifamily dwelling within a subdivision, every dwelling unit shall be
located within 150 feet of a refuse collection facility intended for the
disposal of household garbage and trash. This 150 feet shall be
measured along the designed pedestrian and vehicular travel ways.
B. Within a land development for other than residential uses, refuse
collection facilities shall be provided within 200 feet of each proposed
structure or within 200 feet of each tenant space in those proposed
structures intended to contain more than one tenant or use. These 200
feet shall be measured along the designed pedestrian and vehicular
travel ways.
C. Each refuse collection facility shall be visually screened by a fence or
wall, being not less than six feet in height, or by enclosure within a
building.
D. Each refuse collection facility shall be located so as to provide safe and
convenient pickup by refuse collection agencies.
E. No refuse collection facility shall be located in a designated loading or
unloading space, off-street parking spaces, parking aisle, driveway or
access drive.
A. Land dedication for a residential subdivision. The applicant of a
proposed subdivision of 10 acres or more and involving 20 or more lots,
to be developed for residential use, may be required to set aside a
minimum of 8% of the total acreage of said subdivision.
(1) Said site shall be used for open space and recreational facilities.
(2) The site may be dedicated and developed by the Borough or may be
dedicated to the common ownership of the subdivision
landowner(s).
(3) Site requirements.
(a) Location, size, dimensions and use of land to be dedicated shall
be subject to Borough approval prior to the granting of
preliminary plan approval, and the following minimum
requirements shall apply:
[1] Land to be dedicated shall be in less than ten-percent
slope.
[2] Land to be dedicated shall be within the subdivision.
160. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 184, Solid Waste.
§ 210-32 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-33
210:431
(b) Land to be dedicated shall be accessible to the lots within the
subdivision by either adjoining a public street or by having a
dedicated right-of-way, to be a minimum of 20 feet wide, from a
public street to the land dedicated.
B. Fee in lieu of land dedication for a residential subdivision. Where, in the
opinion of the Borough, a need does not exist for an open space/
recreational area or where suitable lands for public or common
ownership cannot be found within the subdivision site, the applicant of
the subdivision of 10 acres or more and involving 20 or more lots, to be
developed for residential use, shall, in lieu of land dedication, make a
cash payment to the Borough as set from time to time by resolution of
the Borough Council. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
(1) Fee is to be paid in full to the Borough prior to the granting of final
plan approval.
(2) Fee shall be placed in a special escrow account to be used for the
acquisition, maintenance and development of public recreation and
community facilities in a location being in reasonable proximity to
the proposed subdivision.
C. Open space and recreational development for a residential land
development. The owner/applicant of a proposed land development,
other than a subdivision of a minimum of 10 acres or 25 dwelling units
may be required to set aside and develop an open space area having
recreational facilities at a rate of 8% of the total acreage of said land
development.
(1) The land area required for open space/recreation uses shall be
developed with recreational facilities, the rate/amount of which
shall be subject to Borough approval.
(2) Site and design requirements. Location, size, dimensions, facilities
and development schedule shall be subject to Borough approval
prior to the granting of preliminary plan approval. The following
minimum requirements shall apply:
(a) Land to be used for open space/recreation shall be in less than
ten-percent slope.
(b) Open space/recreation area(s) shall be within the development
site and shall be accessible to all residents of the proposed
dwelling units.
(3) The owner of the development shall perpetually maintain
ownership and maintenance responsibilities of the open space/
recreation area(s) unless a Borough-approved owners' association
has been organized as per § 210-34 of this chapter or unless the
Borough shall choose to accept ownership, in which case a fifty-foot
right-of-way shall be provided from a public street to the recreation
site.
§ 210-33 MONACA CODE § 210-33
210:432
§ 210-34. Organization and management of the owners' association.
D. Open space development for a land development other than for
residential use.
(1) The applicant of a proposed land development for use(s) other than
permanent residential use(s) may be required to set aside a
minimum of 5% of the total acreage of said land development for
open space to be landscaped or developed as a recreation area.
(2) Site and design requirements.
(a) Location, size, dimensions, landscaping and development
schedule shall be subject to Borough approval prior to the
granting of preliminary plan approval.
(b) Land to be used for the open space shall be in less than tenpercent
slope.
A. If an owners' association shall be established to govern common open
space within a subdivision or land development, the organization and
management of said association shall be approved by the Borough prior
to final approval of the subdivision or land development plan and shall
be developed according to the following regulations:
(1) The organization shall be organized by the applicant and shall
operate with financial subsidization by the applicant, if necessary,
before the lease or sale of any lots or property within the
development.
(2) Membership in the organization is mandatory for all property
owners therein and their successors.
(3) The organization shall be responsible for maintenance, insurance
and taxes on common open space.
(4) The members of the organization shall share equitably the costs of
maintaining and developing common open space in accordance
with procedures established by them.
(5) The organization shall hire adequate staff to administer common
facilities and maintain the common open space.
B. Failure to administer common facilities and maintain the common open
space. In the event that the organization or any successor organization
established to own and maintain the common open space shall, at any
time after establishment of the owners' association, fail to maintain
such common open space in reasonable order and condition in
accordance with the development plan, the Borough shall have
recourse to remedy this failure to maintain in accordance with the
following procedure:
§ 210-33 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-34
210:433
(1) The Borough may serve written notice upon such organization or
owners of the development concerning such deficiencies of
maintenance and hold a hearing into the same.
(a) The Borough may serve written notice upon such organization
or the owners of the development, setting forth the manner in
which the organization has failed to maintain such common
open space in a reasonable condition. Said notice shall include
a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured
within 30 days thereof and shall state the date and place of a
hearing into this matter, which shall be held within 14 days of
the notice.
(b) At such hearing into the deficiencies of maintenance, the
Borough may modify the terms of the original notice as to the
deficiencies and may give an extension of time within which
they shall be cured.
(2) Failure to cure such deficiencies of maintenance within said 30
days or any extension thereof in accordance with the original
notice or modifications thereof may result in Borough entry onto
and maintenance of such common open space for the period of one
year.
(a) Said entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any
rights to use the common open space except when the same is
voluntarily dedicated to the public by the owners.
(b) Said entry and maintenance may be undertaken by the
Borough in order to preserve the taxable values of the
properties within the development and to prevent the common
open space from becoming a public nuisance.
(3) Prior to the expiration of said year of Borough maintenance of such
common open space, the Borough shall call a public hearing to
determine whether such maintenance by the Borough shall, at the
election of the Borough, continue for a succeeding year.
(a) Before the expiration of said year of Borough maintenance of
such common open space, the Borough shall, upon its own
initiative or upon the request of the organization theretofore
responsible for the maintenance of the common open space
and upon notice to such organization or to the owners of the
development, call a public hearing into the matter of continued
Borough maintenance of such common open space.
(b) At such public hearing, the organization theretofore
responsible for the maintenance of the common open space or
the owners of the development shall show cause why such
maintenance by the Borough shall not, at the election of the
Borough, continue for a succeeding year.
§ 210-34 MONACA CODE § 210-34
210:434
§ 210-35. Additional regulations for land developments.
Each land development that is hereafter created or enlarged in land area
within the Borough shall comply with these additional standards governing
land developments:
(c) If the Borough shall determine that such organization is ready
and able to maintain said common open space in reasonable
condition, the Borough shall cease to maintain the common
open space at the end of said year.
(d) If the Borough shall determine that such organization is not
ready and able to maintain said common open space in a
reasonable condition, the Borough may, in its discretion,
continue to maintain said common open space during the next
succeeding year and, subject to a similar hearing and
determination, in each year thereafter.
(e) The decision of the Borough in any such case shall constitute a
final administration decision subject to judicial review.
(4) The cost of such maintenance by the Borough shall be assessed
ratably against the properties within the development that have a
right of enjoyment of the common open space and shall become a
tax lien on said properties. The Borough, at the time of entering
upon such common open space for the purpose of maintenance,
shall file a notice of such lien in the office of the Prothonotary of
Beaver County upon the properties within the development
affected by such lien.
A. A preapplication conference and its requirements, including the
payment of a filing fee, shall be a mandatory application procedure.
(1) The Borough may approve or disapprove the proposed master plan
of development or any or all of the alternate plans applicable to the
master plan and may attach necessary conditions and/or
restrictions.
(2) The applicant shall have obtained Borough approval of the master
plan and shall have agreed to all conditions and/or restrictions
prior to proceeding with the preliminary plan application.
B. In addition to those standards and requirements included within prior
sections of this Article IV, the following requirements shall apply to
each application for a land development:
(1) Site requirements.
(a) Ownership. The applicant shall be the landowner or have
written authorization to act on behalf of the landowner for the
entire site proposed under the master plan.
§ 210-34 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-35
210:435
(b) Minimum area, lot width and yard requirements and maximum
building height and lot coverage shall be as per the standards
and requirements of the Borough Zoning Ordinance.161
(2) Permitted uses. Only those uses permitted by the Borough Zoning
Ordinance within the zoning district in which the land development
is located shall be permitted in the land development.
(3) Space between buildings. Unless affixed by way of adjoining walls,
every building or structure shall at a minimum have a ten-foot
separation between buildings and/or structures. An adjoining wall
shall be a load-bearing wall of the structure, extending from the
foundation through the attic to the roof structure.
(4) Maximum length of residential structures. When residential
dwelling units are affixed by adjoining walls, no more than eight
dwelling units may be affixed side by side or front to back without a
side yard separation of 10 feet between said groupings of dwelling
units. An adjoining wall shall be a load-bearing wall of the
structure, extending from the foundation through the attic to the
roof structure.
(5) Requirements where adjacent to residential areas. When a
nonresidential land development is adjacent to an existing
residential use or an existing residential zoning district, the land
development shall be visually screened at the boundary lines of the
land development.
(6) Development requirements/restrictions. The applicant shall submit
with the preliminary plan application the following additional items
for Borough review and approval:
(a) The proposed architectural controls within the development
intended to assure a control over style and shape of structures,
roofline control and/or facade treatments and construction
materials.
(b) The proposed controls and uniform signage plan to assure
overall control and uniformity of directional, informational and
advertising signs.
(c) The proposed control over open and outdoor storage to assure
security of storage areas and visual screening from the public
street.
(d) The proposed control and restrictions of pollution emissions,
waste storage and waste treatment to assure the public health,
safety and general welfare.
161. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 210-35 MONACA CODE § 210-35
210:436
§ 210-36. Planned residential development.
(e) The proposed ownership/management plan to assure control of
covenants, control of maintenance and control of long-range
development.
A. Where permitted by the Borough Zoning Ordinance,162 a planned
residential development shall comply with the standards of this section
governing the application process, development plan approvals, site
planning standards plus improvement and construction requirements.
B. The application process and development plan approval process,
including the tentative approval, public hearings and final approvals,
shall comply with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act
247, as amended, Article VII, Sections 707, 708, 709, 710 and 711.163
C. Site planning standards/improvement and construction requirements.
(1) The applicant shall be the landowner of the entire site proposed for
development.
(2) The minimum site size shall be 1/2 acre for a planned residential
development.
(3) The minimum frontage on a public street shall be the minimum lot
width as specified in the Borough Zoning Ordinance164 for the
zoning district within which the development site is located.
(4) The uses permitted in a planned residential development are those
uses permitted and enumerated by the Borough Zoning
Ordinance165 for the zoning district in which the proposed
development is located and shall be deemed to be exclusive; no
other uses shall be permitted.
(5) The following density of land use for a planned residential
development in terms of dwelling units per acre, percent of
development site devoted to nonresidential uses, percent of total
land coverage permitted by buildings and percent of land devoted
to open space shall be as follows:
162. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
163. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10707, 10708, 10709, 10710 and 10711.
164. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
165. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 210-35 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-36
210:437
Permitted Density of Land Use
Within the Zoning District
Dwelling
Units per
Gross Acre1
Percent of
Site for
Nonresidential
Use2
Percent of
Land
Coverage3
Percent of
Land in
Open Space1
R-1 Low-Density
Residential
6 10 60 10
R-2 Medium-Density
Residential
12 25 60 10
R-3 High-Density
Residential
20 25 60 10
C-C Central Commercial 29 50 95 5
C-N Neighborhood
Commercial
9 50 60 10
C-P Pedestrian
Commercial
22 50 95 5
G-I General Industrial -- NOT
PERMITTED
-- --
S-C General Conservation 2 10 40 50
NOTES:
1 Dwelling units per acre may be varied by 20%, provided that a ten-percent increase in
open space is provided.
2 Only those nonresidential uses permitted within the Zoning Ordinance166 for the
applicable zoning district shall be permitted.
3 The percent of land coverage covered by buildings excludes open, uncovered paved
walks, parking areas and driveways but includes all other buildings or structures. The
percent of land coverage may not be varied.
(6) No structure or building shall be located closer to the boundary line
of the development site than as specified in the Borough Zoning
Ordinance167 by the minimum front, side and rear yard
requirements for the zoning district within which the development
site is located.
(7) Unless affixed by way of adjoining walls, every structure or building
shall be, at a minimum, separated from another structure or
building by a yard width of 10 feet. An adjoining wall shall be a
load-bearing wall of the structure, extending from the foundation
through the attic to the roof structure.
(8) When residential dwelling units are affixed by adjoining walls, no
more than eight dwelling units may be affixed side by side or front
166. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
167. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 210-36 MONACA CODE § 210-36
210:438
to back without a yard separation of 10 feet. An adjoining wall
shall be a load-bearing wall of the structure, extending from the
foundation through the attic to the roof structure.
(9) When a nonresidential building or use is to be adjacent to an
existing residential use or an existing R-1, R-2 or R-3 Zoning
District, the nonresidential building or use shall be visually
screened.
(10)Off-street parking requirements and building height requirements
shall be those specified by the Zoning Ordinance168 for the zoning
district within which the development site occurs.
(11) At least 25% of the dwelling units shall have been constructed and
occupied prior to occupancy of the nonresidential use(s).
(12) The following requirements shall apply to the required open space:
(a) Required open space areas shall be landscaped and developed
as usable, passive or active recreation areas.
(b) Open space areas shall be dedicated for public use and
accepted by the Borough or deeded to a homeowners'/property
owners' association in accordance with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Article VIII.169
(13) All site improvements related to land suitability, grading, soil
erosion, rights-of-way, easements, groundwater and surface water
drainage, vehicular circulation, pedestrian circulation, off-street
parking and refuse collection facilities shall be as required in
Article IV of this chapter.
168. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
169. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10701 et seq.
§ 210-36 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-36
210:439

ARTICLE V
Mobile Homes
§ 210-37. Mobile home park development.
A. Each mobile home park, whether proposed for lease of space or as a
subdivision that is hereafter created, enlarged or extended within the
Borough, shall comply with the standards of this section governing the
regulation of the land development and/or subdivision for mobile home
parks.
B. The procedures within Articles III and V of this chapter shall apply to
each application to create, enlarge or extend a mobile home park,
including § 210-12, Preapplication conference; fee, and its
requirements, which are a mandatory application procedure and a filing
fee is required.
(1) The Borough may approve or disapprove the proposed master plan
of development and any or all of the alternative plans applicable to
the master plan and may attach necessary conditions and/or
restrictions.
(2) The applicant shall have obtained Borough approval of the master
plan and shall have agreed to all conditions and/or restrictions
prior to proceeding with the preliminary plan application.
C. Site planning and development standards and requirements. The
standards and requirements within Article IV of this chapter shall apply
to each application to create, enlarge or extend a mobile home park
subdivision and/or land development in addition to the following
requirements:
(1) The applicant shall be the landowner or have written authorization
to act on behalf of the landowner for the entire site proposed under
the master plan.
(2) The minimum site size shall be three acres.
(3) The minimum frontage abutting on a public street shall be 45 feet.
(4) The total building coverage shall not exceed 30% of the total site
area.
(5) Each mobile home stand shall have a minimum area of 4,500
square feet; however, no mobile home stand shall have dimensions
less than 40 feet on the narrow dimension nor 80 feet on the long
dimension. Each mobile home stand shall be adequate in size for
the mobile home that is intended to use the space.
(6) No less than 8% of the total site area shall be set aside for common
open space and not less than 50% of the identified common open
space shall be developed as a distinct and usable active recreation
area.
§ 210-37 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-37
210:441
(7) No structure shall exceed a height of 35 feet.
(8) Ancillary/accessory uses shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from
all exterior property and right-of-way lines.
(9) Each mobile home stand shall be separated by a minimum distance
of 10 feet from any other mobile home stand as well as a minimum
distance of 10 feet from the adjoining pavement of a sidewalk,
street, common parking area and other common areas.
(10) A visual screen along the side and rear property boundary is
required to screen the mobile home park from the adjacent uses.
(11) Each mobile home stand shall have a structurally sound foundation
and a system of anchors and tie downs to ensure the stability of the
mobile home. The design of the foundation and anchor/tie-down
system shall be prepared by a Pennsylvania registered engineer
and approved by the Borough prior to final plan approval.
(12) All mobile home foundations that are exposed above ground level
shall be enclosed by a foundation skirting that completely encloses
the foundation yet provides adequate ventilation for the
foundation. The skirting system shall be permanently attached and
rodentproof. Scrap materials may not be used as a foundation
skirting. Development controls shall require this foundation
skirting.
(13) Each mobile home stand shall have a year-round, hard-surface,
paved patio area. Said patio shall be a minimum of eight feet by 15
feet.
(14) Each mobile home stand shall have a year-round, hard-surface and
paved entrance walk from the stand to the nearest interior walk,
sidewalk, parking area or street. The entrance walk shall be a
minimum of two feet wide.
(15) Public, Borough-owned, water and sanitary sewer systems shall be
utilized within the mobile home park.
(16)Off-street parking shall be as required within the Borough Zoning
Ordinance170 and designed in accordance with the requirements of
§ 210-27 of this chapter.
(17) Pavement widths for the driveways, access drives and private
streets shall be as required in the following listing:
(a) Driveways, access drives and streets with on-street parking on
both sides: thirty-six-foot minimum right-of-way and yearround,
hard-surface pavement for a thirty-six-foot minimum
cartway.
170. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 210-37 MONACA CODE § 210-37
210:442
(b) Driveways, access drives and streets with parking on one side:
thirty-three-foot minimum right-of-way and year-round, hardsurface
pavement for a twenty-eight-foot minimum cartway.
(c) Driveways, access drives and one-way streets, all without onstreet
parking serving a maximum of 20 mobile homes: twentyfoot
minimum right-of-way and cartway. Cartway shall be hardsurface,
year-round pavement.
(18) For driveways, access drives and private streets, a Boroughapproved
covenant assuring proper maintenance shall be provided.
(19) Paving requirements and right-of-way and cartway widths shall be
as specified in § 210-22 of this chapter for any proposed public
streets.
(20) Signs used within the mobile home park for information, restriction
of use, directional and other permitted noncommercial sign usage
shall be uniform and the design approved by the Borough prior to
final approval of the plan.
(21) The proposed ownership/management plan of the mobile home
park, including covenants to control development as per the
approved plan, control of maintenance and control of accessory
and ancillary uses, shall be approved by the Borough prior to final
plan application approval.
§ 210-37 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-37
210:443

ARTICLE VI
Final Approval, Recording and Acceptance of Public Improvements
§ 210-38. Developer's agreement and performance/improvement
guaranty required prior to final approval and recording.
A. Developer's agreement. As a condition to final approval for a
subdivision or land development, the Borough Council shall require the
applicant to enter into a contract with the Borough of Monaca outlining,
defining and agreeing:
(1) To be bound by and comply with the terms, provisions and
conditions of this chapter.
(2) To be bound by and comply with all of the documents, exhibits and
plat/plans submitted by the applicant to the Borough of Monaca in
the final plan application.
(3) To be bound by and comply with all of the conditions which the
Borough Council shall establish as a basis for its grant of final
approval of the subdivision and/or land development.
(4) To furnish a performance improvement guaranty within 30 days
after execution of the developer's agreement.
(5) To furnish as-built drawings prior to the Borough of Monaca
accepting the improvements.
(6) To furnish a maintenance bond prior to the Borough of Monaca
accepting the improvements.
B. Performance/improvement guaranty. As a condition to final approval for
a subdivision or land development, the Borough Council shall, in
addition to the aforementioned requirements of the developer's
agreement, require the applicant to furnish a bond or other acceptable
financial security.
(1) Such bond or financial security shall be the form of a corporate
surety, a cash deposit, an irrevocable letter of credit from a federalor
commonwealth-chartered lending institution, a deposit of
securities in escrow or any other form as shall meet the approval of
the Borough Solicitor in accordance with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.171
(2) Such bond or financial security shall be furnished by the applicant
to the Borough to assure completion of the required improvements
within one year from the date of the execution of the developer's
agreement.
(3) Said financial security to be posted for the completion of the
required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of
171. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 210-38 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-38
210:445
§ 210-39. Final approval and recording of plat/plan.
completion based upon an estimate of the cost of completion of
the required improvements, submitted by an applicant or developer
and prepared by a professional engineer licensed as such in the
commonwealth and certified by such engineer to be a fair and
reasonable estimate of such cost. The Borough, upon
recommendation of the Borough Engineer, may refuse to accept
such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant or developer
and the Borough are unable to agree upon an estimate, then the
estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another
professional engineer licensed as such in the commonwealth and
chosen mutually by the Borough and the applicant or developer.
The estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed
fair and reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event
that a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said
engineer shall be paid equally by the Borough and the applicant or
developer. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
(4) Where more than one year may be required to complete the
required improvements, the amount of said bond or other financial
security shall be increased by an additional 10% for each additional
one-year period up to an amount not exceeding 110% of the costs
as estimated at the expiration of the preceding one-year period.
The estimate shall be obtained through the same bid procedure
identified in the preceding section.
C. Four-week review. The applicant shall submit to the Borough Secretary
draft copies of the developer's agreement and the performance/
improvement guaranty four weeks prior to consideration by the
Borough Council, who reserves the right to waive or modify this time
limit.
A. Final approval. Final approval of the subdivision and/or land
development shall be obtained only after approval and execution of all
final plan exhibits (§ 210-14) and final documents (§ 210-38) by the
Borough Council.
B. Recording. Upon the approval of a final plat, the developer shall, within
90 days of such final approval, record such plat in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Beaver County. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord.
No. 822]
C. Effect of recording of plan. Every street, sewer, drainage facility or
other improvement shown on a plan that is recorded as provided herein
shall be deemed to be a private street, sewer, drainage facility or other
improvement and the Borough shall have no responsibility with respect
thereto until such time as the same shall have been offered for
dedication to the Borough and shall have been accepted by it by
ordinance or resolution or until it shall have been duly condemned by
the Borough for public use. (See § 210-42.)
§ 210-38 MONACA CODE § 210-40
210:446
§ 210-40. Construction permits.
§ 210-41. Partial release from the performance/improvement
guaranty.
As the required improvements are completed, the applicant who has posted
a performance/improvement guaranty may request the Borough to release
or authorize the release of such portions of the financial security necessary
for payment to the contractor(s) performing the work.
A. Notice of start of construction and permit required. No construction of
any improvements or facilities approved by The Borough Council shall
be commenced unless and until a permit authorizing such
commencement shall be received from the Borough Secretary. Not less
than three days prior to the actual commencement of such
improvements of facilities, a written notice setting forth the date on
which such construction work will begin shall be given to the Borough
Secretary.
B. Prerequisites to issuance of permits. The construction permit shall not
be issued by the Borough Secretary until the applicant has complied
with all of the following:
(1) All final documents (§ 210-38) shall have been executed by both the
applicant and the Borough.
(2) All final plans (§ 210-14) shall have been submitted to and approved
by the Borough Council.
(3) The Borough shall have received a certificate from the Recorder of
Deeds of Beaver County, Pennsylvania, that the recording plat has
been recorded in said Recorder's office, setting forth the date and
place of such recording.
(4) The Borough shall have received one copy of the site plan and/or
recording plat. Such copy of the land development and/or
subdivision shall be certified by the applicant to be true and
correct.
A. The applicant shall submit a written request to the Borough Council for
a partial release of the financial security. The written request shall
include a description of the improvement(s) completed and an estimate
of the value of the improvements completed.
B. Within 45 days from receipt of the written request:
(1) The Borough Council shall authorize the Borough Engineer to
inspect the completed improvements.
(2) The Borough Engineer shall submit a written report indicating
whether the improvements were correctly completed and
indicating an estimated amount fairly representing the value of the
improvements completed.
§ 210-40 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-41
210:447
§ 210-42. Final release from performance/improvement guaranty.
(3) The Borough Council shall act on the Borough Engineer's report by
denying the request or by authorizing release from the financial
security based on the Borough Engineer's estimated value of the
completed improvements. If a release of funds is authorized, the
Borough Council may require retention of 10% of the value of
completed improvements.
C. If the Borough fails to act within the forty-five-day period, all completed
improvements will be deemed approved as completed and failure to act
shall be deemed to have approved the release of funds as required.
A. Notice of completion. When applicant has completed all of the required
public improvements, the applicant shall notify the Borough Secretary
in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of all the
required public improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the
Borough Engineer.
B. Borough Engineer's report.
(1) Within 10 days after receipt of such notice of completion, the
Borough Secretary shall authorize the Borough Engineer to inspect
the public improvements.
(2) The Borough Engineer shall prepare a written report detailing the
results of his inspection and recommending Borough approval or
rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part. If the
Borough Engineer shall not approve or shall reject said
improvements or a portion thereof, the report shall contain a
statement of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
(3) The Borough Engineer shall file this report with the Borough within
30 days after receiving authorization from the Borough Secretary
to inspect the improvements.
(4) The Borough Secretary shall promptly mail a copy of the Borough
Engineer's report to the applicant by certified or registered mail.
C. Borough Council's action. The Borough Council shall, within 15 days,
review, accept or reject the information and recommendations within
the Borough Engineer's report. The Borough Secretary shall notify the
applicant in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the action of the
Borough Council with regard to the Borough Engineer's report.
[Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
(1) If the Borough Council has approved the Borough Engineer's
report which has recommended approving all the public
improvements, the applicant shall prepare the documentation
necessary for the Borough to proceed with the acceptance of the
public improvements. (See § 210-44.)
§ 210-41 MONACA CODE § 210-42
210:448
§ 210-43. Failure to complete improvements.
(2) If the Borough Council has approved the Borough Engineer's
report which has recommended nonapproval or rejection of the
public improvements, either in whole or in part, the applicant shall
proceed to comply with the Borough Council's action and, upon
completion, the same procedure of notice of completion as outlined
herein shall be followed. Nothing herein, however, shall be
construed in limitation of the applicant's right to contest or
question by legal proceedings or otherwise any determination of
the Borough or the Borough Engineer.
D. If the Borough or the Borough Engineer fails to comply with the time
limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements will be
deemed to have been approved and the applicant shall be released from
all liability pursuant to the performance/improvement guaranty.
A. In the event that the applicant shall fail to complete within the specified
time period the construction of the improvements as required by this
chapter and the final plans submitted hereunder, there shall become
due and payable to the Borough, as liquidated damages, the amount of
said bond or other financial security. The sum recovered by the Borough
as liquidated damages shall be used by the Borough for the purpose of
constructing and completing said improvements.
(1) In the event that the total cost for the construction of such
improvements, including the Borough Engineer's and Solicitor's
fees, shall be less than the amount recovered by the Borough, the
Borough shall, upon completion of such improvements, return such
excess to whomever shall have paid or deposited said moneys.
(2) In the event that the total cost for the construction of such
improvements, including the Borough Engineer's and Solicitor's
fees, shall be greater than the amount recovered by the Borough,
the Borough may elect either to construct such portions of the
improvements as can be constructed for the sum recovered by the
Borough or to revise any plans and specifications for such
improvements in such a manner as to reduce the cost of such
construction to the amount recovered or to complete such
improvements and assess the additional costs against the
properties abutting such improvements on any basis allowed by
law.
(3) The Borough shall not be limited to the time in which said
improvements shall be constructed or completed.
(4) Upon Borough completion of the construction of said improvements
or any part of such improvements, the same shall be accepted by
the Borough as public improvements and shall be maintained by
the Borough.
§ 210-42 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-44
210:449
§ 210-44. Requirements for acceptance of public improvements.
The Borough Council shall not accept any public improvements for
operation and maintenance purposes by the Borough until all requirements
of this chapter and all other applicable Borough ordinances have been fully
complied with. Prior to Borough acceptance of the public improvements, the
following shall be submitted to the Borough Council:
A. A deed of dedication in such form as shall be approved by the Borough
Solicitor.
B. Documentation from the contractor who was responsible for the
construction of the public improvements, certifying that all labor and
material costs incurred during construction of said public
improvements have been paid in full.
C. Documentation certifying that all charges and fees as required by the
Borough under the provisions of this chapter have been paid in full by
the applicant.
D. Official documentation of the Borough Council's action approving all of
the required public improvements.
E. Documentation from a Pennsylvania registered professional engineer,
other than the Borough Engineer, certifying that the improvements
offered for acceptance have been constructed in accordance with the
final plans and final documents approved by the Borough Council and
the provisions of this chapter. Where there have been deviations from
said final plans and final documents, the applicant shall provide as-built
drawings, indicating any and all deviations thereto, with appropriate
authorizations from the Borough or its Engineer.
F. Maintenance bond. The applicant shall furnish a bond or other
acceptable financial security in the form of a corporate surety, a cash
deposit, an irrevocable letter of credit from a federal- or
commonwealth-chartered lending institution, a deposit of securities in
escrow or any other form as shall meet the approval of the Borough
Solicitor in accordance with the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.172 Such bond or financial security shall
be furnished by the applicant to the Borough to secure the structural
integrity of the improvement(s) as well as the proper functioning of the
improvements in accordance with the approved final plans. Such bond
or financial security shall be for a term not to exceed 18 months from
the date of acceptance of dedication and shall be in the amount not to
exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation of said improvements.
172. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 210-44 MONACA CODE § 210-44
210:450
ARTICLE VII
Fees and Administration
§ 210-45. Fees.173
The Borough Council may, by resolution, establish from time to time a
fee schedule to cover the costs and expenses in the study and approval
of subdivision and land development plans, inspection of construction
operations and plat recording and for the procedure necessary to accept
public improvements. It is the intent of this fee schedule that the applicant
pay all costs, charges and expenses attributed to the receipt, review,
inspection, approval and recording of a subdivision or land development.
§ 210-46. Certificates, affidavits and approval.
Certificates, owner's adoption and affidavits as required by the Borough
Council shall be inscribed on the plat and shall be properly signed and
attested when the plat is submitted for review. The certificates, affidavits
and approvals shall be prepared in the form as required by the Borough and
as outlined in Appendix A to this chapter.174
§ 210-47. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which being the owner
or agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land who or which
had violated the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay
a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce
the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, except as
provided in 53 P.S. § 10515.3(a).
173. Editor's Note: See Ch. A256, Fee Schedule.
174. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 210-45 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 210-47
210:451
Chapter 213
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Delinquent Tax Collector — See Ch. 35, Art. II.
Per capita tax exemptions — See Ch. A253.
§ 210-47 MONACA CODE § 210-47
210:452
ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-12-1975 by Ord. No. 660]
§ 213-1. Imposition of tax. [Amended 12-28-1981 by Ord. No.
423-A]
A tax for general revenue purposes of 1% is hereby imposed on:
§ 213-2. Incorporation of other provisions. [Amended 12-28-1981 by
Ord. No. 423-A]
Section 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act of 1965 (P.L. 1257)175 is hereby
adopted and incorporated by reference and made a part of this article to the
same extent as if the full text of said section were set out in verbatim in this
article, except that:
A. Earned income, earned on and after January 1, 1982, by residents of the
Borough of Monaca;
B. Earned income, earned on and after January 1, 1982, by nonresidents of
the Borough of Monaca for work done or services performed or
rendered in the Borough of Monaca;
C. Net profits earned on and after January 1, 1982, by residents of the
Borough of Monaca; and
D. Net profits earned on and after January 1, 1982, from the operation of
business, professions or other activities, except corporations,
conducted in said Borough by nonresidents of the Borough of Monaca.
A. In the case of annual earned income tax return (final return), the
Borough elects to operate under the preceding option. Every taxpayer
shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file with
the officer on a form prescribed or approved by the officer and the
Monaca Borough Council, a final return showing the amount of earned
income or net profits earned, paid or received by the taxpayer or any
person believed to be a taxpayer, during the preceding tax year
beginning on January 1 and ending December 31. Said final return must
be supported by copies or facsimiles of the taxable's W-2 form supplied
by the employer and/or copies of applicable state and/or federal
schedules as required by the officer. At the time of filing the final return,
the taxpayer shall pay the balance of tax due or shall make demand for
refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
B. In case of earned income not subject to withholding, the Borough elects
to operate under the option set forth in 53 P.S. § 6913, Subdivision
IIIB(1), requiring an annual return and payment of the tax for the
175. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6913 et seq.
§ 213-1 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-2
210:453
§ 213-3. Income Tax Officer.
The Borough Council may from time to time appoint and designate a person
to serve as Income Tax Officer, and the bond of the Income Tax Officer shall
be filed with the Borough Solicitor.
preceding year, rather than quarterly returns, with accompanying
payment of the tax, as provided in 53 P.S. § 6913, Subdivision IIIB(2).
§ 213-2 MONACA CODE § 213-3
210:454
ARTICLE II
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 902176]
§ 213-4. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Monaca Borough Local
Services Tax Ordinance."
§ 213-5. Legislative authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act,177
as amended by Act No. 7 of 2007, and the Borough Code.
§ 213-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide revenue for police, fire and
emergency services; road construction and maintenance; the reduction of
property taxes; and such other purposes as may be specified for such tax
from time to time by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 213-7. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person or firm from time to time designated by motion
of the Council of the Borough of Monaca to administer the provisions of this
article and collect the tax levied by this article. Until changed by subsequent
motion, the Collector shall be the same person or firm last designated
to collect the Emergency and Municipal Services Tax for the Borough of
Monaca.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation, as determined under Section 303 of
the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code
of 1971,"178 and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Part I, Subpart B, Article
V179 (relating to personal income tax), not including, however, wages or
compensation paid to individuals on active military service. Employee
business expenses are allowable deductions as determined under Article
III of the Tax Reform Code of 1971. Any housing allowance provided to a
member of the clergy shall not be taxable as earned income.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons
176. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Emergency and Municipal
Services Tax, adopted 2-8-2005 by Ord. No. 881, as amended.
177. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
178. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
179. Editor's Note: See 61 Pa. Code § 101.1 et seq.
§ 213-4 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-7
210:455
on a salary, wage, commission, fee or other compensation basis, including a
self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Shall include the singular and plural number and male,
female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person engaged in any occupation, trade or profession
within the jurisdictional limits of the Borough of Monaca whose total earned
income and net profits within the Borough of Monaca are greater than
$12,000 per calendar year.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity (except from corporations), determined under
Section 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax
Reform Code of 1971,"180 and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Part I, Subpart
B, Article V181 (relating to personal income tax). The term does not include
income which is not paid for services provided and which is in the nature
of earnings from an investment. For taxpayers engaged in the business,
profession or activity of farming the term shall not include:
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on
or preformed within the jurisdictional limits of the Borough of Monaca for
which compensation is charged and/or received, whether by salary, wages,
commissions, fees or net profits for services rendered.
RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE ARMED FORCES — The United States
Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force
Reserve, The Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air
National Guard.
TAX — The local services tax levied in this article.
YEAR — A calendar year.
§ 213-8. Levy of tax.
The Borough of Monaca hereby levies and imposes on every individual
engaging in an occupation within the jurisdictional limits of the Borough of
Monaca a tax in the amount of $52 per annum, beginning the first day of
January 2008, and continuing on a calendar basis annually thereafter, until
Any interest generated from monetary accounts or investment
instruments of the farming business;
A.
B. Any gain on the sale of farming machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
C.
D. Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
180. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
181. Editor's Note: See 61 Pa. Code § 101.1 et seq.
§ 213-7 MONACA CODE § 213-8
210:456
modified or repealed by subsequent ordinance. This tax is in addition to
all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the Borough of
Monaca.
§ 213-9. Use of revenue restricted.
§ 213-10. Duty of employer to collect.
A. The Borough of Monaca shall use the revenue derived from this tax for
the following purposes:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services.
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance.
(3) Reduction of property taxes.
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85,
Subchapter F182 (relating to homestead property exclusion).
B. The Borough of Monaca shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived
from the local services tax for emergency services.
A. Each employer within the Borough of Monaca and each employer
situate outside the Borough of Monaca who engages in business within
the Borough of Monaca is hereby charged with the duty of collecting
the tax from each of the employees engaged by the employer and
performing work for the employer within the Borough of Monaca. Each
person subject to the tax shall be assessed a pro rata share of the tax for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation.
B. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person for a payroll period
shall be determined by dividing the combined rate of the local services
tax levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar.
C. Employer collection of the local services tax shall be made on a payrollperiod
basis for each payroll period, beginning with the first payroll
period in which the person is engaging in an occupation.
D. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the local
services tax or for the payment of the withheld tax money to a political
subdivision if the failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect
information submitted by the employee as to the employee's place or
182. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8581 et seq.
§ 213-8 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-10
210:457
§ 213-11. Returns.
Employers are required to make and file a local services tax quarterly
return 30 days after the end of each quarter of a calendar year. The local
services tax quarterly return shall list the name, address and social security
number of the employee; the physical address of the employee's place of
employment; the number of payroll periods for which the local services tax
was withheld; and the amount of local services tax being remitted for each
employee.
§ 213-12. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
Each employer shall use his employment and payroll records from the
first day of January to March 31 each year for determining the number
of employees from whom said tax shall be deducted and paid over to the
Collector on or before April 30 of the same calendar year. Supplemental
reports shall be made by each employer on July 30, October 30 and January
31 for new employees as reflected on his employment and payroll records
from April 1 to June 30, July 1 to September 30 and October 1 to December
31, and payments on these supplemental reports shall be made on July 30,
October 30 and January 30, respectively.
§ 213-13. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed by more than one political subdivision.
places of employment, the employee's principal office or where the
employee is principally employed.
A. In the event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires that the
person work in more than one political subdivision during the payroll
period, the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in
the following order:
(1) The political subdivision in which a person maintains his principal
office or is principally employed;
(2) The political subdivision in which the person resides and works, if
the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) The political subdivision in which a person is employed and which
imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the local services tax, if the employee provides:
(1) A recent pay statement from a principal employer that includes the
name of the employer, the length of the payroll period and the
amount of local services tax withheld; and
(2) A statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer, and the employee will notify other
§ 213-10 MONACA CODE § 213-13
210:458
§ 213-13.1. Exemptions.
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence.
C. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. It is the
intent of this section that no person shall be subject to the payment of
the local services tax by more than one political subdivision during each
payroll period.
A. The local services tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for
each calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions
within which a person may be employed.
B. The law requires municipalities and school districts who levy the local
services tax at a combined rate exceeding $10 to exempt any person
from the local services tax whose total earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for
the calendar year in which the local services tax is levied.
C. Each political subdivision levying the local services tax shall exempt the
following persons from the local services tax:
(1) Any person who served in any war or armed conflict in which the
United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans Administration or its
successor to be a total, one-hundred-percent permanent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. A "reserve component of the armed forces" shall mean
the United States Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve,
United States Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast Guard
Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, The Pennsylvania Army
National Guard or The Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
D. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the collector of the
tax for the Township of Monaca and file a copy of the certificate
with the person's employer affirming that the person reasonably
expects to receive earned income and net profits from all sources
within the political subdivision of less than $12,000 in the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate is filed.
(2) The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of all of
the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment within
§ 213-13 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-13.1
210:459
the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year for
which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the local
services tax.
(3) Upon receipt of the exemption certificate, and until otherwise
instructed by the collector of the tax for the Borough of Monaca,
the employer shall not withhold the tax from the person during the
calendar year or remainder of the calendar year for which the
exemption certificate applies. With respect to a person who
claimed an exemption from the local services tax, upon notification
to an employer by the person or by the collector of the tax for the
Borough of Monaca that the person has received earned income
and net profits from all sources within the Borough of Monaca
equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or that the
person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the Borough of Monaca in an amount equal
to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall
withhold the local services tax from the person as follows:
(a) If a person who claimed an exemption from the local services
tax for a given calendar year becomes subject to the tax for the
calendar year the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year.
(b) The employer shall withhold from the person, for the first
payroll period after receipt of the notification under Subsection
D(3)(a) a lump sum equal to the amount of the tax that was not
withheld from the person due to the exemption certificate filed
by the person, plus the per-payroll amount due for that first
payroll period.
(c) The amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the
remaining payroll periods in that calendar year shall be the
same amount withheld for other employees.
(d) In the event the employment of a person subject to withholding
of the local services tax under this exception is severed in that
calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding
balance of tax due, and the political subdivision levying the tax
may pursue collection under this article.
E. Employers shall not be responsible for investigating exemption
certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or exempting any
employee from the local services tax.
F. Employers shall be responsible for retaining a copy of all exemption
certificates filed by employees within a given calendar year for a
minimum of three years. Employers who have failed to withhold the
local services tax from an employee or employees, and who do not have
copies of the employee exemption certificate or certificates, will be held
§ 213-13.1 MONACA CODE § 213-13.1
210:460
§ 213-13.2. Self-employed individuals.
All self-employed individuals and individuals whose employer is not
required to withhold local taxes (certain state and federal agencies) will be
billed quarterly for the local services tax. The full amount of tax must be
paid by the date indicated on such billing. If such taxpayer qualifies for a
low-income exemption, the taxpayer may complete the required exemption
certificate or make application for a refund of the tax paid.
§ 213-13.3. Employees and self-employed individuals residing
beyond limits of Borough.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside the Borough of Monaca but who engage in any
occupation within the Borough of Monaca do, by virtue thereof, agree
to be bound by and subject themselves to the provisions, penalties and
regulations promulgated under this article with the same force and effect
as though they were residents of the Borough of Monaca. Further, any
individual engaged in an occupation within the Borough of Monaca and an
employee of a nonresident employer may, for the purpose of this article, be
considered a self-employed person, and in the event this tax is not paid, the
Collector shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or
employee for collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 213-13.4. Duty of Collector; administration and enforcement of
tax.
responsible for the payment of the local services tax as if the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
A. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive payments of
this tax and keep a record thereof showing the amount received by him
from each employer or self-employed person, together with the date the
tax was received. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and keep
a record of the information submitted by employers relating to the
number of employees subject to the tax, the number of employees
exempt from the tax, the employee exemption certificates and refunds
of the tax paid to individuals and employers.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby empowered to prescribe,
adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any
matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the examination of the payroll records of any
employer subject to this article; the examination and correction of any
return made in compliance with this article; and any payment alleged or
found to be incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to
have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Collector
shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Beaver
County as in other cases provided.
§ 213-13.1 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-13.4
210:461
§ 213-13.5. Recovery of unpaid tax; interest; penalty for
nonpayment.
§ 213-13.6. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or who refuses inspection of his books, records or accounts
in his custody and control in order to determine the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his employment, or who fails or refuses to
file any return required by this article, or fails or refuses to pay the tax
herein levied shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600, plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, be
sentenced to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. It is further
provided that the action to enforce the fine and penalty herein provided may
be instituted against any person in charge of the business of any employer
who has failed or refused to file a return required by this article.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event any of the tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due date set forth above, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of such tax due or unpaid, together with interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 10%
shall be added to the flat rate of said tax for nonpayment thereof. Where
suit is brought for the recovery of this tax, the individual liable therefor
shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of collection,
including, but not limited to, attorney's fees.
§ 213-13.4 MONACA CODE § 213-13.6
210:462
ARTICLE III
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 11-12-1975 as Ch. XXIV, Part 3, of the 1975 Code]
§ 213-14. Imposition of tax. [Amended 11-12-1975 by Ord. No. 668;
5-11-2010 by Ord. No. 916]
An annual per capita tax of $10 is hereby imposed on all adults domiciled
within the geographical limits of the borough of Monaca on a calendar-year
basis. Said tax shall continue to be imposed annually unless the Council of
the Borough of Monaca ordains otherwise.
§ 213-15. Applicability.
This tax is levied upon all persons of the age of 18 years or older who,
during the taxable year, are domiciled within the geographic limits of the
Borough of Monaca.
§ 213-16. Collection of tax.
The tax shall be collected by that person, persons or corporation that may
from time to time be designated by the Town Council of the Borough of
Monaca as the collector of the tax herein imposed.
§ 213-17. Payments.
This tax shall be payable at the office of the Tax Collector.
§ 213-18. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
§ 213-19. Enforcement of Collector.
The Tax Collector shall have the right to bring a suit before any District
Justice or the Court of Common Pleas of Beaver County, Pennsylvania, to
enforce the collection of any tax due under the terms of this article.
§ 213-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-12-1975 by Ord.
No. 668; 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Code
Enforcement.
A. Fail or refuse to pay the tax imposed by this article.
B. Fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this article or regulations
adopted by the Tax Collector.
§ 213-14 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-20
210:463

ARTICLE IV
Real Estate Transfer Tax
[Adopted 6-8-1987 by Ord. No. 774]
§ 213-21. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the
Borough of Monaca."
§ 213-22. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Borough of Monaca, regardless of where the documents making the transfer
are made, executed or delivered or where the actual settlements on such
transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate Transfer
Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 213-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments or like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. Document shall also include a
declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 213-22 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
§ 213-21 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-23
210:465
FAMILY FARM PARTNERSHIP — A partnership of which at least 75% of
its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75%
of the interests in the partnership are continuously owned by members
of the same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to
include:[Added 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such an individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof and, as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Borough of Monaca,
including without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures, mines,
minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower
boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or interests,
which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance or land, but
excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an
industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
§ 213-23 MONACA CODE § 213-23
210:466
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant or a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that, where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
B.
§ 213-23 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-23
210:467
§ 213-24. Imposition of tax; interest.
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Beaver County Recorder of
Deeds whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax
and the signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision
shall impose or thereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer, then the tax levied by the Borough of Monaca under the
authority of that Act shall, during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and
such one-half rate shall become effective without any action on the part
of the Borough of Monaca; provided, however, that the Borough of
Monaca and any other political subdivision which impose such tax on
the same person or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their
respectively different rates, the total of which shall not exceed the
maximum rate permitted under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
§ 213-23 MONACA CODE § 213-25
210:468
§ 213-25. Exempt parties.
The United States or the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 213-26. Excluded transactions.
A. The tax imposed by § 231-24 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property fine
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Borough of Monaca is prohibited from taxing
under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at Sheriff sale or Tax
Claim Bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife and between persons who
were previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband and wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce; between parent
and child or the spouse of such child; between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister; and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
§ 213-25 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-26
210:469
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from or for the benefit of
his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is
the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee
claims an exemption from taxation under this subsection.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it but only if the
grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
§ 213-26 MONACA CODE § 213-26
210:470
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture and the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities or a transfer from such a
conservancy to the United States or the commonwealth or to any of
their instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions.
[Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family, which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm partnership by a member of the same family, which
family directly owns at least 75% of the interests in the
partnership. [Added 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
(21) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company, family farm corporation or family
farm partnership which owns real estate. [Amended 9-10-1996
by Ord. No. 822]
(22) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(23) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of value
may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the
reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 213-26 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-27
210:471
§ 213-27. Documents.
Except as otherwise provided in § 213-26, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 213-28. Acquired company.
§ 213-29. Credits against tax.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company and, of itself or together
with prior changes, has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of issuance or
transfer of stock or because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are
devoted to the business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum
requirements of a family farm corporation under this article.
C. A family farm partnership is an acquired company when, because of
voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm
partnership or when, because of transfer of partnership interests or
because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to the
business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a
family farm partnership under this article. [Added 9-10-1996 by Ord.
No. 822]
D. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the transfer
to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due upon the
transfer.
§ 213-27 MONACA CODE § 213-29
210:472
§ 213-30. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 213-31. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax; and the Sheriff or other
officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first
moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are
insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 213-32. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property, which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time at the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate, which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount or tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the Borough
of Monaca based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from the Borough of Monaca.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
§ 213-29 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-32
210:473
§ 213-33. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction,
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction, showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 213-34. Civil penalties.
§ 213-35. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments or any interest therein, lying and being
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
Borough of Monaca all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for
use of the county, together with a report containing the information as
is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting
collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent
commission shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month of fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 213-32 MONACA CODE § 213-35
210:474
situated, wholly or in part, within the boundaries of the Borough of Monaca,
which lands, tenements, hereditaments or interest therein are described
in or conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the
tax imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the
time when the tax under this article is due and payable and continue until
discharge by payment or in accordance with the law; and the Solicitor
is authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common
Pleas of Beaver County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and
amendments.
§ 213-36. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 213-37. Additional regulations.
The Manager/Secretary of the Borough of Monaca is charged with
enforcement and collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and
enforce reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax.
The regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into
and made a part of this article.
§ 213-38. Violations and penalties. [Added 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation found in violation of this article,
shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Code Enforcement.
§ 213-35 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-38
210:475

ARTICLE V
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance
[Adopted 3-19-1987 by Ord. No. 772]
§ 213-39. Short title.
This article is a local economic revitalization tax assistance ordinance and
shall be known and cited as the "Borough of Monaca LERTA Ordinance."
§ 213-40. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DETERIORATED COMMERCIAL PROPERTY — Any industrial, commercial
or other business property owned by an individual, association or
corporation which is located in an investment opportunity area, as
hereinafter provided.
DETERIORATED MULTIUNIT PROPERTY — A dwelling unit within a
commercial/ residential structure which is located in an investment
opportunity area, as hereinafter provided.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms for living purposes, together with
separate cooking and sanitary facilities, used or intended to be used by one
or more persons living together and maintaining a common household and
accessible from the outdoors either directly or through an entrance hall
shared with other dwelling units.
IMPROVEMENTS — Repair, construction or reconstruction, including
alterations and additions, having the effect of rehabilitating a deteriorated
property so that it becomes habitable or attains higher standards of safety,
health, economic use or amenity or is brought into compliance with laws,
ordinances or regulations governing such standards and increases its
assessment. Ordinary upkeep and maintenance shall not be deemed an
improvement.
INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITY AREA — That area recommended as the
proposed LERTA District.183
LOCAL TAXING AUTHORITY — The Borough of Monaca.
§ 213-41. Investment opportunity area boundary description.
[Amended 7-12-2005 by Ord. No. 884]
The specific properties encompassing the Borough of Monaca LERTA
District, and defined as the “investment opportunity area,” are delineated
in the attached map,184 and any subsequent changes to these properties by
replotting of lot lines or subdivision into smaller lots shall also be included
in the Borough of Monaca investment opportunity area.
183. Editor's Note: The map delineating this district is on file in the Borough offices.
184. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 213-39 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-42
210:477
§ 213-42. Maximum exemption.
§ 213-43. Exemption schedule.
A. The exemption from real property taxes shall be limited to:
(1) That portion of the additional assessment attributable to the actual
cost of improvements to deteriorated commercial property.
(2) That portion of the additional assessment attributable to the actual
cost of improvements to deteriorated multiunit property.
B. In all cases, the exemption from real property taxes shall be limited to
that portion of the additional assessment to the improvements, as the
case may be, for which a separate assessment has been made by the
Beaver County assessment office and for which an exemption has been
separately requested. No tax exemption shall be granted if the owner
does not secure the necessary and proper permits prior to improving
the property. No tax exemption shall be granted if the property as
completed does not comply with the minimum standards of the Zoning
Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance185 and other codes of the Borough of
Monaca.
C. In any case after the adoption of this article, where deteriorated
commercial property or deteriorated multiunit/commercial property is
damaged, destroyed or demolished, by any cause or for any reason,
including the building or erection of new construction, and the assessed
valuation of the property affected has been reduced as a result of said
damage, destruction or demolition, the exemption from real property
taxation authorized by this article shall be limited to that portion of new
assessment attributable to the actual cost of improvements or
construction that is in excess of the original assessment that existed
prior to damage, destruction or demolition of the property.
A. The schedule of exemption from real property taxes shall apply for a
five-year period. For the first five years during which the improvement
becomes assessable, the following shall apply:
Year Percent of Exemption
First 100
Second 80
Third 60
Fourth 40
Fifth 20
B. The exemption from taxes granted under this article upon a property
shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of the property.
185. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning, and Ch. 210, Subdivision and Land Development,
respectively.
§ 213-42 MONACA CODE § 213-43
210:478
§ 213-44. Procedure for obtaining exemption.
C. If an eligible improvement is granted tax exemption pursuant to this
article, the improvement shall not, during the exemption period, be
considered as a factor in assessing either other subsequent
improvements to the same property or other properties.
A. Any persons desiring tax exemption pursuant to this article should
apply to the Borough of Monaca at the time a building permit is secured
for construction of the improvement or new residential construction, as
the case may be. The application must be in writing, upon forms
specified by the Borough of Monaca, setting forth the following
information:
(1) The date the building permit was issued for said improvement.
(2) The location of property to be improved.
(3) The nature of the property to be improved.
(4) Type of improvements (commercial, residential or both).
(5) The summary of the plan of the improvements.
(6) The cost of improvements.
(7) Whether the property has been condemned by any governmental
body for noncompliance to laws or ordinances.
(8) Verification that the property has been inspected by the Zoning
Officer of the Borough of Monaca and other additional information
as may be required.
B. There shall be on the application form for a building permit the
following notice:
Note to Taxpayer: By the Borough of Monaca ordinance 1987, you may
be entitled to exemption from tax on your contemplated improvement
by reassessment. An application for exemption may be secured from
the Zoning Officer or other properly designated official and must be
filed at the time the building permit is secured.
C. A copy of the exemption request shall be forwarded to the Beaver
County assessment office by the Zoning Officer. The assessment office
shall determine whether the exemption shall be granted and shall, upon
completion of the improvements, assess the improvements and shall
otherwise perform its duties as above provided for construction of
improvements to residential and commercial properties.
D. Appeals from the reassessment and the amount eligible for the
exemption may be taken by the Borough of Monaca or by the taxpayer
as provided by law.
§ 213-43 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-44
210:479
Chapter 216
TREES
§ 216-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 216-2. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant any Carolina poplar tree upon
any property in the Borough of Monaca owned by him or to allow any such
tree, heretofore or hereafter planted upon such property, to remain thereon.
§ 216-3. Trimming required.
It shall be the duty of every owner of property in the Borough of Monaca to
keep the trees and shrubs growing upon his property at all times trimmed
so that no part thereof shall extend over or onto any sidewalk at a height of
less than eight feet or over or onto the roadway of any street, highway or
alley at a height of less than 14 feet.
§ 216-4. Notice; failure to comply; costs of removal.
In any case where the owner of any property in the Borough, within 10
days after notice from the Borough Council so to do, shall fail, neglect
or refuse to remove any tree or part thereof or to trim the overhanging
branches or parts thereof in order to conform to the requirements of this
chapter, the Borough Council shall have the authority, through its agents
or employees or under contract with any person, to cause the work of
removal or trimming to be done and to collect the cost of such work, with
an additional amount of 10%, from such defaulting property owner by any
means authorized by law, provided that such amounts may be collected in
addition to the fine and costs imposed under § 216-5 of this chapter.
§ 216-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, for each
and every such violation, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days, provided
that each day's continuance of a violation, after the expiration of the ten-
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, association or
corporation.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
§ 213-44 MONACA CODE § 216-5
216:480
day period referred to in § 216-4 of this chapter, shall constitute a separate
violation, provided, further, that such fine and costs may be collected in
addition to any cost of work and additional amount collected under § 216-4
of this chapter.
Chapter 219
VANDALISM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
§ 216-5 VANDALISM § 216-5
219:481

ARTICLE I
Public Property
[Adopted 11-12-1975 by Ord. No. 682]
§ 219-1. Prohibited acts generally.
No person or persons shall destroy or injure in any way or tamper with or
deface any public property in the Borough of Monaca or any grass, walk,
tree, lamp, ornamental work, building, streetlight, public accommodation of
any kind or nature, fire hydrant or water or gas stop box on or in any of the
streets, alleys, sidewalks, public grounds or public buildings in the Borough.
§ 219-2. Stakes, posts, monuments and other markers.
No person or persons shall, in any manner, interfere with or meddle with
or pull, drive, change, alter or destroy any stake, post, monument or other
evidence of any elevation, grade line, location, corner or angle in the
Borough of Monaca made, placed or set or hereafter made, placed or set
or caused to be done by the authorities of the Borough or by any licensed
surveyor or engineer in any survey of or in any street, alley or public ground
in the Borough to evidence the location, elevation, line, grade, corner or
angle of any public street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter, sewer, drain or other
public work, matter or thing.
§ 219-3. Warning signs; flares and barricades.
No person or persons shall willfully or maliciously destroy or remove or
deface or obliterate or cover up any lamp, warning sign, flare or barricade
erected by the authorities of the Borough or by any person, firm or
corporation doing work by permission of the authorities of the Borough
on any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, bridges or public grounds in the
Borough.
§ 219-4. Removal of earth, stone or other materials.
No person or persons shall take any earth, stone or other material from
any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public grounds in the Borough of
Monaca.
§ 219-5. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to normal activities in connection with the
construction, maintenance and repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks and
public grounds and the structures and fixtures thereon or therein or to
incidental results of work done thereon or therein upon permit from or by
authority of the Borough.
§ 219-1 VANDALISM § 219-6
219:483
§ 219-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II,
Code Enforcement.
§ 219-6 MONACA CODE § 219-6
219:484
ARTICLE II
Minors
[Adopted 5-9-1977 by Ord. No. 705]
§ 219-7. Definitions.
The following words, as used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
LEGAL GUARDIAN — A person appointed guardian or given custody of
a minor by a Circuit Court of the commonwealth, but does not include a
person appointed guardian or given custody by a Juvenile Court.
MINOR — A person who is above the age of 11 years but not yet 19 years of
age.
§ 219-8. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or negligently
break, deface, injure, remove or destroy any property within the Borough
of Monaca, whether said property is owned by the state, county, Borough,
any other governmental body or by any private person or to condone such
actions.
§ 219-9. Parental responsibility.
The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such
parent or legal guardian shall be presumed, in absence of evidence to the
contrary, to have failed to exercise adequate parental responsibility, and
said minor shall be deemed to have committed the acts described in § 219-8
above with the knowledge and permission of the parent or guardian, and
the parent or guardian shall be deemed to be in violation of the provisions
of this article upon the occurrence of the following:
A. An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian
shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of this article or any other
ordinance, law or statute prohibiting willfully and malicious acts
causing injury to a person or property or shall have incurred nonjudicial
sanctions from another official agency resulting from an admission of
guilt of violation of the aforementioned;
B. Said parent or legal guardian shall have received official written notice
thereof, by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by
personal messenger, with certificate of messenger service returned,
from the Monaca Police Department, following said adjudication or
nonjudicial sanction; and
C. If at any time within one year following receipt of the official notice set
forth in Subsection B above, said minor is either adjudicated to be in
violation of this article or any other article, law or statute as described
in Subsection A above or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from
§ 219-7 VANDALISM § 219-9
219:485
§ 219-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
822]
Any person convicted of violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Code Enforcement.
another official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation
of this article, law or statute as described in Subsection A above.
§ 219-9 MONACA CODE § 219-10
219:486
Chapter 225
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking Authority — See Ch. 9, Art. II.
Speed-timing devices — See Ch. 188.
Storage of mercantile vehicles — See Ch. 228,
Art. I.
§ 219-10 VANDALISM § 219-10
219:487

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 225-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 225-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Borough of Monaca.
§ 225-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 225-4. Experimental regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq. (the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except
that in this chapter the word "street" may be used interchangeably with
the word "highway" and shall have the same meaning as the word
"highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in
limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. These temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Mayor and the Police Department in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who drives or parks a vehicle in violation of any
such regulation or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature.
A. The Borough Council may, from time to time, designate places upon and
along the streets in the Borough where, for a period of not more than 90
§ 225-1 VANDALISM § 225-4
219:489
§ 225-5. Streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance
or special events.
§ 225-6. Authority of police officers.
The police shall have authority to direct traffic on the streets in the
Borough, at intersections in public and in other places where the Vehicle
Code or this chapter applies.
days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate those
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified in
this chapter. No person shall drive or park a vehicle in violation of any
such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made
by authority of this section. Any person who violates any provision of
this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty set out in the
law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and parking.
A. The Borough Council shall have authority to close any street or specific
part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police
officers at each end of the closed portion, while construction or
maintenance work is under way or a special event is being conducted
on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Borough Council shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is
under way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such
restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign
directing that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
§ 225-4 MONACA CODE § 225-6
219:490
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 225-7. Speed limits.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I (§ 225-56), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated in said
schedule. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that street or part of a street.
§ 225-8. Speed limits adjacent to certain recreational areas.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle at a speed in
excess of 15 miles per hour upon any of the portions of the highways
in the Borough described in Schedule II (§ 225-57), attached hereto and
made a part of this chapter, at any time when the adjacent swimming pool,
playground or other recreational area is occupied by children.
§ 225-9. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule III (§ 225-58), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 225-10. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street
into another one-way street) when facing a steady red signal at any of the
locations described in Schedule IV (§ 225-59), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 225-11. Prohibited turns at intersections.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a turn of the kind
designated (left, right, all) at any of the intersections described in Schedule
V (§ 225-60), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 225-12. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn on any of
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI (§ 225-61), attached
to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 225-13. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII (§ 225-62),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other than in the direction
established for traffic on that street.
§ 225-7 VANDALISM § 225-14
219:491
§ 225-14. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established along those streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VIII (§ 225-63), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake
or pass another vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any nopassing
zone described in said schedule.
§ 225-15. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IX (§ 225-64), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby established as through
streets; and the driver of any vehicle, upon approaching any such street
at any intersection thereof (except for such intersections where there are
now or shall hereafter be located official traffic signals), shall come to a full
stop or yield the right-of-way, as the case may be, before entering any such
through street.
§ 225-16. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule X (§ 225-65), attached to and made
a part of this chapter (in addition to intersections with the through streets
established by this chapter), are hereby established as stop intersections,
and official stop signs shall be erected in such a position upon the firstnamed
street as to face traffic approaching the second-named street in
the direction or directions indicated in said schedule. Every driver of a
vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street, in
the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall come to a full stop
before entering any such intersection.
§ 225-17. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule XI (§ 225-66), attached to and made
a part of this chapter (in addition to intersections with the through streets
established by this chapter), are hereby established as yield intersections,
and official yield signs shall be erected in such a position upon the firstnamed
street as to face traffic approaching the second-named street in the
direction or directions indicated. Every driver of a vehicle approaching any
such intersection upon the first-named street, in the direction or directions
indicated in each case, shall slow down or stop the vehicle and then yield
the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on the
second-named street so closely as to constitute a hazard during the time
that the driver is moving across or within such intersection.
§ 225-18. Closing of certain streets to certain vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle, except a passenger
vehicle (but not including any passenger vehicle drawing any trailer or
towing any other vehicle), upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XII (§ 225-67), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 225-14 MONACA CODE § 225-19
219:492
§ 225-19. Vehicle weight limits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any commercial vehicle or
other tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combination, having a gross weight in
excess of that respectively prescribed, upon any of the streets or bridges,
or portions thereof, described in Schedule XIII (§ 225-68), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, except for the purpose of making local
deliveries on said streets.
§ 225-19.1. Motor scooters and motorized pedalcycles. [Added
10-14-2003 by Ord. No. 867]
A. It shall be unlawful to drive, move, operate or use the following unless
registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, upon or on any street
or highway situated in the Borough of Monaca:
(1) A motor-driven cycle, including a motor scooter, as defined in the
Vehicle Code.186
(2) A motorized pedalcycle, as defined in the Vehicle Code.187
(3) A motor-driven cycle or motor-driven powerboard with a motor
rated no more than 1.5 brake horsepower, a cylinder capacity not
exceeding 50 cubic centimeters, an automatic transmission and a
maximum designed speed of no more than 25 miles per hour.
B. It shall be unlawful to drive, move, operate or use the following,
whether registered or not registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania:
(1) A motor-driven cycle including a motor scooter, as defined in the
Vehicle Code.188
(2) A motorized pedalcycle, as defined in the Vehicle Code.189
(3) A motor-driven cycle or motor-driven powerboard with a motor
rated no more than 1.5 brake horsepower, a cylinder capacity not
exceeding 50 cubic centimeters, an automatic transmission and a
maximum designed speed of no more than 25 miles per hour.
C. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine as set forth in § 225-55 of Chapter
225.
186. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
187. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
188. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
189. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 225-19 VANDALISM § 225-19.1
219:493

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 225-20. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 225-21. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule XIV (§ 225-69), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, except at an angle. On all streets or portions thereof where angle
parking is now or shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon
shall be parked with the front thereof nearest the curb.
§ 225-22. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XV (§ 225-70), attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 225-23. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XVI (§ 225-71), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, during the hours and on the days specified in said schedule.
§ 225-24. (Reserved)190
§ 225-25. Special purpose parking zones.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or to allow the
same to remain parked in any special purpose parking zone established
in Schedule XVIII (§ 225-73), attached to and made a part of this chapter,
except as specifically provided for such zone.
§ 225-26. Penalties for parking violations. [Amended 10-12-2004 by
Ord. No. 877; 12-11-2018 by Ord. No. 960]
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or any
provision of § 225-72, as amended, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 and not more than $300,
plus costs of prosecution.
190. Editor’s Note: Former § 225-24, Time limit parking, was repealed 12-11-2018 by Ord. No.
960.
§ 225-20 VANDALISM § 225-26
219:495
§ 225-27. General parking restrictions.
B. The peace officer making such report shall also attach to every such
vehicle a notice that such vehicle was parked in violation of this article,
which notice shall contain instructions to the owner or operator of such
vehicle that if he/she shall report to the office of the Chief of Police and
pay, for the use of the Borough, the sum of $25 within five days after the
time of such notice, the same shall save such violator from prosecution
and payment of the fine and costs hereinabove prescribed, except the
following:
(1) Section 225-27A(1)(a), (b), (g) and (2)(b): penalty of $50; and
(2) Section 225-27B: penalty of $100 for violation of a reservation for
handicap parking.
A. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to protect
the safety of any person or vehicle or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person
shall:
(1) Stand or park a vehicle in the Borough of Monaca:
(a) In front of any entrance or exit or public or private driveway.
(b) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(c) At any place where official signs prohibit such.
(d) On any portion of a public roadway where the curb is painted
yellow.
(e) With wheels more than 12 inches from the curb.
(f) Against the flow of traffic.
(g) At any place where official signs indicate a loading zone.
(h) In the wrong direction on a one-way street.
(2) Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
(a) Within an intersection.
(b) On a crosswalk.
(c) On a sidewalk.
(3) Park or leave unattended a vehicle on private property without the
consent of the owner or other person in control or possession of the
property, except in the case of emergency or disablement of the
vehicle.
§ 225-26 MONACA CODE § 225-27
219:496
§ 225-27.1. Parking of certain large vehicles. [Added 8-16-2005 by
Ord. No. 885]
B. The provisions of the Vehicle Code at 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3353(a) through (e)
are incorporated herein by reference, made part hereof and merged
herein as though more fully set forth at length.
C. Any person violating any provision of Subsections A and B above is
guilty of a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not less than $25 and not more than $300, plus costs of
prosecution. [Amended 10-12-2004 by Ord. No. 877]
A. Legislative intent. The Council of the Borough of Monaca has
determined that hazardous and unsafe traffic conditions within the
municipal limits of the Borough exist because large vehicles are often
parked on streets in the Borough. These hazardous and unsafe traffic
conditions are detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the Borough of Monaca and others, impede emergency
vehicles (including fire trucks, ambulances, etc.) and interfere with the
peaceful and quiet enjoyment of the residents of the Borough of Monaca
in their homes and neighborhoods. The Council has determined that the
adoption of this section is necessary to remediate the foregoing.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
LARGE VEHICLES —
PARK or PARKING — The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
except temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in,
loading or unloading property or passengers.
STREET — Any street, road, lane, court, cul-de-sac, alley, path, public
way and public square within the municipal limits of Monaca Borough.
The following, as defined by 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 102: articulated bus,
combination, construction truck, driveway-towaway operation,
farm equipment, full trailer, house trailer, limousine (capable of
carrying 10 or more passengers), maxi-cube vehicle, mobile home,
motor home, recreational trailer, semitrailer, stinger-steered
automobile or boat transporter, tow dolly, trailer, truck-camper, and
truck tractor.
(1)
Boats, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles and similar off-road
vehicles, pickup campers, boat trailers, tent trailers and cases
or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment (whether
containing that equipment or not).
(2)
C. Parking of large vehicles prohibited. No person shall park, cause to be
parked or permit to be parked any large motor vehicle on any street
within the municipal limits of Monaca Borough.
§ 225-27 VANDALISM § 225-27.1
219:497
D. Exceptions. This section shall not apply to emergency vehicles as
defined by 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 102.
E. Penalties for violation. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by
the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, any person or registered owner of any
vehicle which violates this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not less than $300, plus costs of prosecution.
§ 225-27.1 MONACA CODE § 225-27.1
219:498
ARTICLE IV
Parking Meters
§ 225-28. (Reserved)191
§ 225-29. Manner of parking.
The Borough shall cause individual parking spaces to be marked off on
the surface of each of the roadways referred to in Schedule XX, and every
person desiring to park a vehicle in any such space shall park such vehicle
so that it shall be parked parallel to the curb and between the guidelines
marked on the pavement for such space, and with the wheels of the vehicle
not more than six inches from the curbing.
§ 225-30. through § 225-31. (Reserved)192
191. Editor’s Note: Former § 225-28, Parking time limited in certain locations, was repealed
12-11-2018 by Ord. No. 960.
192. Editor’s Note: Former §§ 225-30, Deposit of coin in meter, and 225-31, Parking fees, were
repealed 12-11-2018 by Ord. No. 960.
§ 225-28 VANDALISM § 225-30
219:499

ARTICLE V
Off-Street Metered Parking
§ 225-32. Applicability. [Amended 12-11-2018 by Ord. No. 960]
§ 225-33. Lots restricted to certain vehicles.
The parking lots to which this article applies are intended and constructed
for the parking of passenger motor vehicles of standard and sports types
and of trucks which do not have dual tires and which have a registered
gross weight of not more than 7,000 pounds. It shall be unlawful to park
in any such lot any vehicle not included in the categories hereinabove
specified, and such prohibition shall include, but shall not be limited to,
trucks with dual tires and/or a gross weight in excess of 7,000 pounds,
buses, trailers, carriers and mobile machinery.
A. This article shall apply to any and all lots of land owned or leased by the
Borough or by any authority established by the Borough, and
established by ordinance as an official parking lot, for the parking of
certain vehicles by the general public, under the terms and conditions
set forth in this article.
B. The following lots are hereby established as official Monaca parking
lots:
(1) The area located in the Second Ward of the Borough and bounded
on the north by Pennsylvania Avenue, on the east by the Municipal
Building, on the south by Spruce Alley and on the west by privately
owned property.
(2) The area located in the Second Ward of the Borough and bounded
on the east side by Eleventh Street and the north side by Maple
Alley, hereby known and recognized as the "George Washington
Town Plaza Parking Lot."
(3) The area located in the Second Ward of the Borough and bounded
on the south side by Pennsylvania Avenue and on the east side by
an unnamed alley, and on the north and west sides by privately
owned property.
C. The parking of vehicles in an official Monaca parking lot:
(1) Shall be permitted for only two hours between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m. every day of the week, except as may be permitted otherwise;
(2) Shall not be permitted between 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
D. A permit to park a vehicle in an official Monaca parking lot in
accordance with Subsection C hereof, may be obtained from the
Borough Manager pursuant to regulations adopted from time to time by
Borough Council.
§ 225-32 VANDALISM § 225-34
219:501
§ 225-34. Manner of parking.
The Borough authorities shall cause individual parking stalls to be marked
off on the surface of each parking lot, and every person desiring to park
a vehicle in any such lot shall park such vehicle so that it shall be parked
parallel to and between the guidelines marked in the pavement for such
stall, and with one wheel of the vehicle not less than six inches from the
curbing at the side or center of the parking lot.
§ 225-35. through § 225-38. (Reserved)193
193. Editor’s Note: Former §§ 225-35, Deposit of coin in meter; 225-36, Parking fees; 225-37,
Unlawful to deposit substitute for coin in meter; and 225-38, Violations and penalties,
were repealed 12-11-2018 by Ord. No. 960.
§ 225-34 MONACA CODE § 225-35
219:502
ARTICLE VI
Length of Vehicle Restrictions
§ 225-39. Length of vehicles in municipal lot restricted.
Pursuant to the authority contained in § 6109(a)(7) of the Vehicle Code of
Pennsylvania, it shall be unlawful to drive, move or otherwise operate upon
the municipal parking lot, adjacent to the Monaca Borough Building, any
vehicle, or combination thereof, or attachment thereto which exceeds 30
feet in length.
§ 225-40. Erection of signs.
In compliance with the aforesaid authority and the further requirements of
§ 6109(c) of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, official signs giving notice and
designation of the length restrictions upon the aforesaid municipal lot shall
be erected and maintained as provided by law.
§ 225-41. Statutory authorization.
In compliance with § 6109 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, it is hereby
declared that this article is enacted pursuant to § 6109(b) of the Vehicle
Code in the reasonable exercise of the police powers of the Borough Council
of Monaca; and in compliance with § 6109(e) and the limitations in § 4902(a)
of the Vehicle Code, as amended, it is further declared that action to adopt
this article was taken following the completion of an engineering and traffic
investigation conducted by an engineer, wherein the length limitations
imposed by this article were recommended.
§ 225-42. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforceable in accordance with and in
conformity with the provisions of Chapters 49 and 65 of the Vehicle Code.
§ 225-43. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $75.
§ 225-39 VANDALISM § 225-43
219:503

ARTICLE VII
Removal and Impounding of Certain Vehicles
§ 225-44. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle Code
and gives authority to the Borough to remove and impound vehicles that are
parked overtime on any street in the Borough, or in metered and unmetered
parking lots in the Borough, in violation of any provision of this chapter.
§ 225-45. Authority to remove and impound.
The Borough shall have authority to remove and impound or to order
the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 225-44 of this article and provided that no such
vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the
provisions of this article.
§ 225-46. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only by
approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time by the
Borough Council. Every such garage shall submit evidence to the Borough
Council that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount
satisfactory to the Borough Council as sufficient to indemnify owners of
impounded vehicles against loss or damage to those vehicles while in the
custody of the garagekeeper for the purpose of towing or storage. The
approved storage garage shall submit to the Borough Council its schedule
of charges for towing and storage of vehicles under this article, and when
the schedule is approved by the Borough Council, those charges shall
be adhered to by the approved storage garage. No different schedule of
charges shall be adopted without approval of the Borough Council, and no
different charges shall be demanded of or collected from any person whose
vehicle is removed or impounded under this article by any approved storage
garage. The Borough Council shall delete from its list of approved storage
garages any garage that makes any unapproved charge in connection with
any vehicle removed or impounded under this article.
§ 225-47. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that the vehicle was removed shall
be sent by the Borough to the owner of record of the vehicle. The notice
shall designate the place from which the vehicle was removed, the reason
for its removal and impounding and the garage in which it was impounded.
§ 225-44 VANDALISM § 225-48
219:505
§ 225-48. Effect of payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this article
shall, unless payment is made under protest, be final and conclusive and
shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid. If
payment of any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a District Justice. Payment
of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver of any
vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the provision
of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 225-49. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Borough shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under
this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or
the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to the place
of storage of the vehicle.
§ 225-50. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the
time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the time being in
charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 225-48 MONACA CODE § 225-50
219:506
ARTICLE VIII
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 225-51. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named pursuant to this
article, the Mayor and Council President, in his discretion, may declare a
snow and ice emergency (designated in this article as a "snow emergency").
Information on the existence of a snow emergency may be given by the
Borough through radio, newspaper or other available media, and
information on the termination of the emergency may be given by use of the
same media.
§ 225-52. Parking and driving restrictions.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
§ 225-53. Snow emergency routes.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XIX (§ 225-75),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as snow
emergency routes.
§ 225-54. Violations and penalties.
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated pursuant to this
article.
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
A. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under this
article, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a motor vehicle to
remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency route, that person
shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction, shall be
punishable as provided in § 225-26 of this chapter.
B. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under this
article, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow emergency
route without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires or chains,
that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon
conviction, shall be punishable as provided in § 225-55 of this chapter.
§ 225-51 VANDALISM § 225-54
219:507

ARTICLE IX
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 225-55. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Vehicle Code (75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or except as herein specified, every person
convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, or any supplement
thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of $25 and costs of prosecution.
§ 225-55 VANDALISM § 225-55
219:509

ARTICLE X
Schedules
§ 225-56. Schedule I: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-7, speed limits are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
All alleys in the
Borough
5 Entire length
Allaire Avenue 25 From Front Street to Palm Alley
Allen Avenue 25 From Don Street to Eckert Road
Ann Street 25 From Bechtel Street Extension to
western terminus of Ann Street
Atlantic Avenue 25 From Fourth Street to Fifteenth
Street
Beaver Avenue 25 From Clover Alley to Timathey
Alley
Beaver Avenue 25 From Fourteenth Street to
overhead bridge
Beaver Avenue 35 From overhead bridge to east
borough line
Bechtel Street 25 From Fourteenth Street to
Marshall Road
Bechtel Street 25 From Speyer Avenue to
Fourteenth Street
Bechtel Street
Extension
25 From Marshall Road to Kermiet
Drive
Beech Street 25 From Taylor Avenue to Eckert
Road
Blaine Road 25 From Front Street to Center Road
Calder Avenue 25 From McClellan Street to Grant
Street
Cascade Road 25 From Beaver Avenue to Valley
Road
Center Road 25 From Marshall Road to south
borough line
Charles Street 25 From Allen Avenue to Marshall
Road
Charlotte Ann Street 25 From Walnut Street to South Elm
Street
§ 225-56 VANDALISM § 225-56
219:511
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Chestnut Street 25 From Welch Avenue to southern
terminus of Chestnut Street
Childs Avenue 25 From Front Street to Elkhorn
Street
Circle Drive 25 From Summit Avenue to Hillview
Drive
Clearview Drive 25 From South Elm Street to Walnut
Street
Cliff Drive 25 From Hillview Drive to Ridge
Road
Colonial Street 25 From Constitution Street to
Beaver Avenue
Constitution Street 25 From Ohio Avenue to Summit
Avenue
Don Street 25 From Allen Avenue to Wayne
Avenue
Dowell Avenue 25 From Bechtel Street to Walnut
Street
Eckert Road 25 From Fourteenth Street to Eckert
Road Extension
Eckert Road
Extension
25 From Eckert Road to Walnut
Street
Eighth Street 25 From Spruce Alley to Atlantic
Avenue
Eleventh Street 25 From Washington Avenue to
Atlantic Avenue
Elkhorn Street 25 From Childs Avenue to Nimick
Avenue
Elmira Street 25 From Chestnut Street to Walnut
Street
Elm Street 25 From Johnston Avenue to Marshall
Road
Fifteenth Street 25 From Pacific Avenue to
Pennsylvania Avenue
Fifth Street 25 From Sixth Street to Atlantic
Avenue
Fourteenth Street 25 From Beaver Avenue to
Pennsylvania Avenue
§ 225-56 MONACA CODE § 225-56
219:512
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Fourteenth Street 35 From Bechtel Street to Beaver
Avenue
Fourteenth Street
Extension
25 From Fourteenth Street at Beaver
Avenue to Fourteenth Street at
Eckert Road
Fourth Street 25 From Pennsylvania Avenue to
Atlantic Avenue
Front Street 25 From Howe Street to Summit
Avenue
Front Street 25 From Ohio Avenue to Childs
Avenue
Glenn Alley 25 From Marshall Road to Allen
Avenue
Grant Street 25 From Speyer Avenue to Taylor
Avenue
Greiner Street 25 From Wayne Avenue to south
borough line
Grove Street 25 From Wayner Avenue to Taylor
Avenue
Hill Road 25 From Cascade Road to Center
Road
Hillview Drive 25 From Circle Drive to Ridge Road
Howe Avenue 25 From Front Street to Ridge Road
Indiana Avenue 25 From Fifth Street to Ninth Street
Indiana Avenue 25 From Ninth Street to Thirteenth
Street (eastbound only)
Indiana Avenue 25 From Sixteenth Street to
Eighteenth Street
Jackson Avenue 25 From Ridge Road to southern
terminus of Jackson Avenue
Johnston Avenue 25 From Elm Street to Walnut Street
Kaye Avenue 25 From McClellan Street to Elm
Street
Kazar Street 25 From Ash Alley to Bechtel Street
Kermiet Drive 25 From Bechtel Street Extension to
western terminus of Kermiet
Drive
Linden Street 25 From Wagner Avenue to Elmira
Street
§ 225-56 VANDALISM § 225-56
219:513
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Locust Drive 25 From Walnut Street to Chestnut
Street
Marshall Road 25 From west borough line to
Jackson Avenue
McClellan Street 25 From Johnston Avenue to south
borough line
McCoy Avenue 25 From McClellan Street to Bechtel
Street
Meadow Avenue 25 From Front Street to Ridge Road
Nimick Avenue 25 From Elkhorn Street to Front
Street
Ninth Street 25 From Pacific Avenue to Atlantic
Avenue
Oak Road 25 From Center Road to Cascade
Road
Obney Avenue 25 From McClellan Street to western
terminus of Obney Avenue
Ohio Avenue 25 From Marshall Road to Elkhorn
Street
Ohio Avenue 25 From Ridge Road to Front Street
Pacific Avenue 25 From Ninth Street to Twelfth
Street (eastbound only)
Pacific Avenue 25 From Sixth Street to Seventh
Street
Pacific Avenue 25 From Twelfth Street to Fifteenth
Street
Park Road 25 From Hill Road to Cherry Alley
Pennsylvania Avenue 25 From Pennsylvania Avenue
Extension to overhead bridge
Ridge Road 25 From Cascade Road to Allaire
Avenue
Ridge Road 25 From Jackson Avenue to Howe
Avenue
Sarah Street 25 From Indiana Avenue to Atlantic
Avenue
Seventeenth Street 25 From Pennsylvania Avenue to East
Rochester-Monaca bridge
Seventeenth Street 25 From Pennsylvania Avenue to
Spruce Alley
§ 225-56 MONACA CODE § 225-56
219:514
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Seventh Street 25 From Pacific Avenue to
Pennsylvania Avenue
Sixteenth Street 25 From Pennsylvania Avenue to
Washington Avenue
Sixth Street 25 From Pacific Avenue to Atlantic
Avenue
South Elm Street 25 From Ash Alley to Charlotte Ann
Street
Speyer Avenue 25 From McClellan Street to Elm
Street
Stephen Phillips
Homes streets
25 From Cascade Road to terminus
of all streets in Stephen Phillips
Homes
Summit Avenue 25 From Front Street to Circle Drive
Taylor Avenue 25 From Forest Street to McClellan
Street
Taylor Lane 25 From McClellan Avenue to
western terminus of Taylor Lane
Tenth Street 25 From Pennsylvania Avenue to
Atlantic Avenue
Tew Street 25 From Center Road to Blaine Road
Thirteenth Street 25 From Pennsylvania Avenue to
Atlantic Avenue
Twelfth Street 25 From Pennsylvania Avenue to
Atlantic Avenue
Virginia Avenue 25 From Eleventh Street to U.S.
Sanitary Company
Wagner Avenue 25 From Fourteenth Street to Grove
Street
Wahl Street 25 From Pacific Avenue to
Pennsylvania Avenue
Walnut Street 25 From Fourteenth Street to Dowell
Avenue (northbound only)
Walnut Street 25 From Fourteenth Street to Taylor
Avenue
Walnut Street 25 From Johnston Avenue to Dowell
Avenue
Walnut Street 25 From Kazar Street to Charlotte
Ann Street
§ 225-56 VANDALISM § 225-56
219:515
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Walnut Street 25 From Marshall Road to Kazar
Street (southbound only)
Washington Avenue 25 From Fifth Street to Fifteenth
Street
Washington Avenue 25 From Sixteenth Street to 17th
Street
Wayne Avenue 25 From Don Street to Charles Street
Welch Avenue 25 From Charles Street to Chestnut
Street
§ 225-56.1. Schedule IA: Speed Limit, Warnings and Signage on
Portions of 14th Street. [Added 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 919]
A. The speed limit on 14th Street, only between Station 10+00RT and
15+00LT, shall be 15 miles per hour. In all other locations on 14th
Street the speed limit shall be that set by ordinances adopted prior
hereto.
B. The stations referred to in Subsection A hereof are depicted in a plan of
existing conditions, which will be attached to the original of this
section, be made part thereof and merged therein.194
C. That the following warning signs shall be erected on 14th Street in the
Borough of Monaca at or between the stations designated below, in
accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices and
PennDot Publication 236M-Handbook of approved signs:
(1) Hill: W7-3, 24 inches by 18 inches to be posted in conjunction with
Hill sign on 14th Street at STA 10+00 RT for traffic descending the
hill.
(2) 11% Grade: W7-3, 24 inches by 18 inches to be posted in
conjunction with Hill sign on 14th Street at 10+00 RT for traffic
descending the hill.
(3) Chevron Alignment Sign: W1-8, 18 inches by 24 inches to be posted
on 14th Street on outside of curve at right angles to approaching
traffic at STA. 12+25 RT and 13+50 RT. Two W1-8 signs should be
placed back-to-back at each location. Spacing of the W1-8 signs
should be such that the driver always has two signs in view until
the change in alignment eliminates the need for additional signs. To
be effective the W1-8 signs should be visible for at least 500 feet.
(4) Slippery When Wet: W8-5, 30 inches by 30 inches to be posted on
14th Street at STA. 10+00 RT and 15+00 LT for traffic ascending
194. Editor's Note: Said plan is available for review in the Borough offices.
§ 225-56 MONACA CODE § 225-56.1
219:516
§ 225-57. Schedule II: Speed Limits Adjacent to Recreation Areas.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-8, a speed limit of 15 miles per
hour is hereby established upon the following streets or parts thereof at any
time when the adjacent swimming pool, playground or other recreational
area is occupied by children:
Name of Street Location
Fifteenth Street From Virginia Avenue to Indiana
Avenue
Indiana Avenue From Fifteenth Street to Sixteenth
Street
Jackson Avenue From Ridge Road to Marshall Road
Marshall Road From Allaire Avenue to Jackson
Avenue
Ohio Avenue From Marshall Road to Ridge Road
Sixteenth Street From Washington Avenue to Indiana
Avenue
Washington Avenue From Fifteenth Street to Sixteenth
Street
§ 225-58. Schedule III: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-9, traffic control signals shall be
installed and operated at the following described intersections:
Intersection
L.R. 254 at Colonial Avenue
Ninth Street at Atlantic Avenue
Pennsylvania Avenue at Fourteenth Street
Pennsylvania Avenue at Ninth Street
Pennsylvania Avenue at Seventeenth Street
§ 225-59. Schedule IV: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-10, no person shall make a right
turn (or a left turn from a one-way street onto another one-way street) when
facing a steady red signal at any of the locations described below:
and descending 14th Street Hill if Monaca Borough determines
that the roadway surface is extraordinarily wet.
(5) 15 mph Advisory Speed Plaque: W13-1, 18 inches by 18 inches to
be posted on 14th Street at STA. 10+00 RT and 15+00 LT in
conjunction with Slippery When Wet sign.
§ 225-56.1 VANDALISM § 225-59
219:517
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on Red
Signal Onto
Ninth Street South Pennsylvania Avenue
§ 225-60. Schedule V: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
§ 225-61. Schedule VI: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-12, no driver of any vehicle shall
make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts thereof described below:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 225-62. Schedule VII: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-13, the following described
streets or parts thereof are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 225-11, no driver of any vehicle
shall make a turn of the kind designated below at any of the following
intersections:
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At
Intersection
of
Fourth Street North Left At all times Route 18
Indiana
Avenue
East Left 3:00 p.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Ninth Street
Ninth Street Both Both At all times Atlantic
Avenue
Washington
Avenue
Both Both 3:00 p.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Ninth Street
B. In accordance with the provisions of § 225-11, traffic flow shall only be
permitted as designated below at the following intersections: [Added
7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 837]
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel
Permitted
Traffic Flow Hours
At
Intersection
of
Sixth Street South Right turn
only
At all times Pennsylvania
Avenue
§ 225-59 MONACA CODE § 225-62
219:518
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Ash Alley South From Marshall Road to Elmira
Street
Atlantic Avenue West From Fifteenth Street to Ninth
Street
Grape Alley South From Virginia Avenue to
Pennsylvania Avenue
Indiana Avenue East From Fifteenth Street to Sixteenth
Street
Indiana Avenue East From Ninth Street to Fifteenth
Street
Maple Alley West From 11th Street to Tenth Street
Pacific Avenue East From Wahl Street to Twelfth Street
Peach Alley South From Pennsylvania Avenue to
Spruce Alley
Tenth Street [Added
10-12-1999 by Ord.
No. 843]
South Washington Avenue to Maple Alley
Twelfth Street South From Pennsylvania Avenue to
Spruce Alley
Wahl Street South From Pennsylvania Avenue to
Pacific Avenue
Walnut Street North From Fourteenth Street to Dowell
Avenue
Walnut Street North From Marshall Road to Allen
Avenue
Walnut Street South From Marshall Road to Kazar
Street
§ 225-63. Schedule VIII: No-Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-14, no-passing zones are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
(Reserved)
§ 225-64. Schedule IX: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-15, the following described
streets or parts thereof are hereby established as through streets:
§ 225-62 VANDALISM § 225-64
219:519
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 225-65. Schedule X: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-16, the following described
intersections are hereby established as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as provided therein:
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Alexander Avenue East Charles Street
Alexander Avenue West McClellan Street
Allaire Avenue Both Marshall Road
Allaire Avenue Both Ridge Road
Allaire Avenue North Colonial Avenue
Allen Avenue Both Bechtel Street
Allen Avenue Both Chestnut Street
Allen Avenue Both Eckert Road
Allen Avenue Both Ella Street
Allen Avenue Both Griener Street
Allen Avenue Both Linden Street
Allen Avenue Both McClellan Street
Allen Avenue Both Walnut Street
Allen Avenue North Cascade Road
Allen Avenue West Elm Street
Ann Street East Bechtel Street Extension
Apple Alley Both Maple Alley
Apple Alley South Pennsylvania Avenue
Atlantic Avenue Both Eighth Street
Atlantic Avenue Both Sixth Street
Atlantic Avenue West Eleventh Street
Atlantic Avenue West Fourth Street
Atlantic Avenue West Tenth Street
Atlantic Avenue West Thirteenth Street
Atlantic Avenue West Twelfth Street
Beaver Avenue Both Cascade Road
Beaver Avenue Both Fifteenth Street
Beaver Avenue Both L.R. 254
§ 225-64 MONACA CODE § 225-65
219:520
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Beaver Avenue
[Added 2-13-2001
by Ord. No. 851]
East Fourteenth Street
Beaver Avenue
Extension
Both L.R. 254
Bechtel Street Both Fourteenth Street
Bechtel Street Both Marshall Road
Bechtel Street North Kaye Avenue
Beech Alley Both Apple Alley
Beech Alley Both Grape Alley
Beech Alley West Eleventh Street
Beech Street North Fourteenth Street
Bell Avenue [Added
11-13-2001 by Ord.
No. 857]
East Blaine Road
Blaine Road Both Marshall Road
Blaine Road Both Ridge Road
Calder Avenue East Grant Street
Calder Avenue West McClellan Street
Cascade Road Both Marshall Road
Cascade Road Both Ridge Road
Cascade Road North Beaver Avenue
Center Road North Marshall Road
Chambers Drive South Cascade Road
Charles Street Both Allen Avenue
Charles Street North Taylor Avenue
Charles Street South Marshall Road
Cherry Lane [Added
2-13-2001 by Ord.
No. 851]
East Center Road
Cherry Lane [Added
2-13-2001 by Ord.
No. 851]
West Cascade Road
Chestnut Street Both Allen Avenue
Chestnut Street Both Eckert Road Extension
Chestnut Street Both Locust Drive
Chestnut Street Both Marshall Road
§ 225-65 VANDALISM § 225-65
219:521
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Chestnut Street North Welch Street
Childs Avenue Both Ridge Road
Childs Avenue North Front Street
Childs Avenue South Marshall Road
Clearview Drive East South Elm Street
Clearview Drive West South Walnut Street
Cliff Drive West Hillview Drive
Cliff Drive West Ridge Road
Colonial Avenue North Front Street
Constitution Street Both Jackson Avenue
Constitution Street East Summit Avenue
Dowell Avenue
[Added 2-8-2000 by
Ord. No. 847]
Both Walnut Street
Dowell Avenue
[Added 2-8-2000 by
Ord. No. 847]
East Elm Street
Dowell Avenue West Bechtel Street
Eckert Road Both Marshall Road
Eckert Road North Fourteenth Street
Eckert Road
Extension
Both Chestnut Street
Eckert Road
Extension
Both South Elm Street
Eckert Road
Extension
West South Walnut Street
Eighth Street Both Indiana Avenue
Eighth Street Both Washington Avenue
Eighth Street North Atlantic Avenue
Eighth Street South Pennsylvania Avenue
Eleventh Street Both Indiana Avenue
Eleventh Street North Atlantic Avenue
Eleventh Street North Maple Alley
Eleventh Street South Virginia Avenue
Eleventh Street
[Added 11-13-2001
by Ord. No. 857]
South Washington Avenue
§ 225-65 MONACA CODE § 225-65
219:522
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Elkhorn Road South Marshall Road
Ella Street Both Allen Avenue
Ella Street South Marshall Road
Elm Street Both Allen Avenue
Elm Street Both Taylor Avenue
Elm Street Both Welch Avenue
Elm Street South Fourteenth Street
Elm Street South Marshall Road
Elmira Street Both Ash Alley
Elmira Street Both South Elm Street
Elmira Street East Chestnut Street
Elmira Street West Linden Street
Elmira Street West South Walnut Street
Fifteenth Street Both Pennsylvania Avenue
Fifteenth Street Both Virginia Avenue
Fifteenth Street Both Washington Avenue
Fifteenth Street North Atlantic Avenue
Fifteenth Street South Pacific Avenue
Fifth Street North Atlantic Avenue
Fifth Street North Indiana Avenue
Fifth Street South Sixth Street
Fourteenth Street
Extension
East Beaver Avenue
Fourteenth Street
Extension
South Fifteenth Street
Fourth Street North Atlantic Avenue
Fourth Street South Pennsylvania Avenue
Front Street East Allaire Avenue
Front Street South Ridge Road
Front Street West Colonial Avenue
Glenn Alley North Marshall Road
Grant Street Both McCoy Avenue
Grant Street North Speyer Avenue
Grant Street South Taylor Avenue
Grape Alley South Pennsylvania Avenue
§ 225-65 VANDALISM § 225-65
219:523
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Greiner Street Both Allen Avenue
Greiner Street Both Obney Avenue
Greiner Street North Wayne Avenue
Grove Street South Taylor Avenue
Hill Road East Center Road
Hill Road West Cascade Road
Hillview Drive North Ridge Road
Indiana Avenue Both Eighth Street
Indiana Avenue Both Seventeenth Street
Indiana Avenue Both Sixteenth Street
Indiana Avenue Both Sixth Street
Indiana Avenue East Eleventh Street
Indiana Avenue East Fifteenth Street
Indiana Avenue East Ninth Street
Indiana Avenue East Tenth Street
Indiana Avenue East Twelfth Street
Indiana Avenue West Fifth Street
Jackson Avenue Both Ridge Road
Jackson Avenue South Marshall Road
Kaye Avenue Both Bechtel Street
Kaye Avenue Both Grant Street
Kaye Avenue East Elm Street
Kaye Avenue West McClellan Street
Kazar Street Both South Walnut Street
Kazar Street East South Elm Street
Kazar Street West Bechtel Street Extension
Kermiet Drive East Bechtel Street Extension
Linden Street Both Allen Avenue
Linden Street Both Marshall Road
Linden Street Both Taylor Avenue
Linden Street Both Welch Avenue
Locust Drive Both South Elm Street
Locust Drive West South Walnut Street
Maple Alley West Ninth Street
§ 225-65 MONACA CODE § 225-65
219:524
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Maple Alley West Tenth Street
Marshall Road Both Bechtel Street
Marshall Road Both Blaine Road
Marshall Road Both Cascade Road
Marshall Road Both Ohio Avenue
Marshall Road East Jackson Street
Marshall Road West Allaire Avenue
McClellan Street Both Allen Avenue
McClellan Street Both Taylor Avenue
McClellan Street North Calder Avenue
McClellan Street North Speyer Avenue
McClellan Street South Kaye Avenue
McClellan Street South McCoy Avenue
McCoy Avenue East Bechtel Street
McCoy Avenue West McClellan Street
Meadow Avenue North Front Street
Meadow Avenue South Ridge Road
Nimick Avenue Both Marshall Road
Nimick Avenue Both Ridge Road
Nimick Avenue North Front Street
Ohio Avenue Both Constitution Street
Ohio Avenue Both Marshall Road
Ohio Avenue Both Ridge Road
Pacific Avenue Both Fourteenth Street
Pacific Avenue Both Twelfth Street
Park Road [Added
2-13-2001 by Ord.
No. 851]
North Cherry Lane
Park Road [Added
2-13-2001 by Ord.
No. 851]
South Hill Road
Peach Alley Both Walnut Alley
Peach Alley South Pennsylvania Avenue
Pine Alley Both Thorne Alley
Ridge Road Both Allaire Avenue
§ 225-65 VANDALISM § 225-65
219:525
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Ridge Road Both Blaine Road
Ridge Road Both Cascade Road
Ridge Road Both Childs Avenue
Ridge Road Both Jackson Avenue
Ridge Road Both Ohio Avenue
Ridge Road Both Summit Avenue
Seventeenth Street South Pennsylvania Avenue
Sixteenth Street Both Virginia Avenue
Sixteenth Street Both Washington Avenue
Sixteenth Street North Indiana Avenue
Sixteenth Street South Pennsylvania Avenue
Sixth Street Both Indiana Avenue
Sixth Street Both Pennsylvania Avenue
Sixth Street Both Washington Avenue
Sixth Street North Atlantic Avenue
South Elm Street Both Locust Drive
South Elm Street North Marshall Road
South Walnut Street Both Kazar Street
Speyer Avenue Both Bechtel Street
Speyer Avenue Both Walnut Street
Speyer Avenue East Elm Street
Speyer Avenue West McClellan Street
Taylor Avenue Both Bechtel Street
Taylor Avenue
[Added 7-13-1999
by Ord. No. 841]
Both Grant Street
Taylor Avenue Both McClellan Street
Taylor Avenue Both Walnut Street
Tenth Street Both Indiana Avenue
Tenth Street
[Amended
10-12-1999 by Ord.
No. 843]
Both Washington Avenue
Tenth Street North Atlantic Avenue
Tenth Street South Pennsylvania Avenue
Tew Street East Blaine Road
§ 225-65 MONACA CODE § 225-65
219:526
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Tew Street West Center Road
Thirteenth Street Both Indiana Avenue
Thirteenth Street Both Virginia Avenue
Thirteenth Street Both Washington Avenue
Thirteenth Street North Atlantic Avenue
Thirteenth Street South Pennsylvania Avenue
Thorne Alley Both Pine Alley
Twelfth Street Both Indiana Avenue
Twelfth Street Both Virginia Avenue
Twelfth Street Both Washington Avenue
Twelfth Street North Atlantic Avenue
Twelfth Street South Pacific Avenue
Twelfth Street South Pennsylvania Avenue
Virginia Avenue Both Fifteenth Street
Virginia Avenue Both Seventeenth Street
Virginia Avenue Both Sixteenth Street
Virginia Avenue Both Thirteenth Street
Virginia Avenue Both Twelfth Street
Virginia Avenue West Eleventh Street
Wagner Avenue Both Elm Street
Wagner Avenue West Fourteenth Street
Walnut Alley Both Grape Alley
Walnut Street Both Allen Avenue
Walnut Street Both Taylor Avenue
Walnut Street Both Welch Avenue
Walnut Street North Fourteenth Street
Washington Avenue Both Eighth Street
Washington Avenue Both Eleventh Street
Washington Avenue Both Fifteenth Street
Washington Avenue Both Ninth Street
Washington Avenue Both Seventeenth Street
Washington Avenue Both Sixteenth Street
Washington Avenue Both Sixth Street
Washington Avenue Both Tenth Street
§ 225-65 VANDALISM § 225-65
219:527
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Washington Avenue Both Thirteenth Street
Washington Avenue Both Twelfth Street
Washington Avenue West Fifth Street
Wayne Avenue Both McClellan Street
Wayne Avenue East Charles Street
Welch Avenue Both Bechtel Street
Welch Avenue Both Walnut Street
Welch Avenue East Chestnut Street
§ 225-66. Schedule XI: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-17, the following described
intersections are hereby established as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 225-67. Schedule XII: Closing of Certain Streets to Certain
Vehicles.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-18, it shall be unlawful for any
person to drive any vehicle, except a passenger vehicle (but not including
any passenger vehicle drawing any trailer or towing any other vehicle),
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below:
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 225-68. Schedule XIII: Vehicle Weight Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-19, gross weight limits are
hereby established as indicated for commercial vehicles or other tractor,
trailer or tractor-trailer combinations, upon the streets, bridges or portions
thereof described below, except for the purpose of making local deliveries
on said streets, bridges or portions thereof:
§ 225-65 MONACA CODE § 225-68
219:528
Name of Street or
Bridge
Maximum
Gross Weight
(tons) Location
Allaire Avenue 6 From Marshall Road to
Colonial Avenue
Allaire Avenue 6 From Marshall Road to Elkhorn
Street
Allen Avenue 6 From Cascade Road to Don
Street
Ann Street 6 From Bechtel Street to western
terminus of Ann Street
Atlantic Avenue [Added
11-9-2004 by Ord. No.
879]
10 From the middle of the
intersection of Eighth Street to
the middle of the intersection
of Ninth Street
Atlantic Avenue [Added
11-9-2004 by Ord. No.
879]
6 From Fourth Street to the
middle of the intersection of
Eighth Street
Atlantic Avenue 6 From Fourth Street to
Fifteenth Street
Atlantic Avenue [Added
11-9-2004 by Ord. No.
879]
6 From the middle of the
intersection of Ninth Street to
Fifteenth Street
Atlantic Avenue 6 From Sarah Street to Football
Field
Beaver Avenue 6 From Clover Alley to Timathey
Alley
Bechtel Street 6 From Fourteenth Street to
Marshall Road
Bechtel Street 6 From Speyer Avenue to
Fourteenth Street
Bechtel Street Extension 6 From Marshall Road to
Kermiet Drive
Beech Street 6 From Fourteenth Street to
Eckert Road
Blaine Road 6 From Front Street to Center
Road
Calder Avenue 6 From Grant Street to
McClellan Street
Cascade Road 6 From Beaver Avenue to Valley
Road
§ 225-68 VANDALISM § 225-68
219:529
Name of Street or
Bridge
Maximum
Gross Weight
(tons) Location
Center Road 6 From Marshall Road to
southern terminus of Center
Road
Charles Street 6 From Allen Avenue to Marshall
Road
Charles Street 6 From Taylor Avenue to Welch
Avenue
Charlotte Ann Street 6 From South Elm Street to
Walnut Street
Chestnut Street 6 From Welch Avenue to Eckert
Road Extension
Childs Avenue 6 From Front Street to Elkhorn
Street
Circle Drive 6 From Summit Avenue to
Hillview Drive
Clearview Drive 6 From South Elm Street to
Walnut Street
Cliff Drive 6 From Hillview Drive to Ridge
Road
Colonial Avenue 6 From Allaire Avenue to
Constitution Boulevard
Colonial Avenue 6 From Allaire Avenue to Ohio
Avenue
Constitution Street 6 From Summit Avenue to Ohio
Avenue
Don Street 6 From Wayne Avenue to Allen
Avenue
Dowell Avenue 6 From Elm Street to Bechtel
Street
Eckert Road 6 From Fourteenth Street to
Eckert Road Extension
Eckert Road Extension 6 From Eckert Road to Walnut
Street
Eighth Street 6 From Atlantic Avenue to
Pennsylvania Avenue
Elkhorn Street 6 From Nimick Avenue to Childs
Avenue
Ella Street 6 From Allen Avenue to High
School
§ 225-68 MONACA CODE § 225-68
219:530
Name of Street or
Bridge
Maximum
Gross Weight
(tons) Location
Elm Street 6 From Johnston Avenue to
Marshall Road
Elmira Street 6 From Chestnut Street to
Walnut Street
Fifteenth Street 6 From Atlantic Avenue to
Pennsylvania Avenue
Fifteenth Street 6 From Beaver Avenue to
Fourteenth Street
Fifth Street 6 From Atlantic Avenue to Sixth
Street
Fourteenth Street 6 From Fifteenth Street to
Bechtel Street
Fourth Street 6 From Atlantic Avenue to
Pennsylvania Avenue
Front Street 6 From Howe Avenue to Summit
Avenue
Front Street 6 From Ohio Avenue to Childs
Avenue
Glenn Alley 6 From Marshall Road to Allen
Avenue
Grant Street 6 From Speyer Avenue to Taylor
Avenue
Greiner Street 6 From Wayne Avenue to south
borough line
Grove Street 6 From Wagner Avenue to Taylor
Avenue
Hill Road 6 From Center Road to Cascade
Road
Hillview Drive 6 From Ridge Road to Circle
Drive
Howe Avenue 6 From Front Street to Ridge
Road
Indiana Avenue [Added
11-9-2004 by Ord. No.
879]
10 From the middle of the
intersection of Eighth Street to
the middle of the intersection
of Ninth Street
Indiana Avenue [Added
11-9-2004 by Ord. No.
879]
6 From Fifth Street to the middle
of the intersection of Eighth
Street
§ 225-68 VANDALISM § 225-68
219:531
Name of Street or
Bridge
Maximum
Gross Weight
(tons) Location
Indiana Avenue 6 From Fifth Street to
Seventeenth Street
Indiana Avenue [Added
11-9-2004 by Ord. No.
879]
6 From the middle of the
intersection of Ninth Street to
Seventeenth Street
Jackson Avenue 6 From Marshall Road to
northern terminus of Jackson
Avenue
Johnston Avenue 6 From Elm Street to Walnut
Street
Kaye Avenue 6 From Elm Street to McClellan
Street
Kazar Street 6 From Ash Alley to Bechtel
Street
Kermiet Drive 6 From Bechtel Street Extension
to western terminus of Kermiet
Drive
Linden Street 6 From Wagner Avenue to Elmira
Street
Locust Drive 6 From Chestnut Street to
Walnut Street
Marshall Road 6 From Jackson Avenue to Allaire
Avenue
Marshall Road 6 From Monaca-Center Line to
Allaire Avenue
McClellan Street 6 From Johnston Avenue to south
borough line
McCoy Avenue 6 From Bechtel Street to
McClellan Street
Meadow Avenue 6 From Front Street to Ridge
Road
Nimick Avenue 6 From Front Street to Elkhorn
Street
Oak Road 6 From Center Road to western
terminus to Oak Road
Obney Avenue 6 From McClellan Street to
western terminus of Obney
Avenue
§ 225-68 MONACA CODE § 225-68
219:532
Name of Street or
Bridge
Maximum
Gross Weight
(tons) Location
Ohio Avenue 6 From Front Street to southern
terminus of Ohio Avenue
Park Road 6 From Cherry Alley to Hill Road
Ridge Road 6 From Howe Avenue to Cascade
Road
Sarah Street 6 From Indiana Avenue to
Atlantic Avenue
Seventeenth Street 6 From Pennsylvania Avenue to
Spruce Alley
Sixth Street 6 From Atlantic Avenue to
Pennsylvania Avenue
South Elm Street 6 From Ash Alley to Charlotte
Ann Street
Speyer Avenue 6 From Elm Street to McClellan
Street
Summit Avenue 6 From Front Street to Circle
Drive
Taylor Avenue 6 From Forest Street to
McClellan Street
Taylor Lane 6 From McClellan Street to
western terminus of Taylor
Lane
Tenth Street 6 From Atlantic Avenue to
Pennsylvania Avenue
Tew Street 6 From Center Road to Blaine
Road
Thirteenth Street 6 From Atlantic Avenue to
Pennsylvania Avenue
Twelfth Street 6 From Atlantic Avenue to
Pennsylvania Avenue
Virginia Avenue [Added
11-9-2004 by Ord. No.
879]
6 From Eleventh Street to the
middle of the intersection of
Fifteenth Street
Virginia Avenue 6 From Eleventh Street to
Seventeenth Street
Virginia Avenue [Added
11-9-2004 by Ord. No.
879]
10 From the middle of the
intersection of Fifteenth Street
to the middle of the
intersection of Sixteenth Street
§ 225-68 VANDALISM § 225-68
219:533
Name of Street or
Bridge
Maximum
Gross Weight
(tons) Location
Virginia Avenue [Added
11-9-2004 by Ord. No.
879]
6 From the middle of the
intersection of Sixteenth Street
to Seventeenth Street
Wagner Avenue 6 From Grove Street to
Fourteenth Street
Walnut Street 6 From Johnston Avenue to
Charlotte Ann Street
Washington Avenue
[Added 11-9-2004 by
Ord. No. 879]
10 From the middle of the
intersection of Eighth Street to
the middle of the intersection
of Ninth Street
Washington Avenue
[Added 11-9-2004 by
Ord. No. 879]
10 From the middle of the
intersection of Fifteenth Street
to the middle of the
intersection of Sixteenth Street
Washington Avenue
[Added 11-9-2004 by
Ord. No. 879]
6 From Fifth Street to the middle
of the intersection of Eighth
Street
Washington Avenue 6 From Fifth Street to U.S.
Sanitary Company
Washington Avenue
[Added 11-9-2004 by
Ord. No. 879]
6 From the middle of the
intersection of Ninth Street to
the middle of the intersection
of Fifteenth Street
Washington Avenue
[Added 11-9-2004 by
Ord. No. 879]
6 From the middle of the
intersection of Sixteenth Street
to U.S. Sanitary Company
Wayne Avenue 6 From Charles Street to Don
Street
Welch Avenue 6 From Chestnut Street to
Charles Street
§ 225-69. Schedule XIV: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-21, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below, except at an angle:
§ 225-68 MONACA CODE § 225-69
219:534
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Eleventh Street West All/all From Pennsylvania
Avenue to Virginia
Avenue
Indiana Avenue North a.m./Sunday From Eighth Street to
Ninth Street
Tenth Street West All/all From Pennsylvania
Avenue to Washington
Avenue
Twelfth Street West All/all From Pennsylvania
Avenue to Spruce Alley
Wahl Street West All/all From Pennsylvania
Avenue to Pacific
Avenue
Washington Avenue North a.m./Sunday From Ninth Street to
Eighth Street
§ 225-70. Schedule XV: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-22, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Bechtel Street East From 40 feet south to the corner of
Taylor Avenue
Bechtel Street West From 50 feet southwardly to the
intersection of Allen Avenue and
Bechtel Street
Charles Street East From Bechtel Street to Allen Avenue
Charles Street West From 30 feet northwardly to the
intersection of Charles Street and
Marshall Road
Eleventh Street East From Pennsylvania Avenue to Virginia
Avenue
Ella Street Both From Allen Street to Marshall Street
Fifteenth Street
[Added 12-8-1998 by
Ord. No. 839]
East From Eckert Road to Beaver Avenue
Fifteenth Street
[Added 12-8-1998 by
Ord. No. 839]
West From Fourteenth Street Extension to
Beaver Avenue
§ 225-69 VANDALISM § 225-70
219:535
Name of Street Side Location
Fourteenth Street
[Added 12-8-1998 by
Ord. No. 839]
East From Wagner Avenue to Beech Street
Fourteenth Street
[Added 12-8-1998 by
Ord. No. 839]
West From Elm Street to Fourteenth Street
Extension
Marshall Road North From Bechtel Street to Charles Street
Ninth Street Both From Pacific Avenue to Pennsylvania
Avenue
Pacific Avenue North From 135 feet east to the corner of
Fifteenth Street and Pacific Avenue
Pacific Avenue North From Fourteenth Street to Fifteenth
Street
Pacific Avenue South Beginning at a point 206 feet from the
southwest corner of Fourteenth Street
and Pacific Avenue intersection a
distance of 66 feet
Pacific Avenue South From 30 feet east from the
intersection of Pacific Avenue and
Wahl Street
Pennsylvania Avenue North From Fourteenth Street to Fifteenth
Street
Pennsylvania Avenue North From 40 feet east from the
intersection of Fourteenth Street
Pennsylvania Avenue North From Tenth Street to Twelfth Street
Pennsylvania Avenue North From 30 feet east to the corner of
Tenth Street
Pennsylvania Avenue South Beginning at a point 344 feet from the
southeast corner of Fifteenth Street
and Pennsylvania Avenue intersection
to 21st Street
Pennsylvania Avenue
[Amended 12-8-1998
by Ord. No. 839]
South From Ninth Street to Apple Alley
Pennsylvania Avenue
[Repealed 12-8-1998 by Ord. No. 839]
Pennsylvania Avenue South From 30 feet west to the corner of
Sixth Street
§ 225-70 MONACA CODE § 225-70
219:536
Name of Street Side Location
Pennsylvania Avenue South From 60 feet eastwardly to the
intersection of Twelfth Street and
Pennsylvania Avenue
Pennsylvania Avenue South From Twelfth Street to Fourteenth
Street
Sixth Street West From 35 feet north to the corner of
Pacific Avenue
Tenth Street East From Pennsylvania Avenue to
Washington Avenue
Twelfth Street East From Pennsylvania Avenue to Spruce
Alley
Wahl Street East From Pennsylvania Avenue to Pacific
Avenue
Wahl Street West From 64 feet north to the intersection
of Pacific Avenue and Wahl Street
§ 225-71. Schedule XVI: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-23, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours and on the days specified below upon any of the streets
or parts thereof described below:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Allen Avenue
[Added 10-8-1996
by Ord. No. 824]
South 2:00 p.m. to 3:30
p.m./Mon. through
Fri.
From Ella Street to a
point approximately
278.2 feet in an
easterly direction
Atlantic Avenue South 3:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From Peach Alley to
Ninth Street
Bechtel Street East 9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From Taylor Avenue
to Fourteenth Street
Pennsylvania Avenue South 3:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From Eighth Street
to Ninth Street
§ 225-72. Schedule XVII: Time Limit Parking. [Amended 12-11-2018
by Ord. No. 960]
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon any
of the streets or parts thereof described below, between the hours specified,
for longer than the time indicated below:
§ 225-70 VANDALISM § 225-72
219:537
Name of Street Side
Time Limit
Hours/Days Location
Eleventh Street Both 2 hrs; 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./All days
From Pennsylvania
Avenue to Virginia
Avenue
Ninth Street Both No parking/All
days
From Atlantic
Avenue to
Pennsylvania Avenue
Pennsylvania Avenue Both No Parking 3:00
a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
every day; 2 hour
parking allowed
from 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.
From Sixth Street to
Fifteenth Street
Tenth Street West 2 hrs; 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./All days
From Pennsylvania
Avenue to Maple
Alley
Thirteenth Street Both 2 hrs; 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./All days
From Pennsylvania
Avenue to Virginia
Avenue
Twelfth Street Both 2hrs; 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./All days
From Pacific Avenue
to Pine Alley
Wahl Street Both 2 hrs; 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./All days
From Pennsylvania
Avenue to Pacific
Avenue
Washington Avenue North 2 hrs; 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./All days
From Ninth Street to
Peach Alley
§ 225-73. Schedule XVIII: Special Purpose Parking Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-25, the following are hereby
established as special purpose parking zones:
Name of Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle Location
Ninth Street West No trucks From Washington Avenue
to Maple Alley
§ 225-74. Parking restrictions for street cleaning purposes.
[Amended 9-14-1999 by Ord. No. 842]
Street cleaning routes shall be established and posted restricting parking
as follows:
§ 225-72 MONACA CODE § 225-74
219:538
§ 225-75. Schedule XIX: Snow Emergency Routes.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-53, the following streets or parts
thereof are hereby designated as snow emergency routes:
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 225-76. (Reserved)195
A. First and Second Wards: Monday and Tuesday, 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
as posted.
B. Third, Fourth and Fifth Wards: Wednesday and Thursday, 5:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon, as posted.
C. Ninth Street, Pennsylvania Avenue, Seventeenth Street and Fourteenth
Street: Monday, Wednesday and Friday, 5:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m.
195. Editor’s Note: Former § 225-76, Schedule XX: Metered Parking, was repealed 12-11-2018
by Ord. No. 960.
§ 225-74 VANDALISM § 225-76
219:539
Chapter 227
VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 225. Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 228.
§ 227-1. Operation restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to operate any motor vehicle, including
but not limited to a motorcycle, motorbike, motor scooter, all-terrain vehicle
or snowmobile, upon any private property without the permission of the
owner or owners thereof and on any property owned by the Borough of
Monaca without the permission of the majority of Borough Council.
§ 227-2. Permission to operate on private property required.
Prior to operating any such vehicle as hereinbefore described on private
property, the operator must request and receive the permission of the
owner of the property. Where private property is owned by more than one
person, it shall be insufficient compliance with this section to request and
receive the permission of any one of the owners, if the operator has reason
to know that another owner objects thereto. It is the intent of this section
to prohibit the operation of such off-road vehicle on property owned by
more than one person if any of the owners object, but to permit an operator
who has received permission from one of the owners to presume that the
operator has permission of all the owners unless the operator has reason to
know otherwise.
§ 227-3. Permission to operate on Borough property required.
Prior to operating any such vehicle as hereinbefore described on property
owned by Monaca Borough, the operator must request and receive the
permission of a majority of the Borough Council.
§ 227-4. Trails or other permitted areas.
The Council, by resolution, may establish trails or other places, permitting
the operation of such vehicles as hereinbefore described, on public property
owned by Monaca Borough. Such resolution may limit the operation of such
vehicles to such days of the week, hours of the day or otherwise as the
Council sees fit. Such resolution(s) may also limit the number of vehicles
to be operated at any given time or attach any other condition(s) to the
operation of such vehicles as the Council sees fit.
§ 225-76 MONACA CODE § 227-5
219:540
§ 227-5. Revocation of permission; removal of vehicle.
Any permission granted hereunder may be revoked at the will of the private
property owner of such private property and the will of the Council
respecting public property. Upon request of any owner of private property,
the operator shall immediately remove his/her vehicle from the private
property. Upon request of the Council granting permission to operate the
vehicle on public property, the operator shall immediately remove his/her
vehicle from such public property.
§ 227-6. Operation near residential dwellings.
Irrespective of compliance with the foregoing sections of this chapter, it
shall be unlawful for any person(s) to operate any motor vehicle, including
but not limited to a motorcycle, motorbike, motor scooter, all-terrain vehicle
or snowmobile, upon private property or upon property that is owned by
Monaca Borough that is located within 100 feet of a residential dwelling.
The aforesaid one-hundred-foot restriction shall not apply to a residential
dwelling that is owned by a person who has given his/her permission to
operate a motor vehicle under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 227-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount not less than
$100 and not exceeding $300, together with costs of prosecution.
Chapter 228
VEHICLES, STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Accumulation of vehicles — See Ch. 184, Art.
II.
Storage areas — See Ch. 193.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 225.
§ 227-5 VANDALISM § 227-7
219:541

ARTICLE I
Mercantile Vehicles
[Adopted 6-14-1982 by Res. No. 12-82196]
§ 228-1. Mayor approval to park.
It shall be at the discretion of the Mayor to allow merchants within the
Borough of Monaca, who have obtained a mercantile license and who have
submitted to the Borough proof of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
sales tax licensing and are a registered business as provided by law of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, fictitious name, registered incorporation,
etc., an additional 30 days to park, within the Borough of Monaca, a motor
vehicle not having a current inspection sticker or registration plate. This
shall only affect those vehicles that are parked on private property and in
no way shall affect vehicles parked on any street or any thoroughfare within
the Borough of Monaca.
§ 228-2. Enforcement.
The police shall serve a warning upon said businessman who has submitted
his credentials and documentation to the Borough, and then, after 30 days,
the Borough must take action, and it shall be at the discretion of the Police
Department and its officials.
196. Editor's Note: Section 1 of this resolution provided that "All sections of Ordinance No.
706, Section 3, are hereby ratified." See Ch. 184, Art. II, § 184-13.
§ 228-1 VANDALISM § 228-2
219:543

ARTICLE II
Motor Vehicle Nuisances
[Adopted 9-12-2006 by Ord. No. 891]
§ 228-3. Definitions.
§ 228-4. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or lessee to maintain a motor
vehicle nuisance upon the open private property of such person, owner
or lessee within the Borough of Monaca. A motor vehicle nuisance shall
include any motor vehicle which is unable to move or be moved under its
own power and has any of the following physical defects:
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
LESSEE — Owner, for the purposes of this article, when the lessor or
owner of the property holds the lessee responsible for maintenance and
repairs.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any type of mechanical device, propelled by a
motor, in which persons or property may be transported upon public
streets or highways, and including trailers or semitrailers or any other
thing or device pulled thereby.
NUISANCE — Any condition, structure or improvement which shall
constitute a danger or potential danger to the health, safety or welfare
of the citizens of the Borough of Monaca.
OWNER — The actual owner, agent or custodian of the property on
which motor vehicles are stored, whether individual, partnership,
association or corporation.
PERSON — A natural person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation or other legal entity.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall
include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. One or more broken windshields, mirrors or other glass, with sharp
edges;
B. One or more flat or open tires or tubes which could permit vermin
harborage;
C. A missing door or doors, window or windows, hood, trunk or other body
parts which could permit animal harborage;
D. Any body part(s) with sharp edges, including holes resulting from rust;
E. Missing tire(s) resulting in unsafe suspension of the motor vehicle;
§ 228-3 VANDALISM § 228-4
219:545
§ 228-5. Storage of motor vehicle nuisances permitted; permit
required; fees.
F. Upholstery which is torn or open which could permit animal and/or
vermin harborage;
G. Broken headlamp(s) or taillamp(s), or headlamp(s) and/or taillamp(s)
with sharp edges;
H. Disassembled chassis parts apart from the motor vehicle stored in a
disorderly fashion or loose in or around the vehicle;
I. Protruding sharp objects from the chassis;
J. Broken vehicle frame suspended from the ground in an unstable
manner;
K. Leaking or damaged oil pan or gas tank which could cause fire or
explosion;
L. Exposed battery containing acid;
M. Inoperable locking mechanism for door(s) or trunk;
N. Open or damaged floorboards, including trunk and firewall;
O. Damaged bumper(s) or bumper(s) pulled away from the perimeter of
the vehicle;
P. Broken grill with protruding edges;
Q. Loose or damaged metal trim and/or clips;
R. Broken communication equipment and/or antennae;
S. Suspended or unstable supports; and
T. Such other defects which could threaten the health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the Borough of Monaca.
A. Any person, owner or lessee who has one or more motor vehicle
nuisances as defined in § 228-4 above may store such vehicle(s) in the
Borough of Monaca only in strict compliance with the regulations
provided herein. Such person, owner or lessee must first apply for a
permit for temporary storage and pay a fee of $50 to the Borough of
Monaca pursuant to a resolution of the Borough Council. A temporary
permit shall expire 90 days after the date it is issued. Additional
temporary permits, which also shall expire 90 days after the dates they
are issued, may be issued at the discretion of the Borough of Monaca at
a cost of $10 for each additional permit. The motor vehicle nuisance(s)
must be stored within a garage or other enclosed building or outside
within an opaque fence, to the extent a fence is permitted by zoning or
other Borough ordinances, is at least six feet high and is locked at all
times while unattended.
§ 228-4 MONACA CODE § 228-5
219:546
§ 228-6. Inspection of premises; notice to comply.198
§ 228-7. Authority to remedy noncompliance.
If the owner of property on which motor vehicles are stored does not comply
with the notice to abate the nuisance within the time limit prescribed, the
Borough of Monaca shall have the authority to take measures to correct the
conditions and collect the cost of such corrections, plus 10% of all costs. The
Borough of Monaca, in such event and pursuant to its statutory or otherwise
authorized police powers, shall have the right and power to enter upon the
offending premises to accomplish the foregoing.
§ 228-8. Hearing.
B. With the special approval of the Borough Council, motor vehicle
nuisances may also be stored outside in an area enclosed by a chain link
fence at least six feet high, screened by shrubbery around the
perimeter to the height of the fence, with an unobstructed gate capable
of admitting fire or emergency equipment. Such gate shall remain
locked at all times when unattended. In addition, all gas and oil or other
flammable liquid shall be removed from the motor vehicle, and it shall
be kept free of vermin infestation while being stored. The total area of
storage of motor vehicle nuisances may not exceed 400 square feet.
C. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the storage of motor
vehicle nuisances contrary to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of
the Borough of Monaca.197
A. The police officers of the Borough of Monaca are hereby empowered to
inspect private property on which motor vehicles are stored to
determine if there is compliance with the provisions of this article. If
noncompliance with the provisions of this article constitutes a nuisance,
or if any condition, structure or improvement poses a threat to the
health, safety or welfare of the public, a Monaca Borough police officer
shall issue a written notice to be served by registered or certified mail,
or by personal service, upon the owner of said premises or, if the
owner's whereabouts or identity be unknown, by posting the notice
conspicuously upon the offending premises.
B. Said notice shall specify the condition or structure or improvement
complained of and shall require the owner to commence to remove or
otherwise rectify the condition or structure or improvement as set forth
therein within 10 days of mailing, delivery or posting of said notice and,
thereafter, to fully comply with the requirements of the notice within 30
days.
A. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the police officers may request
and shall then be granted a hearing before the Borough Council,
197. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
198. Editor's Note: A copy of the notice to comply is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 228-5 VANDALISM § 228-8
219:547
§ 228-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, on conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine or not more than $300 and, in default
of payment, to undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 228-10. Remedies not mutually exclusive.
The remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this article, or any
remedy provided by law, shall not be deemed mutually exclusive; rather,
they may be employed simultaneously or consecutively, at the option of the
Borough of Monaca.
§ 228-11. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed, except for provisions of any ordinance, including the
Zoning Ordinance,199 which deal with or regulate fences or fencing.200
provided he files with the Borough of Monaca within 10 days after
notice of the police officer's decision, a written petition requesting such
hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. The
hearing shall commence not later than 30 days after the date on which
the petition was filed unless postponed for sufficient cause.
B. After such hearing the Borough Council shall sustain, modify or
overrule the action of the police officers.
C. If the person filing the appeal desires to have the proceeding reported
by an official court reporter, then the person who files the appeal shall
pay all costs, fees or charges imposed by the official court reporter.
199. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
200. Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Fences, Hedges and Walls.
§ 228-8 MONACA CODE § 228-11
219:548
Chapter 231
WARRANTLESS ARRESTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 50. Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 80.
§ 231-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902, effective January 17, 1996, a police officer
shall upon view have the right of arrest without a warrant, upon probable
cause, when there is ongoing conduct that imperils the personal security of
any person or endangers public or private property.
§ 231-2. Police authority.
If a police officer of the Borough of Monaca has probable cause to believe
that there is a violation of one of the four offenses listed below, that the
defendant's conduct is ongoing, that the conduct constituting the crime
is based upon the police officer's view of the conduct, and if the conduct
imperils the personal security of any person or endangers public or private
property, the officer shall have the right to arrest a defendant without a
warrant.
§ 231-3. Prohibited acts.
These guidelines shall only apply to the following summary offenses,
pursuant to Title 18 Pa.C.S.A.:
§ 231-4. Procedure upon arrest.
Any officer making an arrest under these guidelines shall also follow those
procedures set forth in the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure and in
particular Rule 71, said rule currently providing as follows:
A. Section 5503, Disorderly conduct.
B. Section 5505, Public drunkenness.
C. Section 5507, Obstructing highways and other public passages.
D. Section 6308, Purchase, consumption, possession or transportation of
liquor or malt or brewed beverages.
A. When a defendant has been arrested without a warrant, the defendant
shall be either released from custody pursuant to Subsection B or taken
before the proper issuing authority under Subsection C.
B. Release of defendant.
§ 228-11 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 231-4
231:549
§ 231-5. Amendments to regulations; compliance.
The Council recognizes that Rule 71 and 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902 may be
amended from time to time. It is the intention of the Council that the police
officers follow the terms of the rule or statute that is in effect as of the date
of the arrest, whether or not these guidelines have been formally amended
to comply with any rule or statute changes.
(1) When a defendant has been arrested without a warrant, the
arresting officer may, when the officer deems it appropriate,
promptly release the defendant from custody when the following
conditions have been met:
(a) The defendant is a resident of the commonwealth;
(b) The defendant poses no threat of immediate physical harm to
any other person or to himself or herself;
(c) The arresting officer has reasonable grounds to believe that
the defendant will appear as required; and
(d) The defendant does not demand to be taken before an issuing
authority.
(2) A citation shall be issued to the defendant at the time of release,
and thereafter the case shall proceed in accordance with Rules 55
through 59 as if the proceedings had been instituted by issuing a
citation to the defendant.
C. When the defendant has not been released from custody under
Subsection B, the defendant shall be taken without unnecessary delay
before the issuing authority where a citation shall be filed against the
defendant. The defendant shall be given an immediate trial unless:
(1) The commonwealth is not ready to proceed or the defendant
requests a postponement, and, in either event, the defendant shall
be given the opportunity to deposit collateral for appearance on the
new date and hour fixed for trial; or
(2) The defendant's criminal record must be ascertained before trial as
specifically required by statute for purposes of grading the offense
charged, in which event the defendant shall be given the
opportunity to deposit collateral for appearance on the new date
and hour fixed for trial, which shall be after the issuing authority's
receipt of the required information.
§ 231-4 MONACA CODE § 231-5
231:550
Chapter 233
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Water and sewage assistance program — See
Ch. 237.
Fee schedule — See Ch. A256.
§ 231-5 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 231-5
231:551

ARTICLE I
Water Main Construction and Extension
[Adopted 11-12-1975 as Ch. XXVI, Part 1, of the 1975 Code]
§ 233-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER — Any landowner in the Borough of
Monaca whose property abuts upon the water main or upon that portion of
street which said water main is being constructed.
COMPLETION — The time when the last work necessary for the
construction of the water main and the replacement and resurfacing of the
surface is actually done.
COST OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes all costs of the construction of a
new water main or of the extension of an existing water main and shall
include the cost of excavation, materials, refilling, resurfacing, engineering
expenses and any other expenses necessarily incidental to the construction
of said new water main or the extension of an existing water main.
ESTIMATED COST — The cost of construction of the water main as
estimated by the Borough Engineer of the Borough of Monaca.
§ 233-2. Applicability.
All water mains built in the Borough of Monaca after the effective date of
this article and all extensions of existing water mains shall be constructed
under and pursuant to the terms hereof; provided, however, that water
mains which may be constructed for the benefit of the entire Borough rather
than any particular extension shall not be subject to the provisions hereof.
The question of whether a particular water main is for the benefit of the
Borough as a whole shall be a matter solely within the discretion of the
Council, and its determination of this question shall be final.
§ 233-3. Authority.
New water mains shall be constructed or extensions shall be made to
presently existing water mains whenever, in the opinion of the Council
after consultation with the Borough Engineer, it is necessary for the
accommodation and convenience of the general public and for the health
and welfare of the inhabitants of the Borough of Monaca or any portion
thereof. The determination of the location of said water mains and the
time of construction thereof are matters solely within the discretion of the
Borough Council of the Borough of Monaca.
§ 233-1 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 233-4
231:553
§ 233-4. Cost estimate required.
Before any new water main is constructed in the Borough of Monaca or
any extensions are made, a written estimate of the cost of the proposed
construction shall be furnished by the Borough Engineer to the Council.
§ 233-5. Cost responsibility.
The cost of construction of any water main or the extension of any existing
water main shall be paid in such manner as is set forth in the subsections to
this section:
§ 233-6. Notice of proposed work; billing.
Prior to the construction of any new water main or to any extension of an
existing water main, written notice thereof shall be sent to each abutting
property owner by the Borough Secretary. In addition to said notice, each
property owner shall be furnished with a statement of the estimated cost
and his pro rata share. Payment of the estimated cost shall be due 30 days
after receipt of said notice; provided, however, that any property owner may
pay his share of the estimated cost of construction in monthly installments
over a period not to exceed six months by entering into a written agreement
with the Borough of Monaca for such deferred payments.
A. The cost of construction of any new water main or the extension of any
existing water main shall be borne by the Borough of Monaca as to the
frontage of any lot which now fronts on a street in which is situate a
water main, provided that on said lot is situate a structure which is, as
of the date of this article, tapped into said public water main, also
provided that, in the event said lot has a frontage in excess of 100 feet
on said street in which a new water main or extension of a water main is
being constructed, then the cost to be borne by the Borough of Monaca
shall be for only 100 feet of said frontage.
B. As to any corner lot, the full prorated front-foot basis cost of a water
main first laid along one of the two streets abutting said lot and the full
prorated front-foot basis cost of each foot over and above 100 feet for a
water main laid along the other abutting streets shall be paid by the
abutting property owner.
C. As to any corner lot, that prorated front-foot cost from which the
property owner is exempted by virtue of Subsection B of this section of
this article shall be borne by the Borough of Monaca.
D. As to all property other than that covered by Subsections A, B and C of
this section of this article, the prorated front-foot cost shall be paid by
the abutting property owners. Said front footage shall be determined by
the number of feet said water main measures between the extension of
the property lines of said lot.
§ 233-4 MONACA CODE § 233-7
231:554
§ 233-7. Excess costs; refunds.
After completion of construction, the total actual cost of the water main
shall be determined, and the Borough Secretary shall bill each abutting
property owner for any excess cost over the estimated construction cost
within 30 days. Where any property owner has, on the basis of the estimated
construction cost, paid in excess of his pro rata share of the actual cost,
such excess shall be refunded to him within 30 days after the completion of
the water main.
§ 233-8. Interest; filing of lien.
From and after 30 days following the completion of the water main, each
abutting property owner will be liable for interest at the rate of 6% per
annum on the unpaid balance of his pro rata share of the cost of
construction unless by written agreement with the Borough of Monaca, his
payments are otherwise determined. In the event that full payment of the
cost of the water main is not made within 30 days following completion
thereof or within the time specified by written agreement between the
property owner and the Borough, then the Borough of Monaca may file a
municipal lien for the unpaid balance in the office of the Prothonotary of
the Court of Common Pleas of Beaver County, Pennsylvania, which lien shall
fully describe the premises, give the name of the owner thereof and the
amount of the unpaid construction cost. In addition, said lien may include
an attorney's commission of 10% for collection.
§ 233-7 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 233-8
231:555

ARTICLE II
Tapping
[Adopted 11-12-1975 as Ch. XXVI, Part 2, of the 1975 Code]
§ 233-9. Application and contents; fees. [Amended 10-11-1976 by
Ord. No. 468-A; 12-10-2002 by Ord. No. 863]
A. Every property owner desiring or required to make a connection with
the water supply and distribution system of the Borough of Monaca
shall make an application with the Borough Manager for a permit. The
Manager, upon being satisfied that the proposed water connection shall
be in conformity with this article and all other rules, regulations and
requirements of the Borough of Monaca applicable thereto, shall issue
to the applicant a water tapping permit, upon payment by the applicant
of all applicable and prevailing fees, which shall be for use of the
Borough.
B. Customer facilities.
(1) A customer facilities fee is hereby imposed against each
residential, commercial and industrial unit connected or required
to be connected to the Borough's water supply and distribution
system to cover the costs associated with the installation of
customer-owned facilities from the property line to the unit or
structure to be served. The facilities referred to herein shall not
include the water service line on the customer's property, which
line shall be installed and maintained by and be the responsibility
of the customer. The facilities envisioned herein include the costs of
the inside water meter, the outside remote meter and the labor
costs incurred by the Borough to install them.
(2) The amount of the customer facilities fee shall be set from time to
time by resolution of the Monaca Borough Council.
C. Connection fee.
(1) A connection fee is hereby imposed against each residential,
commercial and industrial unit connected or required to be
connected to the Borough's water distribution system to cover the
cost of the facilities installed by the Borough from the system's
main distribution line to the property line of the property or unit to
be served. A typical installation would include a corporation at the
distribution line and all necessary piping and fittings to bring the
line to the property line or edge of the waterline right-of-way line.
(2) The Borough may choose to waive the imposition of any connection
fees imposable against any person or property owner who installs
and dedicates the facilities connecting the Borough's main water
distribution line to the property line of the property or unit to be
served. The Borough shall be entitled to be reimbursed for the
actual costs of inspecting the facilities.
§ 233-9 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 233-9
231:557
(3) The amount of the connection fee shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the Monaca Borough Council.
D. Tapping fee.
(1) A tapping fee is hereby imposed against each residential,
commercial and industrial unit connected or required to be
connected to the Borough's water distribution system. The purpose
of the tapping fee is to recover the capital cost of the capacity of the
water distribution facilities required to serve each new customer. It
shall have four component parts: capacity component, distribution
component, special purpose component and reimbursement
component. The tapping fee authorized by this article and
promulgated by any resolution adopted pursuant hereto shall not
include the cost of operation and maintenance.
(a) Capacity component. The capacity component shall provide for
cost sharing of general water distribution system facilities built
to supply both existing and future service needs. Such facilities
would include but not be limited to treatment plants, holding
tanks, booster stations, transmission lines and related
appurtenances. This component is restricted to the cost of such
facilities, less any outstanding debt and contributions-in-aid-of
construction.
(b) Distribution component. The distribution component shall be
the amount charged for the cost of distribution facilities such
as waterlines and appurtenances. This component is restricted
to the cost of such facilities, less any contributions-in-aid-of
construction.
(c) Special purpose component. The special purpose component
shall serve as a reimbursement of costs applicable to a
particular group of customers, or serving a particular purpose
or servicing a particular area.
(d) Reimbursement component. The reimbursement component
shall serve to collect tapping fees from new connections to
facilities constructed by parties other than the Borough (i.e.,
developers). This component shall apply to waterline
extensions made by a developer, which serve or can serve
homes outside the development. Therefore, where a property
owner or developer constructs or causes to be constructed at
his expense any extension of the water distribution system of
the Borough, the Borough shall provide for the reimbursement
to the property owner or developer when the owner of another
property not in the development for which the extension was
constructed connects a service line directly to the extension
within 10 years of the date of the dedication of the extension to
the Borough in accordance with the following provisions:
§ 233-9 MONACA CODE § 233-9
231:558
[1] Such reimbursement shall be equal to the distribution or
collection part of each tapping fee collected as a result of
subsequent connections. The Borough shall be entitled to
deduct from each reimbursement payment an amount
equal to 5% which shall be deemed to represent the
appropriate charge for administrative expenses and
services rendered in calculating, collecting, monitoring
and disbursing the reimbursement payments to the
property owner or developer entitled thereto.
[2] Reimbursement shall be limited to those lines which have
not previously been paid for by the Borough.
[3] The Borough shall, in the preparation of the necessary
reimbursement agreement with the property owner or
owners or developer(s) for whose benefit reimbursement
will be provided, attach as an exhibit an itemized listing of
all sewer facilities for which reimbursement shall be
provided.
[4] The total reimbursement to which a property owner or
owners or developer(s) shall be entitled shall not exceed
the cost of all labor and material, engineering design
charges, the cost of performance and maintenance bonds,
Borough review and inspection charges, as well as flushing
and televising charges and any and all charges involved in
the acceptance and dedication of such facilities by the
Borough, less the amount which would be chargeable to
such property owner or developer based upon the
Borough's collection and distribution tapping fees which
would be applicable to all lands of the property owner or
developer served directly or indirectly through such
extension if the property owner or developer did not fund
the extension.
[5] The Borough shall be required to notify by certified mail,
to their last known address, the property owner or owners
or developer(s) for whose benefit such reimbursement
shall apply within 30 days of the Borough's receipt of any
such reimbursement payment. In the event that the
property owner(s) or developer(s) have not claimed a
reimbursement payment within 120 days of the mailing of
the notice, the payment shall revert to and become the
sole property of the Borough with no further obligation on
the part of the Borough to refund the payment to the
property owner(s) or developer(s).
(2) The amount of the tapping fee as comprised by its four component
parts shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Monaca
Borough Council.
§ 233-9 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 233-9
231:559
§ 233-10. Prior payment of fee required; supervision.
No permit shall be issued by the Borough Secretary and no connection shall
be made into or with any of said water mains until the license fee has been
paid. All connections made with any of said public water mains shall be
under the supervision and direction of the Street Commission.
§ 233-11. Attachment or connection to waterline leading to main.
No person or persons who have obtained a permit and/or made connection
with a Borough water main shall permit any other person to make an
attachment or connection with his, her or their waterline leading into said
water main.
§ 233-12. Size of tap.
All connections made to any water main shall be by three-fourths-inch taps
except by special permission of the Council.
§ 233-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-12-1975 by Ord.
No. 662; 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
Any person or persons, partnership, firm or corporation connecting a line
to any water main of the Borough of Monaca or to any line leading to a
water main of the Borough of Monaca without having received a permit
and paid the license fee therefor or permitting any other person or persons,
partnership, firm or corporation to make such attachment or connection,
shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, for each and every such
violation, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Code
Enforcement.
E. Fee schedule. The fee schedule appearing in Chapter A256 of the Code
of the Borough of Monaca shall be amended to reflect any fees imposed
by any resolutions adopted pursuant to the authority granted by this
article.
§ 233-9 MONACA CODE § 233-13
231:560
ARTICLE III
Rates and Regulations
[Adopted 11-12-1975 as Ch. XXVI, Part 3, of the 1975 Code]
§ 233-14. Meters required.
All persons, partnerships, firms, corporations and others using water from
the water mains of said Borough, whether for household, manufacturing or
other purposes whatsoever, shall be and they are hereby required to meter
the same.
§ 233-15. Service contracts required. [Amended 11-13-1990 by Ord.
No. 790]
Before any water shall be used from the water mains of said Borough and
before sewage services shall be supplied a contract in writing therefor
shall be signed by the owner of the property where the water and sewers
are to be used and by the tenant or occupant of the same, the form of
which contract, setting forth the rules, regulations, rates and specifications,
shall be obtained from the Borough Secretary/Manager. Any consumer of
Borough water and sewage services who has not signed such a contract at
the time of the effective date of this article is hereby required to sign such
contract or suffer the penalty imposed in § 233-44 hereof.
§ 233-16. Waiver of right to file lien.
Nothing contained in this article shall in any way be construed as a waiver
of the right of the Borough to file a lien against a property to which water
is supplied by the Borough for unpaid water rates or other charges made in
connection with the supplying of water, but, on the contrary, the Borough
expressly reserves said right and hereby declares the same to be a lien
against the particular property to which water or service is furnished by the
Borough, as provided by the Acts of Assembly in such cases specified.
§ 233-17. Meters to be furnished by Borough; charge when meter
fails.
Meters will be furnished by the Water Department or by a plumber carrying
meters standardized by the Borough, at the expense of the property owner
(payable on making application for a meter). If a meter gets out of order
or fails to register, the consumer will be charged at the average daily
consumption as shown by the meter when it was in order, but in no case will
the charge be less than the minimum charge per quarter.
§ 233-18. Reporting of defective meter; repair and replacement.
A. If a meter gets out of order and fails to register, the owner or tenant
must immediately notify the Borough Secretary, whose duty it is to
report the same to the Superintendent of the Water Department. The
Superintendent of the Water Department will repair the meter. Should
§ 233-14 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 233-18
231:561
§ 233-19. Sealing of and tampering with meters.
All meters shall be sealed by the Superintendent of the Water Department
or such other person as the Borough Council shall designate, and no seal on
any meter shall be broken or in any way changed by any person other than
said Superintendent or other such duly designated person, under penalty
imposed by § 233-44 hereof.
§ 233-20. Quarterly meter reading and billing.
Meters will be read at the end of each quarter, ending with the last week
of March, June, September and December of each year, and bills shall be
rendered for the minimum charge for the quarter, together with excess
charge, if any.
§ 233-21. Residential, commercial and industrial water rates.
[Amended 10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 340-A; 12-27-1979 by Ord. No.
719; 3-10-1980 by Ord. No. 739; 12-8-1986 by Ord. No. 771]
any necessary repair be due to damage by frost or injury due to
carelessness of the owner, consumer or anyone of his household, a
charge of actual cost of labor and material required to put the meter in
repair, payable in advance, will be made for repairs.
B. No plumber or any other than an authorized agent of the Water
Department shall at any time be allowed to take out, repair or replace a
meter.
C. Ordinary meter repairs will be made at the expense of the Borough,
except in the case of meters larger than 5/8 by 3/4 inches. In the latter
case, repairs will be made at actual cost of parts.
A. Residential, commercial and industrial consumers. [Amended
12-10-1996 by Ord. No. 825; 6-10-1997 by Ord. No. 828; 9-8-1998
by Ord. No. 838; 9-25-2001 by Ord. No. 855; 12-11-2007 by Ord.
No. 903; 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 925; 12-27-2012 by Ord. No.
930; 12-23-2014 by Ord. No. 941201; 12-28-2015 by Ord. No. 946]
(1) The water rates for residential and commercial consumers shall be
billed quarterly; consumption will be billed as follows:
(a) For 4,000 gallons or less each quarter year, the minimum
charge shall be $69, plus penalty, if applicable.
(b) From 4,001 gallons through 150,000 gallons per quarter year,
the charge shall be $0.75 per 100 gallons, plus penalty, if
applicable, in addition to the minimum charge.
201. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 1-1-2015.
§ 233-18 MONACA CODE § 233-21
231:562
(c) For each 100 gallons over 150,000 gallons per quarter year,
the charge shall be $0.575, plus penalty, if applicable, in
addition to the minimum charge.
(d) A penalty of 10% of the minimum charge shall be added to the
minimum charge in full on or before the 10 days after the due
date of the bill for same.
(2) The water rates for industrial consumers shall be billed monthly;
consumption will be billed as follows:
(a) For 4,000 gallons or less per month, the minimum charge shall
be $69, plus penalty, if applicable.
(b) From 4,001 gallons through 150,000 gallons per month, the
charge shall be $0.75 per 100 gallons, plus penalty, if
applicable, in addition to the minimum charge.
(c) For each 100 gallons over 150,000 gallons per month, the
charge shall be $0.575, plus penalty, if applicable, in addition
to the minimum charge.
(d) A penalty of 10% of the minimum charge shall be added to the
minimum charge in full on or before 10 days after the due date
of the bill for same.
B. Private fire rates.
(1) For all private fire service, the following yearly charge will be
made:
Size of Tap Street Main
(inches) Fee per Annum
1 1/2 $114
2 $165
4 $213
6 $378
8 $645
10 $948
12 $1,269
(2) All private fire hydrants, sprinkling systems or hose connections
shall be on separate and independent lead lines connected directly
to the Borough of Monaca's water mains.
C. Water used from meter hydrants.
(1) The deposit required for meter and setup shall be $400.
(2) The setup charge shall be $15.
§ 233-21 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 233-21
231:563
§ 233-22. Combined water and sewer billing; effect of failure to pay.
All charges due for the consumption of water furnished by the Borough of
Monaca shall be combined with the sewer rental charge due from the water
consumer, as is provided for in the Act of 1949, April 14, P.L. 482, Section 3,
as amended.202 The charge due for the water consumption and the charge
due for sewer rental shall both be for the same period of calendar days.
The charge due for water shall be shown separately from the charge due
for sewer rental, but the two charges shall be considered one bill. Failure to
pay the combined charge shall be construed as failure to pay for the charge
for water.
§ 233-23. Due date; failure to pay; restoration of service.
All charges as shown on the bill for the combined water consumption and
sewer rental shall be paid in full each quarter year on or before 30 days
after the date of the bill for the same. The Borough Council of the Borough
of Monaca does hereby delegate to the Borough Manager of the Borough of
Monaca the authority to shut off the supply of water of persons delinquent
in payment of charges. Said Borough Manager is hereby directed by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Monaca that he shall shut off the supply
of water to persons who do neglect or fail to pay for a period of 30 or more
days from the date of the bill for the same charge as stated on said bill. A
service charge of $5 shall be due for shutting off and turning on water. The
water supply so turned off shall not be turned on until all delinquent water
payment, plus lawful interest from the date of shutting off of water plus said
service charges, are paid in full.
§ 233-24. Access to premises.
The Superintendent or other proper agent of the Water Department shall
have access to the premises of a consumer at all reasonable hours for the
purpose of inspecting the meter or service line, reading meters, removing
the same for repair or making any changes or alterations therein deemed
necessary for the efficient operation thereof and likewise for the purpose of
sealing, resealing or changing the seals of said water meters.
§ 233-25. Furnishing and inspection of stop cock, key and curb box.
Upon the signing of the proper application blanks, the Water Department
will, at a cost of $6 to be paid when the application is made, furnish a
three-fourths-inch or one-inch corporation stop cock and will furnish to the
owner a roundway inverted key curb cock and curb box and will inspect,
in accordance with the Department's specifications, the line from the main
to the meter stop and waste. The corporation stop cock is to remain the
property of the Borough.
(3) A charge of $1 per 1,000 gallons used will be billed.
202. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 2261.
§ 233-21 MONACA CODE § 233-26
231:564
§ 233-26. Application for service attachments.
All applications for the service attachments to the distributing pipes for the
purpose of introducing water into any premises must be made by the owner
of the same.
§ 233-27. Unauthorized tapping prohibited; laying of service line.
No person, other than the properly authorized agent of the Water
Department, shall be permitted to tap or make any connections with the
main or distributing pipes. The service line from the main to the meter must
be laid by the owner in accordance with the specifications of the Water
Department, hereinafter set forth.
§ 233-28. Separate service pipes, stop cocks and curb boxes.
Each building must be supplied by independent service pipes from the
main. In case of a double house, where a single service pipe supplies
the double house, each apartment must be provided with separate and
distinct stop cocks and curb boxes, and each domestic consumer shall be
provided with a separate lock stop or other device which will enable the
Water Department to shut off an offending consumer without affecting a
nonoffending consumer.
§ 233-29. Responsibility for maintenance; frost protection.
Owners of property supplied with water must keep their service pipes and
all fixtures connected therewith in good repair and protected from frost at
their own expense.
§ 233-30. Restrictions.
No person shall without authority from the Water Department turn on or
off any street valve, stop cock, service cock or other street connection or
connect or disconnect any meter and for so doing shall be liable to the
penalty provided by law and § 233-44 of this article.
§ 233-31. Liability for damage from temporary shutoff.
The Borough will endeavor to keep an adequate supply of water in their
mains at all times, but the water is furnished to the consumers upon
express condition that, if for any unavoidable cause or for the purpose of
making connections or for any other reason whatsoever, the water shall
be temporarily shut off, no damages shall in any event be claimed by any
person or persons, whether they shall be consumers or nonconsumers of
water from the mains of this Borough.
§ 233-32. Supplying water to other premises.
No owner or occupant of any building or other premises in which the water
has been introduced will be allowed to supply the owner or occupant of
§ 233-26 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 233-32
231:565
any other building or other premises. If found doing so, the supply will be
stopped and the amount of payment forfeited.
§ 233-33. Additional violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1996
by Ord. No. 822]
Any person who acts or willfully procures another person to act on his
behalf in such manner as to violate § 233-19, which § 233-19 prohibits
unauthorized breaking of the seal on the water meter or violates § 233-30,
which § 233-30 prohibits the unauthorized turning off or turning on of the
street connection or the unauthorized turning off or turning on of the meter
connection in the municipal water system, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine as set forth in § 233-44, Violations and penalties.
§ 233-34. Failure to pay.
Any person not paying a valid fine imposed under the provisions of § 233-44,
as amended, within 30 days after such fine is effected shall be subject to
having his water service terminated until such fine and the costs incurred
therewith has been paid in full.
§ 233-35. Property owners required to make deposits. [Amended
12-27-1979 by Ord. No. 719; 11-13-1990 by Ord. No. 790]
§ 233-36. Specifications.
A. An owner of real estate in the Borough of Monaca shall be responsible
for water and/or sewer fees incurred by his tenants. The owner shall,
upon application and before water is turned on to the premises which
he or she owns, be required to deposit with the Borough Secretary a
sum of not less than $150 or such larger sum as may be deemed
expedient in the judgment of the Borough Manager, which sum shall be
retained as security for water and/or sewer fees. It being specifically
declared that the money deposited shall not be construed as payment of
water and/or sewer fees so as to prohibit shutting off water for failure to
pay such fees but that the money so deposited shall be held for the
specific purpose of being security for unpaid fees remaining after the
tenant has vacated the premises. Any deposit in excess of such unpaid
water and/or sewer fees will be refunded to the property owner if he
claims the same within 60 days after the premises is vacated for which
such deposit was made. Any delinquent water and/or sewer fees in
excess of the deposit of $150 shall be paid to the Borough of Monaca by
the property owner within 10 days of notice by the Borough Manager.
B. The Borough of Monaca Water Department shall make every possible
effort to notify the owner of the rental property, in addition to the
tenant, a minimum of 15 days in advance of the scheduled termination
date.
A. All taps will be three-fourths-inch or one-inch, except by special
permission and at additional cost.
§ 233-32 MONACA CODE § 233-36
231:566
(1) Corporation cock. The Water Department will furnish the
corporation stop cock.
(2) Curb cock. The Water Department will furnish to the owner or his
representatives the three-fourths-inch or one-inch curb cock.
Special sizes will be furnished when requirements demand it.
(3) Curb box.
(a) The curb box shall be placed in accordance with the following
regulations:
[1] When the water main is in the alley, the curb box shall be
between the main and the property line and approximately
nine inches outside of the property line.
[2] When the water main is under the near sidewalk, the curb
box shall be placed between the sidewalk and the property
line and approximately nine inches outside of the property
line.
[3] When the curbline is between the water main and the
property line, the curb box is to be placed approximately
nine inches from the curbline toward the property line.
The top of the curb box must in no case be covered but
always exposed so as to make it easily accessible.
(b) The curb box must be located over the center of the core of the
curb cock and must be placed and fixed in position in the
presence of the Superintendent of the Water Department.
B. Meter connections.
(1) The meter must be placed just inside of the building where the line
enters and must be in a place where it is not liable to freeze, or it
must be properly protected from freezing.
(2) As the line enters the building there must be a three-fourths- or
one-inch stop and waste, with the opening upwards for attaching
the inlet end of the meter.
(3) A three-fourths-inch opening, with female thread, must be provided
12 inches from and directly in line with the stop waste, to attach
the outlet end of the meter. This connection must be flexible
enough to make it easy to insert the meter.
C. Service line.
(1) The service line from the main to the curb box must be threefourths-
inch or one-inch pipe, what is known to the trade as "double
extra-heavy lead pipe" or "Type K soft-copper pipe."
§ 233-36 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 233-36
231:567
§ 233-37. Condemnation of meters authorized.
The Superintendent of the Water Department or any other duly authorized
representative of said Department is hereby authorized to condemn any
meter used by any consumer of the Borough of Monaca Water system when,
in his opinion, such meter cannot be economically repaired.
§ 233-38. Responsibility for meter replacement.
When the Superintendent of the Water Department or his authorized
representative shall determine that any meter should be condemned, such
meter shall be replaced by the Borough of Monaca at no expense to the
consumer; provided, however, that this section shall not apply if the
condition of the meter results from the negligence of the consumer or abuse
of the meter by the consumer in any manner; and provided, further, that this
section shall not in any manner affect meters in excess of 5/8 inches by 3/4
inches in size.
§ 233-39. Repairs required prior to removal of meter; notice.
Upon instructions from the Superintendent of the Water Department of the
necessity for such action, the Borough Secretary shall notify any property
owner or consumer of necessary repairs to his waterlines in and about
the meter so that such meter may be safely removed for the purpose of
repairing it. If the property owner or consumer fails to make the repairs
within 10 days after such notice, the Water Department may shut off the
water and remove said meter to make the necessary repairs.
(2) The service line from the curb to the meter may be double extraheavy
lead, Byers wrought-iron pipe or Type K soft-copper pipe at
the option of the property owner.
(3) When water is to be used for temporary purposes or where extra
large service line is required, special arrangements will be made as
to the service line pipe.
(4) The service line must be laid in the bottom of a ditch not less than
3 1/2 feet below the ground surface at any point.
D. Workmanship. All workmanship must be first class in every respect.
E. Inspection and test. The owner or his representative must notify the
Borough Secretary when the service line is complete from main to
meter, ready for inspection and test. The Secretary will then send a
representative to inspect and test the line.
F. The service line must be left in an exposed condition until after the test
and inspection are made.203
203. Editor's Note: Original Section 64, regarding the Water Department and Superintendent,
which immediately followed this section, was deleted 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 882.
§ 233-36 MONACA CODE § 233-40
231:568
§ 233-40. Minimum water rate applies to each unit.
Each separate house, apartment or other dwelling or separately occupied
unit shall be deemed a separate consumer of water, and each shall be
required to pay no less than the minimum rate for the consumption of water
as set forth in Article III, § 233-21, governing water rates.
§ 233-41. Individual meter required in each unit; exception.
In all cases of new construction or in the remodeling of an old structure,
each house, apartment or separate dwelling unit must be individually
metered unless the same person or persons occupy more than one unit.
§ 233-42. Rented garages to be separately metered.
All garages rented to someone other than the occupant of the house located
on said premises shall be considered a separate unit for the purpose of
metering and payment for water service rendered by the Borough of
Monaca.
§ 233-43. Use of water in air-conditioning equipment.
No consumer, commercial or residential, who purchases water from the
Borough of Monaca shall use such water for any air-conditioning or aircooling
system except an air-conditioning or air-cooling system of a type
which permits constant reuse and recirculation of the water and does not
discharge the water as waste.
§ 233-44. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-12-1975 by Ord.
No. 661; 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 822]
Any person or persons, partnership, firm or corporation violating any
provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Code Enforcement.
§ 233-40 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 233-44
231:569
Chapter 237
WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 177. Water — See Ch. 233.
§ 237-1. Creation.
A water and sewage assistance program is hereby created to provide
financial assistance with water and sewage bills to individuals and families
residing in the Borough of Monaca.
§ 237-2. Operation of program.
Water and sewage customers will be asked to voluntarily contribute an
additional $1 on their quarterly water and quarterly sewage bills.
Contributions received will be accounted for in accordance with generally
accepted accounting procedures and placed by the Borough of Monaca in
an account titled "Water and Sewage Assistance Program." Said account
shall be with one of the depositories authorized and designated by the
Borough of Monaca to hold and maintain funds of the Borough of Monaca.
The depository shall provide insurance through either the F.D.I.C. or
F.S.L.I.C. Contributions received shall be used solely for providing financial
assistance to qualified applicants requesting financial assistance with their
water and/or sewage bills and for no other purpose.
§ 237-3. Application for financial assistance.
Any person residing in the Borough of Monaca who receives water and
sewage services supplied by said Borough shall be eligible to make
application for financial assistance from the Water and Sewage Assistance
Program on a form prescribed by the Board of Review, subject to the
approval, by resolution, of the Council of the Borough of Monaca. The
application shall require the applicant, inter alia, to state the applicant's
and/or applicant family's income and expenses, provide reasonable
documented proof of said income and expenses, sign the application and
verify that the statements made and information provided are true and
correct subject to the penalties provided in 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904 relating to
unsworn falsifications made to authorities.
§ 237-4. Creation of Board of Review.
A Board of Review is hereby created, the membership of which shall consist
of the President of the Borough Council, the Borough Chairman of the
Council Water Committee, Manager/Secretary and two residents of the
Borough of Monaca who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of
the Borough Council.
§ 233-44 MONACA CODE § 237-5
237:570
§ 237-5. Organization of Board.
The President of the Borough Council shall serve as the Chairman of the
Board of Review. The Water Committee Chairman shall serve as the Vice
Chairman of the Board of Review. For the taking of any action, a quorum
shall not be less than a majority of all the members of the Board.
§ 237-6. Review of application.
The Board of Review shall review all applications submitted, determine
the applicant's eligibility for assistance and thereafter grant or deny the
application.
§ 237-7. Eligibility for assistance.
§ 237-8. Payment of assistance.
§ 237-9. Eligibility review.
Every person's eligibility to receive financial assistance from the Water and
Sewage Assistance Program shall be determined on the application filed.
Payment on behalf of individuals whose applications have been granted
shall be made on a one-time basis.
A. Guidelines shall be established and used by the Board of Review and
the Council of the Borough of Monaca in determining eligibility and the
granting of assistance. The guidelines shall be established according to
the standards adopted by the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development for low- and moderate-income individuals.
B. The eligibility guidelines may be amended from time to time by
resolution of the Council of the Borough of Monaca.
C. Each applicant for assistance shall be provided with a list of the
eligibility guidelines upon the making of an application.
A. Upon the granting of an application for assistance, payment will be
made from the Water and Sewage Assistance Program account to the
order of the Borough of Monaca, and the applicant's water or sewage
bill will be credited accordingly.
B. The amount of assistance to be granted each applicant shall be
determined by the Board of Review.
C. The Board of Review shall prepare guidelines, subject to the approval of
the Council of the Borough of Monaca by resolution, to be used in
determining the amount of assistance to be given an applicant.
§ 237-5 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 237-10
237:571
§ 237-10. Monthly reports.
The Board of Review shall present an accounting of the receipts and
expenditures of the Water and Sewage Assistance Program account at the
regular monthly meeting of the Council of the Borough of Monaca.
Chapter 245
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Business District Authority — See Ch. 9, Art.
I.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 46.
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 76.
Building construction — See Ch. 92.
Fences, hedges and walls — See Ch. 120.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 131.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 157.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 169.
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 199.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
210.
Fee schedule — See Ch. A256.
§ 237-10 MONACA CODE § 237-10
237:572
ARTICLE I
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 245-1. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted or defined as follows:
§ 245-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated:
ACCESSORY STORAGE BUILDING — An accessory structure on a
residential lot used for the storage of personal property owned by the
residents of the dwelling to which it is accessory.[Added 9-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 918]
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same lot
with and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal
use or structure.
ADJACENT; ADJOINING — Sharing common property lines uninterrupted
by any alley, public street or private street right-of-way.[Added 9-28-2010
by Ord. No. 918]
ADULT BOOKSTORE — Any commercial establishment in which is offered
for sale as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade
videocassettes, movies, books, magazines or other periodicals or other
media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on nudity
or sexual conduct or on activities which if presented in live presentation
would constitute adult entertainment.204
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
B. Words used in the singular shall include the plural.
C. The word "person" includes a corporation, partnership or association as
well as an individual.
D. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel."
E. The terms "shall" and "will" are always mandatory.
F. The word "may" is permissive.
G. The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall
be construed to include the words "intended," "arranged" or "designed"
to be used or occupied.
H. The word "building" includes the word "structure."
I. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally.
204. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 76, Adult Entertainment.
§ 245-1 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-2
237:573
ADULT BUSINESS — An adult bookstore, commercial movie theater or
movie house, or other adult entertainment as defined herein. In the event
that an activity or business which might fall under a use category other than
adult business is combined with and/or includes activities which constitute
an adult bookstore, adult movie theater or movie house or adult
entertainment as defined herein, then such activity or business shall
constitute an adult business and shall be governed by those provisions in
this chapter applicable to any other use category.205
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — A commercial establishment providing, either
as a sole use or in connection with or in addition to other uses,
entertainment consisting of the use of nudity or of live dancing, posing,
displaying, acting or other live presentation or use of persons whose actions
are distinguished or characterized by emphasis on use of the human body in
a manner intended to or resulting in arousal of sexual excitation or sexual
titillation or a prurient interest or intended to or resulting in producing
lustful emotions.206
ADULT MOVIE THEATER OR MOVIE HOUSE (including ADULT MINITHEATERS)
— Any commercial movie theater which on a regular continuing
basis shows films rated X by the Motion Picture Coding Association of
America, or any movie theater which presents for public viewing on a
regular, continuing basis so-called "adult films" depicting sexual conduct, as
defined by this chapter.207
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural part; in the existing facilities; or in the
enlargement, whether by extending a side or by increasing the height; or
the moving from one location to another.
ANTENNA, STANDARD — A device, partially or wholly exterior to a
building, that is used for receiving and/or transmitting short-wave or
citizens band radio frequencies or for receiving television, radio or similar
frequencies, but not including a satellite dish antenna or a commercial
communications antenna. This includes any accessory supporting
structures.208
APARTMENT IN COMBINATION WITH BUSINESS — A dwelling unit
located in the same building with a business or professional office and/or
retail store.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
AREA, NET FLOOR — As applied to off-street parking, the area used or
intended for services to the public as customers, patrons, clients or tenants,
including areas occupied for fixtures and equipment used for display or sale
of merchandise. Floor areas may be excluded which are used exclusively
for storage, housing of mechanical equipment integral with the building,
205. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 76, Adult Entertainment.
206. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 76, Adult Entertainment.
207. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 76, Adult Entertainment.
208. Editor's Note: The former definitions of "behavioral disability" and "billboard," which
immediately followed this definition, were repealed 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918.
§ 245-2 MONACA CODE § 245-2
237:574
for maintenance facilities or for those areas so restricted that customers,
patients, clients, salesmen and the general public are denied access.
ARTERIAL STREET — See "street, arterial."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord.
No. 918]
BAKERY, COMMERCIAL — A retail or wholesale establishment which sells
baked goods to businesses and which may sell to the general public and
which involves on-site processing of baked goods, either for sale on the
premises and/or for delivery to other retail or wholesale outlets.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
BAKERY, RETAIL — A retail establishment which sells baked goods and
confections to businesses and the general public, and which may involve onsite
processing of the goods offered for sale on the premises, but which shall
not include on-site processing of goods for delivery to other retail stores or
wholesale businesses.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
BAR or TAVERN — A business, licensed by the commonwealth, that sells
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises as the principal use
and that may offer food for consumption on the premises as an accessory
use.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A dwelling that is the principal residence of the
operator where no more than four sleeping rooms are offered to transient
overnight guests for compensation and where the only meal served and
included with the overnight accommodations is breakfast.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
BEVERAGE DISTRIBUTOR — A commercial business licensed by the
commonwealth to sell beer in quantity entirely for off-premises consumption
and which may include the sale of other beverages, snacks, ice and party or
picnic supplies.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN TRAILS — A paved or unpaved pathway
located within an easement or dedicated right-of-way used for walking or
traveling by bicycle for exercise or recreation where motorized vehicles are
prohibited except for emergency vehicles or maintenance vehicles.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
BUILDING LINE — An imaginary line located a fixed distance from the
street right-of-way line and interpreted as being the nearest point that a
building may be constructed to the street right-of-way. The building line
shall limit the location of porches, patios and similar construction, steps
excepted, to the face of this line.
BUILDING or STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected with a fixed
location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings,
mobile homes, walls, fences, billboards and poster panels.
BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL OFFICES — Any office of recognized
professions such as doctors, lawyers, architects, engineers, real estate
brokers, insurance agents and others who, through training, are qualified
to perform services of a professional nature and other offices used primarily
for accounting, corresponding, research, editing or other administrative
§ 245-2 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-2
237:575
functions, but not including banks or other financial institutions.[Amended
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
BUSINESS SERVICES — Establishments engaged in providing services
to business offices on a fee or contract basis, including, but not limited
to: advertising and public relations; management and consulting services;
employment services; building security and maintenance services;
equipment servicing, rental/leasing and sales; computer and data
processing services; mailing, photocopying, quick printing and fax services;
sale of office supplies; and similar business services, but not including the
rental, sale or repair of vehicles or heavy equipment.[Added 9-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 918]
CANDY OR ICE CREAM STORE — See "store, candy or ice cream."[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
CARRY-OUT RESTAURANT — See "restaurant, carry-out."[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
CHURCH — A building or buildings, other than a dwelling, used primarily
as a place of worship on a regular basis by a religious denomination that
may also include, as accessory uses: rooms for religious education, social
and recreational activities and administrative offices, rectories, parsonages,
convents, preschool programs and elderly or child day-care centers.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLES — The triangular area formed by two
intersecting street center lines interconnecting points established on each
center line, 75 feet from their point of intersection. This entire area is to
remain clear of obstructions to sight above a plane established 3 1/2 feet in
elevation from grade level at the intersection of the street center line.
CLINIC, MEDICAL — See "medical clinic."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
CLINIC, VETERINARY — See "veterinary clinic."[Added 9-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 918]
COLLECTOR STREET — See "street, collector."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord.
No. 918]
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY — Land use resulting from engagement in a
business, enterprise, activity or other undertaking for a profit.
COMMERCIAL BAKERY — See "bakery, commercial."[Added 9-28-2010
by Ord. No. 918]
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS TOWER/ANTENNA — A structure,
partially or wholly exterior to a building, used for transmitting or
retransmitting electronic signals, such as but not limited to antenna used
for transmitting commercial radio or television signals or cellular telephone
communications. This shall not include a standard antenna.
COMMERCIAL INDOOR RECREATION — See "recreation, commercial
indoor."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
§ 245-2 MONACA CODE § 245-2
237:576
COMMERCIAL LAUNDRY OR DRY-CLEANING PLANT — A business
establishment where clothing is cleaned using chemical solvents or washed
utilizing commercial equipment to accommodate large quantities of clothes
that are picked up from and returned to one or more dry-cleaning pickup
stores, as defined herein.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR RECREATION — See "recreation, commercial
outdoor."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
COMMERCIAL SCHOOL — See "school, commercial."[Added 9-28-2010
by Ord. No. 918]
COMMISSION, PLANNING — The legally appointed Planning Commission
of the Borough of Monaca.209
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any structure designed for transmitting
or receiving wireless communications of video, voice, data and similar
transmissions, including, but not limited to: omnidirectional or whip
antennas, directional or panel antennas and satellite or microwave dish
antennas that may be mounted on an existing building, an existing public
utility storage or transmission structure or an existing communications
tower, excluding transmission and receiving devices licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) exclusively for private use by
citizens.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any structure, whether freestanding or
attached to a building, designed to support multiple communications
antennas, including monopole, self-supporting and guyed towers and one
or more of the following mounts for antennas: rotatable platform, fixed
platform, multipoint or side-arm mounts and pipe mounts for microwave
dish antennas.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
COMPARABLE USE NOT SPECIFICALLY LISTED — A use which is not
specifically listed in a particular zoning district, but which is determined
by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the express standards
and criteria set forth in this chapter to be similar in characteristics and
impact to another use which is specifically listed in the same zoning district
as a permitted use, conditional use or use by special exception.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
COMPLETELY ENCLOSED BUILDING — A building designed and
constructed so that all exterior walls shall be solid from the ground to the
roofline, containing no openings except for windows and doors that are
designed so that they may be closed and any other small openings required
for the ventilation system.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Comprehensive Plan for the Borough of
Monaca, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to the provisions in Article VII.
209. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 46, Planning Commission.
§ 245-2 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-2
237:577
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or structure,
and/or any part thereof, including the placement of a mobile home or
modular home.
CONTRACTING BUSINESS — The administrative offices of a business that
provides landscaping, construction, remodeling, home improvement, land
development and related services on a contractual basis and that may
include the storage of materials, equipment and vehicles.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
CONVENIENCE STORE — See "store, convenience."[Added 9-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 918]
CONVERSION APARTMENT — See Subsection A under "dwelling
type."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
CREMATORIUM — An establishment containing the equipment necessary
to cremate or reduce to ashes human remains of the deceased.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
CUSTOM PRINT SHOP — An establishment engaged in offset printing,
photolithographing or similar techniques used to produce T-shirts, greeting
cards, invitations, business cards, calendars, mugs and similar promotional
items according to special designs requested by the customer.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility, licensed by the commonwealth, for the
care, on a regular basis, during part of a twenty-four-hour day of more than
six clients which may include children under the age of 16 or handicapped
or elderly persons.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
DAY SPA — A business establishment which provides one or more of the
following services to customers who do not stay overnight on the premises:
massage therapy, facials, body wraps, tanning, steam or sauna baths, herbal
treatments, hair styling, manicure, pedicure, nutritional counseling, Yoga
exercise, aromatherapy, reflexology and relaxation therapy.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
DELICATESSEN — A retail establishment, other than a restaurant, with
a gross floor area not exceeding 4,000 square feet that sells ready-toeat
food products such as hot foods, cooked meats, lunch meats, cheeses,
sandwiches, and prepared salads, primarily for consumption off the
premises, but which may provide a few tables or a counter for on-premises
consumption as an accessory use and that may include off-premises
catering.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
DENSITY, DWELLING UNIT — See "dwelling unit density."[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.210
§ 245-2 MONACA CODE § 245-2
237:578
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the
development plan" when used in this chapter shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DISTRIBUTION — The processing of materials so as to sort out which
finished goods are to be transported to different locations and the loading
and unloading of such goods. This use usually involves inventory control,
material handing, order administration and packaging.
DOMESTIC PETS — Animals, fish or fowl customarily found in a dwelling
and kept for company or pleasure, including, but not limited to: no more
than four dogs and/or cats, six months of age or older; any number of
hamsters, parakeets or canaries and similar small animals or birds, but not
including any exotic animals such as lions, tigers, bears, ocelots or other
feral cats, venomous or constrictor snakes, alligators, monkeys or other
animals normally found in a zoo; nor any member of the swine, sheep,
bovine, poultry or equidae family of quadrupeds.[Amended 9-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 918]
DOMICILIARY CARE — Care provided in the provider's dwelling unit to no
more than three persons aged 18 years or older who need assistance with
daily activities and are unable to live alone, where the provider and the
dwelling unit are certified by the Area Agency on Aging.[Added 9-28-2010
by Ord. No. 918]
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY — Any principal use or accessory use that
involves a window, service lane, bay or other facility where customers are
provided services either inside or outside their vehicles and where cars may
or may not wait in line to access these services, including, but not limited
to: "drive-in" or "drive-through" windows at fast-food restaurants, banks
or other businesses, exterior automated teller machines (ATMs), quick oil
change facilities, car washes and similar automotive services and other such
facilities.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
DRUGSTORE — A retail establishment with a gross floor area of 10,000
square feet or more which sells prescription drugs, patent medicines,
surgical and sickroom supplies and which also may sell cosmetics,
household goods and a limited selection of food products.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
DRY-CLEANING PICK-UP STORE — See "store, dry-cleaning
pickup."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
DRY SPACE, COMPLETELY — A space which will remain totally dry during
flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent the passage
of water or water vapor.
210. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 210, Subdivision and Land Development. The former definition
of "developmental disability," which immediately followed this definition, was repealed
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918.
§ 245-2 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-2
237:579
DRY SPACE, ESSENTIALLY — A space which will remain dry during
flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage; the
structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
DUPLEX — See Subsection C under "dwelling type."[Added 9-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 918]
DWELLING TYPE — [Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
CONVERSION APARTMENT — A dwelling unit created within an
existing single-family dwelling in accordance with all applicable
requirements of this chapter.
A.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A residential building containing one
dwelling unit that is the only principal structure on the lot, surrounded
on all sides by open space. (See also Subsection J, Mobile home.)
B.
DUPLEX — A residential building that is the only principal structure
on the lot, designed exclusively for occupancy by two families living
independently of each other, and containing two dwelling units, each
with a separate entrance directly to the outside.
C.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A residential building designed
exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living
independently of each other and containing three or more dwelling
units, including townhouses, garden apartments, mid-rise apartments
and high-rise apartments.
D.
TOWNHOUSE — A multifamily residential building, no more than 2 1/
2 stories in height, that contains at least three, but no more than eight,
dwelling units, each of which are separated from the adjoining unit
or units by a continuous unpierced vertical wall extending from the
basement to the roof, each unit having independent access directly to
the outside and having no other units above or below.
E.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A residential building comprised of
multifamily dwelling units not exceeding three stories in height,
sometimes designed around courts or common open spaces, often
having private balconies or patios.
F.
MID-RISE APARTMENT — A residential building comprised of
multifamily dwelling units containing at least four, but no more than six,
stories.
G.
HIGH-RISE APARTMENT — A residential building comprised of
multifamily dwelling units containing at least seven, but no more than
nine, stories.
H.
MODULAR HOME — Any structure designed primarily for residential
occupancy which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated,
formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or
assembly and installation, on the building site; housing units defined as
mobile homes are excluded from this definition.
I.
§ 245-2 MONACA CODE § 245-2
237:580
DWELLING UNIT DENSITY — The maximum number of dwelling units
authorized by this chapter per acre of land.[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord.
No. 918]
EDUCATIONAL STUDIO — An establishment that provides training to
individuals or groups in specialized recreational activities or avocations,
including, but not limited to: dance, gymnastics, martial arts, photography,
music, arts and crafts and similar pursuits.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
EFFECTIVE DATE — The date on which this chapter is duly adopted by the
Borough or as specified in ordinance adopting same.
ELDERLY HOUSING — Multifamily dwelling units designed for occupancy
by persons aged 65 years or older or persons of any age who are physically
handicapped which dwelling units may contain special design features
associated with the needs of the elderly or handicapped that are not
customary in the construction of multifamily dwellings, including, but not
limited to: emergency call systems, handicapped accommodations in
bathrooms and hallways, doorways and hallways that accommodate
wheelchairs and similar facilities.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
ERECTED — Includes built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon or
any physical operations on the land required for its use or improvement.
Excavating, filling, draining and the like shall be considered part of the
erection.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities, municipal departments or authorities of
underground gas, electrical, telephone transmission or distribution systems
and public water, sanitary sewer and public storm sewer facilities, including
wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxers,
traffic signals, fire hydrants and similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith, including buildings and aboveground storage and
transmission structures necessary for the furnishing of adequate services
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family detached dwelling
intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or
more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again
being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete
and ready for occupancy except for minor incidental unpacking and
assembly operations and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation. A mobile home that is erected on a permanent
foundation and is connected to all available utilities shall be considered
a single-family dwelling, as defined herein, and may be placed where
a single-family dwelling is authorized by this chapter, subject to all
requirements applicable to a single-family dwelling. All other mobile
homes shall be restricted to mobile home lots in a mobile home park.
J.
DWELLING UNIT — Any building or portion thereof which is designed
and used exclusively for residential purposes of one family and includes
complete kitchen and bathroom facilities.
K.
§ 245-2 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-2
237:581
for the public health, safety or general welfare.[Amended 9-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 918]
EXCEPTION, SPECIAL — The permission or approval required by the
Zoning Hearing Board to locate a use in a given district according to
specific conditions prescribed under that district.
FAMILY[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918] —
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME — A facility, licensed or approved by the
commonwealth, as required by the laws of the commonwealth, located
within a dwelling in which the operator resides, for the care on a regular
basis during part of a twenty-four-hour day of not more than six children
under 16 years of age, including care provided to children who are relatives
of the provider, where such use shall be secondary to the use of the dwelling
An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage,
adoption or foster child care, including domestic servants or gratuitous
guests thereof, or a group of not more than three unrelated individuals
living together without supervision and maintaining a common
household; or not more than 10 unrelated individuals living together in
a group living arrangement with supervision, provided that the group
living arrangement meets all of the following criteria:
It provides nonrouting support services, including supervision,
personal care, social or counseling services and transportation to
persons who need such assistance in order to use and enjoy a
dwelling or to avoid being placed within an institution because of
physical disability, old age, mental retardation or other "handicap"
or "disability" as defined by the Fair Housing Amendments Act or
the Americans with Disabilities Act;
(1)
It provides for the joint occupancy of a dwelling unit where the
residents maintain a common household and practice, on a
permanent or long-term basis, a joint economic, social and cultural
life;
(2)
(3) It does not involve the housing of persons on a transient basis;
It does not involve the housing or treatment of persons accepted
for residence in a group living arrangement on the basis of their
status as criminal offenders, juvenile offenders or delinquents, or
who would otherwise qualify for residence by virtue of having been
found by any governmental tribunal, court or agency to be a danger
to society or are on release or under the jurisdiction of the criminal
justice system, a bureau of corrections or similar institution.
(4)
A.
Family shall not include persons living together in a group care facility,
personal care boarding home or transitional dwelling, as defined
herein, or any other supervised group living arrangement for persons
not protected by the Fair Housing Amendments Act or for any persons
who constitute a direct threat to others or their physical property.
B.
§ 245-2 MONACA CODE § 245-2
237:582
for living purposes and shall meet all applicable requirements for a home
occupation.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — See "restaurant, fast-food."[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal or any other manufactured or natural material or combination of
materials erected for the enclosure of land and/or dividing one area of
land from another. This definition shall not include retaining walls that are
designed and approved by the Borough Engineer.[Added 9-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 918]
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — A bank, savings and loan association or
similar institution that lends money or is engaged in a finance-related
business.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
FIRE AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES — Facilities owned and
operated by a public agency or nonprofit corporation used for the storage
of fire trucks, fire-fighting equipment, ambulances and other emergency
medical equipment and for the training of firefighters, paramedics and
other medical rescue personnel and that may or may not include offices,
meeting rooms, exercise rooms, sleeping quarters for the employees and
volunteers, kitchen facilities and a social hall.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord.
No. 918]
FLOOD-FRINGE AREA — The area identified as "floodway fringe" in the
Flood Insurance Study by the Federal Insurance Administration, and which
area of flood-fringe also may be symbolized or referenced by the designation
of "FF."211
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river
or watercourse and/or any area of land subject to the unusual and/or rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.212
FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT — A land area that is a floodplain and as is and
may be delineated on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map for the Borough
of Monaca or any subsequent map prepared as to the Borough of Monaca
relative to the Federal Flood Insurance Program.213
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improvements on real estate, including
but not limited to water and sanitary facilities, structures and/or their
contents.214
FLOODWAY AREA — The area identified as "floodway" in the Flood
Insurance Study prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration, and
211. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 131, Flood Damage Prevention.
212. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 131, Flood Damage Prevention.
213. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 131, Flood Damage Prevention.
214. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 131, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 245-2 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-2
237:583
which area of floodway also may be symbolized or referenced by the
designation of "FW."215
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — Total floor area of all rooms in a dwelling
excluding laundry, kitchen, bathrooms, closets, pantries or other storage
areas, hallways, garages and basement utility areas.[Added 9-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 918]
FRONT WALL OF THE BUILDING — That building wall that contains the
main entrance to the building and that is often most nearly parallel to
the front lot line or that faces the building's main vehicular entrance from
the interior circulation system in a multitenant development.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
FRONT YARD — See "yard, front."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
FUNERAL HOME — A building used for the embalming of deceased human
beings for burial and for the display of the deceased and ceremonies
connected therewith before burial or cremation and which may include a
crematorium as an accessory use.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — See "private garage."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
GARAGE, PUBLIC PARKING — See "public parking garage."[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
GARDEN APARTMENT — See Subsection F under "dwelling type."[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
GENERAL FLOODPLAIN AREA — The area identified as "approximate onehundred-
year floodplain" in the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the
Federal Insurance Administration, and which area of general floodplain also
may be symbolized or referenced by the designation "FA."216
GENERAL MERCHANDISE STORE — See "store, general
merchandise."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
GOVERNING BODY — The Borough Council of the Borough of Monaca,
Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
GROCERY STORE — See "store, grocery."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
GROUP CARE FACILITY — Any supervised long-term group living
arrangement licensed by the commonwealth for persons who do not meet
the definition of mentally or physically handicapped provided in the Fair
Housing Amendments Act or the Americans with Disabilities Act; or any
long-term supervised group living arrangement for persons who do meet
the definition of mentally or physically handicapped provided in the Fair
Housing Amendments Act or the Americans with Disabilities Act living in
an institutional setting and not maintaining a common household; or any
long-term supervised group living arrangement for persons who, whether
215. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 131, Flood Damage Prevention.
216. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 131, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 245-2 MONACA CODE § 245-2
237:584
handicapped or not, are criminal offenders, juvenile offenders or
delinquents or who have been found by any governmental tribunal, court
or agency to be a danger to society or who are on release or under the
jurisdiction of the criminal justice system, a governmental bureau of
corrections or similar agency or institution.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — See "floor area, habitable."
HARDWARE STORE — See "store, hardware."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord.
No. 918]
HEALTH CLUB — A commercial recreational enterprise or private club that
has as a principal use a gymnasium, swimming pool or other sports facility
and that may offer massages, whirlpool baths, steam rooms, saunas and/or
medical facilities as accessory uses to the principal use.[Added 9-28-2010
by Ord. No. 918]
HEIGHT OF BUILDING —
HIGH-RISE APARTMENT — See Subsection H under "dwelling
type."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
HOME-BASED BUSINESS, NO-IMPACT — See "no-impact home-based
business."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
HOME OCCUPATION — A business or commercial activity that does not
meet the definition of a no-impact home-based business conducted as an
accessory use entirely within a dwelling by the residents thereof, which
use is clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes
and does not, in any way, change the character of the dwelling.[Amended
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
HOTEL or MOTEL — An establishment that offers transient overnight
lodging accommodations, including extended stays, to the general public
and that also may provide additional supporting services such as
restaurants, meeting rooms, recreation facilities and living quarters for a
resident manager or proprietor.[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
INFILL HOUSING — One or more newly constructed dwelling units erected
on a lot or lots where one or more deteriorated dwelling units previously
existed prior to being demolished.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
The vertical height from the average elevation of finished grade at the
front of the structure to:
(1) In the case of a flat-roof structure: the highest point of coping.
(2) In the case of a mansard-roof structure: the deck line of roof.
(3) In the case of a gable or hipped roof: the average height of roof.
A.
A habitable attic shall be counted as a story when determining height
as required in this chapter.
B.
§ 245-2 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-2
237:585
JUNK — Any worn, cast-off or discarded article or material which is ready
for destruction or which has been collected or stored for sale, resale,
salvage or conversion to some other use. Any article or material which
can be used for its original purpose as readily as when new, without being
altered, disassembled, unfastened, changed or reconditioned, shall not be
considered junk.
JUNK YARD — The use of 200 square feet or more of the area of any lot,
whether inside or outside a building, for storage, keeping or abandonment
of junk, including scrap metals, or for the dismantling, demolition or
abandonment of junk, including scrap metals, or for the dismantling,
demolition or abandonment of automobile or other vehicles, machinery or
parts thereof and any worn, cast-off or discarded article or material which is
ready for destruction, or which has been collected or stored for sale, resale,
salvage or conversion to some other use.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LAUNDROMAT — A retail business equipped with a number of individual
clothes washing machines, clothes dryers and that may include individual
dry-cleaning machines for use by the general public, excluding laundry
facilities provided as an accessory use in a multifamily residential
building.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a
building or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary stopping of
commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials,
and which abuts upon an alley, street or other appropriate means of access,
and which is not less than 12 feet wide, 15 feet high and 45 feet long,
exclusive of access and turning area.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building or a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.217
217. Editor's Note: The former definition of “licensed group home,” which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918.
§ 245-2 MONACA CODE § 245-2
237:586
LOT AREA — The horizontal surface area within the lot lines of a lot.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection and
on which the front building line for all streets must be observed.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and
the rear lot line. For lots where the front and rear lot lines are not parallel,
the lot depth should be measured by drawing lines from the front to rear lot
lines, at right angles to the front lot line, every 10 feet and averaging the
length of these lines.
LOT FRONTAGE — The length of the front lot line measured at the street
right-of-way line.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from
another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the front
lot line or, in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a
line 10 feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum
distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF — The smallest lot area established by this
chapter on which a use or structure may be located in a particular district.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which exists as shown or described on a plat or
deed in the Beaver County Recorder of Deeds' Office.
LOT, PUBLIC PARKING — See "public parking lot."[Added 9-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 918]
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A through lot which is not accessible from
one of the parallel or nonintersecting streets upon which it fronts.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or which
fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
LOT WIDTH — The mean horizontal distance across the lot between the side
lot lines measured at right angles to the depth.
MANUFACTURING — The mechanical or chemical transformation of raw
materials or substances into new products or other raw materials, including
the assembling of component parts, the manufacturing of products and
the blending of materials into finished or semifinished products.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT — Any device associated with a solar energy
system, such as an outdoor electrical unit/control box, that transfers the
energy from the solar energy system to the intended on-site
structure.[Added 6-12-2012 by Ord. No. 927]
§ 245-2 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-2
237:587
MEDICAL CLINIC — Any establishment, including mobile diagnostic units,
where human patients receive medical, dental, chiropractic, psychological
and surgical diagnosis, treatment and counseling under the care of a group
of licensed medical doctors and dentists and their supporting staff, where
said patients are not provided with board or room or kept overnight on the
premises.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
METEOROLOGICAL TOWER (MET TOWER) — Includes the tower, base
plat, anchors, guy wires and hardware, anemometers (wind speed
indicators), wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment for
anemometers and vanes, data loggers, instrument wiring, and any
telemetry devices that are used to monitor or transmit wind speed and wind
flow characteristics over a period of time for either instantaneous wind
information or to characterize the wind resource at a given location. For
the purpose of this chapter, meteorological (met) towers shall refer only
to those whose purpose are to analyze the environmental factors needed
to assess the potential to install, construct or erect a small wind energy
system.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
MID-RISE APARTMENT — See Subsection G under "dwelling
types."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
MINI-WAREHOUSE OR SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — A building or group of
buildings in a controlled access and fenced compound that contains various
sizes of individual, compartmentalized and controlled access stalls and/or
lockers leased to the general public for a specified period of time for the
dead storage of personal property.[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
MOBILE HOME — See Subsection J under "dwelling type."[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land that has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement of mobile homes.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
MODULAR HOME — See Subsection I under "dwelling type."[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
MOTEL — See "hotel or motel."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — See Subsection D under "dwelling
type."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
MUSEUM — An establishment operated by a public agency or a nonprofit
organization devoted to the procurement, preservation, study and display
of documents, artifacts, memorabilia or other objects of social, historical or
cultural significance.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
NET METERING — The difference between the electricity supplied to a
customer over the electric distribution system and the electricity generated
by the customer's small wind energy system that is fed back into the electric
distribution system over a billing period.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
§ 245-2 MONACA CODE § 245-2
237:588
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use that is clearly secondary to
the use of a dwelling for residential purposes and that involves no customer,
client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, and no pickup,
delivery or removal functions to or from the premises in excess of those
normally associated with residential use.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
NONCOMMERCIAL RECREATION — See "recreation,
noncommercial."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reasons of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of use
provisions in a zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter
enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of
such ordinance or amendment. Such nonconforming structures include, but
are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in a zoning ordnance or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in
existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment, or prior
to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason
of annexation.
NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area
or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the
female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.218
NURSING HOME — An institution licensed by the commonwealth for the
care of human patients requiring skilled nursing or intermediate nursing
care, but not including facilities for major surgery or care or treatment of
drug or alcohol addiction.[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A statement signed by the Zoning Officer setting
forth either that a building or structure complies with this chapter or that a
building, structure or parcel of land may lawfully be employed for specified
uses, or both.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely
to occur once in every 100 years, i.e., that has a one-percent chance of
occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year to such
elevation.219
218. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 76, Adult Entertainment.
§ 245-2 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-2
237:589
OUTDOOR CAFE — A use that is accessory to an eating or drinking
establishment located outside a completely enclosed building, as defined
herein, where food and beverages are served to customers at tables in an
outdoor setting.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
OUTDOOR SALES — Any display of merchandise outside a completely
enclosed building, as defined herein, which is offered for sale, regardless of
whether the purchase is completed indoors or outdoors.[Added 9-28-2010
by Ord. No. 918]
PARKING PAD — A paved area on a residential lot, other than a driveway,
which is accessory to the principal use of the lot and is intended for the
parking of one or more motor vehicles owned by the owners or tenants of
the lot.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
PARKING SPACE — A space for the parking of a motor vehicle within a
public or private parking area.220
PEDESTRIAN TRAIL — See "bicycle and pedestrian trail."[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
PERMITTED USE BY RIGHT — An authorized use specifically allowed as
a matter of right upon review and approval by the Zoning Officer subject
to compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter and land
development plan approval, if applicable.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
PERSONAL CARE BOARDING HOME — A dwelling or institution licensed
by the commonwealth where room and board is provided on a long-term
basis to more than three residents who are not relatives of the operator, who
are mobile or semimobile, but, because of age or infirmity, do not participate
in maintaining a common household and who require specialized services in
such matters as bathing, dressing, diet and medication prescribed for selfadministration,
but who are not in need of hospitalization or skilled nursing
care or intermediate nursing care.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
PERSONAL SERVICES — Any enterprise providing services pertaining to
the person, their apparel, or personal effects commonly carried on or about
the person, including, but not limited to: shoe repair, tailoring, clothes
cleaning, watch repairing, barber shops, beauty parlors and related
activities, but not including any adult business, as defined herein.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
PET GROOMING — Any establishment that offers services for domestic
pets, including, but not limited to: bathing, trimming, manicuring,
massaging or other services to maintain the animals' well-being and which
may sell pet care products and pet supplies as an accessory use, but
not including a veterinary clinic or kennel, as defined herein.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
219. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 131, Flood Damage Prevention, and Ch. 199, Stormwater
Management. The former definition of "open space cluster," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918.
220. Editor's Note: The former definition of "planned residential development," which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918.
§ 245-2 MONACA CODE § 245-2
237:590
PET SERVICES — A business establishment that sells pet food and other
pet care products to the general public and that may offer pet grooming,
a boarding kennel and/or limited veterinary services as accessory uses; or
a business establishment that offers services for the care during part of a
twenty-four-hour day of domestic pets as a principal use and which may sell
food or other pet care products as an accessory use.[Added 9-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 918]
PLANNED RIVER-ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT — A development comprised
of authorized uses on a site which is under single ownership and control
at the time of an application for development and which is planned and
developed as a single unit and is subject to certain incentives and special
design criteria.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
PLANNING AGENCY — The duly constituted Planning Commission of
Monaca Borough, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.221
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
POWER GRID — The transmission system created to balance the supply and
demand for electricity for consumers in the area encompassing the Borough
of Monaca.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
PRINCIPAL USE — The major or dominant permitted use of a parcel.
PRIVATE CLUB — Any establishment operated by a private organization
for social, recreational, educational, fraternal or sororal purposes, which
is open only to members and their guests and not to the general
public.[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
PRIVATE GARAGE — An accessory building or a portion of the principal
building, not accessible to the general public, used for the shelter and
storage of private vehicles and personal property of the occupants of the
principal building.[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
PRIVATE SCHOOL — See "school, public or private."[Added 9-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 918]
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — See "business or professional
offices."[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any building owned or operated by a government
agency, federal, state, county or local, used to provide services to the public,
including administrative offices, public works buildings and storage yards,
libraries, museums, fire companies, senior centers, recreation buildings,
government service centers and similar facilities.[Added 9-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 918]
PUBLIC GARAGE — A building or structure where motor vehicles can be
temporarily stored or parked.
221. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 46, Planning Commission.
§ 245-2 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-2
237:591
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by
the Borough Council or the Planning Commission, intended to inform and
obtain public comment.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall be not
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the public hearing.[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord.
No. 918]
PUBLIC PARKING GARAGE — A parking area that is located in a building
or parking structure that is the principal use on the lot and that may be
operated by either a public agency or private entity, whether for profit
or not, and that is available for use by the general public, usually for a
fee.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
PUBLIC PARKING LOT — A parking area on the surface of the ground that
is the principal use on the lot, that may be operated by either a public
agency or private entity, whether for profit or not, and that is available for
use by the general public, usually for a fee.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
PUBLIC RECREATION — See "recreation, public."[Added 9-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 918]
PUBLIC SCHOOL — See "school, public or private."[Added 9-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 918]
PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Any administrative
building, maintenance building, garage or other building intended for
human occupancy or storage of movable equipment owned or operated by
a utility company regulated by the Public Utility Commission (PUC); or any
building or structure owned or operated by a utility company regulated
by the Public Utility Commission (PUC) or any governmental agency or
municipal authority that is necessary for the generation, treatment,
regulation or intermunicipal distribution of essential services, as defined
herein, including, but not limited to: long-distance transmission facilities
such as electrical power lines or high-pressure natural gas or petroleum
lines, switching facilities, substations, treatment plants, reservoirs, water
towers, transmission towers and similar facilities.
REAR YARD — See "yard, rear."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
REAR YARD AREA — That portion of the lot bounded by the side lot lines,
the rear lot line and a line extended from the corner of the rear wall of the
principal building to the side lot lines.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A single-axle or multiple-axle structure
mounted on wheels or otherwise capable of being made mobile, either
with its own motive power or designed to be mounted on or drawn by
an automotive vehicle, for the purpose of travel, camping, vacation and
recreational use, including, but not limited to: travel trailers, mobile homes,
§ 245-2 MONACA CODE § 245-2
237:592
motor homes, tent trailers, boats, boat trailers, pickup campers, horse
trailers, snowmobiles, jet skis, wave runners, motorcycles and all-terrain
vehicles.[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL INDOOR — A commercial establishment
located within a completely enclosed building, as defined by this chapter,
where customers or patrons engage in athletic or nonathletic leisure
activities as spectators or participants, including, but not limited to: golf
practice facilities, tennis or racquet clubs, batting practice facilities,
miniature golf, practice and/or playing fields, gymnasiums, ice rinks, roller
skating rinks, bowling alleys, billiard parlors, virtual reality and simulation
gaming parlors, video arcades, theaters (live and motion picture), dance
halls and similar facilities, but excluding any adult business, as defined
herein.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR — A commercial enterprise,
operated by an individual, corporation or organization other than a public
or nonprofit entity, for the pursuit of sports and recreational activities
conducted partially or entirely outdoors, including, but not limited to: parks,
playgrounds, playing fields, golf courses, country clubs, golf or batting
practice facilities, ice rinks, tennis courts, swimming pools and similar
facilities.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
RECREATION, NONCOMMERCIAL — An enterprise operated by an
individual or nonprofit association or corporation, other than a public entity,
for the pursuit of sports and recreational activities, which may be advertised
to the general public, but the use of which is limited to members and their
guests including, but not limited to: such establishments as country clubs,
golf courses, sportsmen's clubs, golf practice facilities, playing fields, tennis
or racquet clubs, swimming pools and similar facilities.[Added 9-28-2010
by Ord. No. 918]
RECREATION, PUBLIC — An enterprise owned and operated by a public
entity, available to the general public, whether or not an admission fee
is charged, including either indoor or outdoor facilities for the pursuit of
sports, recreation or leisure activities, including, but not limited to: parks,
playgrounds, playing fields, golf courses, golf or batting practice facilities,
ice rinks, tennis courts, swimming pools and similar facilities.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year-flood elevation
plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.222
REPAIR SHOP — A service establishment providing maintenance and
repairs of items that can be carried in by hand, including personal effects
(such as jewelry, watches, bicycles), small household appliances, office
equipment, small gasoline engines and similar items, but not including
repair of large appliances, motorized vehicles or heavy equipment.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
222. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 131, Flood Damage Prevention, and Ch. 199, Stormwater
Management.
§ 245-2 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-2
237:593
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT — Any establishment, including
laboratories, that carries on investigation in the natural, physical or social
sciences or engineering and development as an extension of such
investigation with the objective of creating end products and that may
include supporting storage and transportation facilities and pilot
manufacturing as accessory uses, but not including the mass production of
such products.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
RESTAURANT, CARRY-OUT — A restaurant where refreshments, beverages,
meals or frozen desserts or the like are served for consumption primarily
outside of the premises and where no more than 12 permanent seats for instore
dining are provided.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A restaurant principally devoted to the retail
sale of prepared or premeasured food items where such food items are
ordered by the customer at a window, counter or vehicle rather than from
a table and that is designed to facilitate quick service and takeout
orders.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
RESTAURANT, SIT-DOWN — An establishment where orders are placed
with waitpersons by customers seated at tables and food and beverages
are served at the table by waitpersons or are offered by buffet service that
includes a complete meal and where the usual length of stay is one hour or
more. A sit-down restaurant may or may not serve alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises as an accessory use and may or may not offer
takeout service as an accessory use, but shall not include a pickup window
or drive-through window.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
RETAIL BAKERY — See "bakery, retail."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
RETAIL STORE — See "store, retail."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total easement dedicated for use as a vehicular
passageway for streets, roads and like purposes. The right-of-way contains
the paved cartway and is bounded by the front line of lots on either side.223
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA or SATELLITE ANTENNA — A ground-based
reflector, usually parabolic in shape, that receives electronic signals from a
satellite. This term shall also include any pedestal or attached structure.
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL — A privately operated, for-profit establishment
providing technical or skilled training, vocational or trade educational
courses and programs.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
SCHOOL, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE — An accredited institution of learning that
offers elementary and secondary level instruction or which offers associate,
bachelor or higher degrees in the several branches of learning required by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — See "mini warehouse or self-storage
facility."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
223. Editor's Note: The former definition of "rooming house," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918.
§ 245-2 MONACA CODE § 245-2
237:594
SERVICE STATION (GASOLINE STATION) — An area of land, including
structures, used for the sale of gasoline, motor fuel oil and other lubrication
substances and the sale of motor vehicle accessories which may include
associated facilities for automobile servicing, excluding painting.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Patently offensive representations of descriptions of
ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, and patently
offensive representations, descriptions or acts of masturbation, excretory
functions, homosexuality, sodomy, sexual intercourse or physical contact
with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if
such person be female, breast.224
SHADOW FLICKER — The visible flicker effect when rotating blades of a
wind generator cast shadows on the ground and nearby structures causing
a repeating pattern of light and shadow.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
SIDE YARD — See "yard, side."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
SIGN AREA — See § 245-22A.[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918225]
SIGN TYPES AND CLASSES — See § 245-21.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord.
No. 918]
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — See Subsection B under "dwelling
type."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
SIT-DOWN RESTAURANT — See "restaurant, sit-down."[Added 9-28-2010
by Ord. No. 918]
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy conversion system
consisting of a wind generator, a tower and associated control or conversion
electronics, which has a rated capacity of 100 kilowatts or less and will
be used primarily for on-site consumption.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM HEIGHT — The vertical distance from
ground level to the tip of the wind generator blade when it is at its highest
point.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM MODIFICATION — Any change to the
small wind energy system that materially alters the size, type or location
of the small wind energy system. Like-kind replacements shall not be
construed to be a modification.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
224. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 76, Adult Entertainment. The former definitions of "sign" and
"sign, animated or moving," which immediately followed this definition, were repealed
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918. See now § 245-21.
225. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definitions of "sign, awning, canopy
or marquee," "sign, billboard," "sign, business," "sign, business park identification," "sign,
changeable copy," "sign, construction," "sign, directional," "sign, face," "sign, flashing,"
"sign, freestanding," "sign, governmental," "sign, ground," "sign, home occupation," "sign,
identification," "sign, illuminated," "sign, memorial," "sign, name plate," "sign, off-site
directional," "sign, on-site directional," "sign, political," "sign, pole," "sign, portable,"
"sign, private sale or event," "sign, projecting," "sign, real estate," "sign, residential
development designation," "sign, roof," "sign, temporary," "sign, wall" and "sign, window,"
which definitions immediately followed this definition. See now § 245-21.
§ 245-2 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-2
237:595
SOLAR ACCESS — A property owner’s right to have sunlight shine on the
owner’s land.[Added 6-12-2012 by Ord. No. 927]
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — An energy conversion system, including
appurtenances, which converts solar energy to a usable form of energy
to meet all or part of the energy requirements of the on-site user. This
definition shall include the terms "passive solar" and "active solar
systems."[Added 6-12-2012 by Ord. No. 927]
SOLAR GLARE — The effect produced by light reflecting from a solar panel
with an intensity sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual
performance and visibility.[Added 6-12-2012 by Ord. No. 927]
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was issued
and/or, if no building permit is obtained, includes the actual commencement
of a development or substantial improvement, including first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, including but not limited
to pouring of a concrete slab or footers, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond land preparation such as
clearing, grading and filling, regardless of the nature of development or
substantial improvement structure involved.
STORE, CANDY OR ICE CREAM — A retail establishment which sells candy
and/or ice cream, but which shall not include on-site processing of the
products sold on the premises or for delivery off the premises.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
STORE, CONVENIENCE — A business with a gross floor area of 5,000
square feet or less, offering a limited selection of grocery, household and
personal items for quick purchase.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
STORE, DRY-CLEANING PICK-UP — A retail store where customers drop
off and pick up clothing and household items for dry cleaning or laundering
that does not involve any dry cleaning or laundering on the premises, but
that may include tailoring or pressing on the premises.[Added 9-28-2010
by Ord. No. 918]
STORE, GENERAL MERCHANDISE — A retail store selling a wide variety of
products including, but not limited to: apparel, home furnishings, lawn and
garden supplies, outdoor equipment and supplies, automotive, hardware,
home improvement, beauty and health products, cards and gifts, office
supplies, and may offer limited quantities of food products.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
STORE, GROCERY — A retail establishment that primarily sells meat, food
and household products, but that may also include as accessory uses a
pharmacy, a florist, a travel agency, a video rental (excluding an adult video
store), a coffee shop, a delicatessen, banking and copy/fax services.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
STORE, HARDWARE — A retail store that primarily sells tools and supplies
for plumbing, carpentry, electrical, heating, ventilating and air-conditioning
maintenance and repairs and that may also offer the sale of lawn and garden
§ 245-2 MONACA CODE § 245-2
237:596
maintenance and other household products.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord.
No. 918]
STORE, RETAIL — Any establishment not otherwise specifically defined in
this article that sells commodities and/or services on the premises directly
to consumers, but not including the manufacturing or processing of any
products or wholesale sales.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
STORE, VIDEO — A retail establishment offering video cassettes, DVDs, Blu
Ray discs or other prerecorded movies or video games for sale or rent and
that may offer as an accessory use the sale of related snack items.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
STREET, ARTERIAL — A public street that carries large volumes of longdistance
traffic. Streets classified as arterial streets in the Borough are PA
Route 51 (Constitution Boulevard and Pennsylvania Avenue) and PA Route
18-51.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
STREET, COLLECTOR — A public street that, in addition to providing
access to abutting lots, intercepts local streets and provides a route for
carrying considerate volumes of local traffic to community facilities and
arterial streets. Streets classified as collector streets in the Borough are
Atlantic Avenue, Beaver Avenue, Bechtel Street, Bechtel Street Extension,
Brodhead Road, Cascade Road, Echert Road, Fourteenth Street, Fourteenth
Street Extension, Marshal Road, Ninth Street.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord.
No. 918]
STREET LINE — The line defining the edge of the legal width of a dedicated
street right-of-way. The street line is also the front lot line.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.226
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the Municipal
Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements for
which financial security was posted) of those improvements required as a
condition for the final approval have been completed in accordance with
the approved plan, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or
operated for its intended use.
SUPPLY YARD — A commercial establishment engaged in storing and
selling building supplies, industrial supplies or feed and grain primarily to
businesses, rather than the general public.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
226. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 245-2 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-2
237:597
SURPLUS SCHOOL SPACE — A school building or portion thereof now or
formerly owned by the school district that is no longer needed for public
educational purposes and which is offered for sale or has been sold to a
private owner by the school district.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
SWIMMING POOL — A water-filled enclosure, permanently constructed or
portable, having a depth of more than 18 inches below the level of the
surrounding land, or an above-surface pool, having a depth of more than 30
inches, designed, used and maintained for swimming.
TAVERN — See "bar or tavern."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
TEMPORARY PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT(S) — Any standalone container,
storage unit, shed or other portable structure that can be or is used for
the storage of personal property of any kind and which is located for such
purposes accessory to a permitted principal use on a nonpermanent basis
for a set period of time until the portable storage unit is moved to an off-site
location.[Added 10-13-2009 by Ord. No. 912]
TEMPORARY USE OR STRUCTURE — Any use or structure that is intended
to be used either on a seasonal basis, during the time of construction and
completion of an approved development or for any other period of time
that is six months or less, including, but not limited to: tents, air-supported
structures, bleachers, portable bandstands, reviewing stands, mobile office
units, construction trailers, model homes or sales offices and similar uses or
structures.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
TOWER — The monopole, guyed monopole or lattice structure that supports
a wind generator or communications antenna.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord.
No. 918]
TOWER HEIGHT — The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower,
excluding the wind generator or the communications antennas.[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
TOWNHOUSE — See Subsection E under "dwelling type."[Added
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
TRAIL — See "bicycle and pedestrian trail."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
TRANSITIONAL DWELLING — A supervised group living arrangement
occupied on a short-term basis by persons assigned by a court of law or
public, semipublic or nonprofit agency and managed by a public, semipublic
or nonprofit agency responsible for the occupant's care, safety, conduct,
counseling and supervision for a specified period of time, including
alcoholic recovery, shelters for battered persons and their children,
community re-entry services following incarceration, prison assignment,
house arrest or other court-ordered treatment and other such short-time
supervised assignments.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
TREE NURSERY — An area of land utilized for the growing of trees in
an outdoor setting and on-site sales, either by wholesaling to business
customers or at retail to the general public.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
§ 245-2 MONACA CODE § 245-2
237:598
TRUCK TERMINAL — A facility to accommodate the fueling, routine
maintenance and storage of trucks and other motorized equipment and
trailers and that may provide warehousing and transfer facilities as
accessory uses.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed; it may
be occupied or maintained. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall
not be deemed to include any nonconforming use.227
USE BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use authorized by this chapter that may
be granted only by the Zoning Hearing Board following a public hearing
subject to express standards and criteria contained in this
chapter.[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
UTILITY — Within the framework of this chapter, includes public sanitary
sewer facilities only.
VARIANCE — Relief granted by the Zoning Hearing Board upon appeal
from the terms of this chapter, where owing to special physical conditions
literal enforcement of the provisions of the zoning regulations will result
in unnecessary hardship, yet where the intent of the zoning regulations
can be observed and substantial justice done. A variance applies only to
that particular piece of property for which it is granted and only to the
modification of the land development standards. It does not apply to the
modification of the uses permitted within the district and must not be
contrary to the public interest.
VEHICLE ACCESSORIES SALES AND INSTALLATION — An establishment
engaged in the retail sales and installation of accessories for trucks,
automobiles and motorcycles, including, but not limited to, such items as
tires, hubcaps, mirrors, seat covers, floor mats, tonneau covers, truck caps,
windshield wipers, trim packages, running boards and the like, but not
including any mechanical parts.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
VEHICLE RENTAL, SALES AND SERVICE — The rental, sales and service
of automobiles, motorcycles and trucks under 26,000 pounds gross vehicle
weight (GVW), but not including any heavy equipment or any other vehicle
or equipment that is not classified as a "motor vehicle" under the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP — A building, or part thereof, used for the
servicing and repair of motor vehicles, including engine overhaul, body
work and recapping/retreading of tires and where all storage of parts and
dismantled vehicles and all repair work are conducted entirely inside a
completely enclosed building, as defined by this chapter.[Added 9-28-2010
by Ord. No. 918]
VERTICAL AXIS WIND TURBINE (VAWT) — A compact type of small wind
energy system that can be mounted on buildings, telecommunication towers
and poles and produce energy using vertical wind turbine technology in low
wind speeds, is capable of working in heavy storms, is viewed by animals
227. Editor's Note: The former definition of "trailer, utility," which immediately preceded this
definition, was repealed 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918.
§ 245-2 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-2
237:599
as a solid object, thus is bat and bird friendly and operates at low noise
levels.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
VETERINARY CLINIC — An establishment where animals are examined
and treated by veterinarians and which may include indoor kennels for
temporary boarding of animals during treatment.[Added 9-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 918]
VIDEO STORE — See "store, video."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
WAREHOUSING AND DISTRIBUTION — A building used for the storage
and handling of freight or merchandise, but not including the maintenance
or fueling of commercial vehicles. Warehousing that is incidental to retail
sales and that does not constitute in excess of 30% of the total floor area
of the retail establishment shall be excluded from this definition.[Amended
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
WHOLESALING — A business primarily engaged in selling merchandise
to retailers, institutional, commercial or professional business customers
or other wholesalers, rather than to the general public which includes the
warehousing of merchandise and which may include distribution of such
merchandise on the site of the principal business.[Added 9-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 918]
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, SMALL — See "small wind energy
system."[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
WIND GENERATOR — The blades and associated mechanical and electrical
conversion components mounted on top of the tower whose purpose is to
convert kinetic energy of the wind into rotational energy used to generate
electricity.[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
YARD — A required open space located on a lot that is unobstructed by
any portion of a principal structure, other than certain projections expressly
permitted by this chapter.[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending between the side lot lines across the
full lot width from the front lot line to a line parallel to, or concentric with,
the front lot line known as the front building line, the minimum horizontal
distance required by this chapter.[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
YARD, REAR — A yard extending between the side yards of the lot parallel
to the rear lot line and being the minimum horizontal distance from the rear
lot line required by this chapter.[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
YARD, REQUIRED — The minimum distance established in each zoning
district for the measurement of a front yard, rear yard or side yard, as
defined by this chapter.[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending from the required front building line to the
rear lot line parallel to the side lot line, the minimum horizontal distance,
from the side lot line required by this chapter.[Amended 9-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 918]
ZONING — A legal and administrative process whereby a municipality
divides its territory into districts and applies to each district a number of
§ 245-2 MONACA CODE § 245-2
237:600
regulations to control the use of land, the height and bulk of buildings and
the area of ground built upon.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Board assigned to the duties of judging
appeals of persons aggrieved by the enforcement of the terms of this
chapter and deciding requests for variances and special exceptions.
ZONING OFFICER — The individual authorized by the Borough Council
to be the administrator of the day-to-day application of the provisions
contained in this chapter.
ZONING PERMIT — A statement signed by the Zoning Officer indicating
that the application for permission to construct, alter or add is approved
and in accordance with the requirements of the terms of this chapter.
§ 245-2 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-2
237:601

ARTICLE II
Zoning Districts
§ 245-3. Establishment of districts. [Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord.
No. 918]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Borough of Monaca is hereby divided
into the following districts:
Single-Family Residential District R-1
Single-Family and Two-Family Rsidential
District
R-2
Multifamily Residential District R-3
Core Commercial District C-C
Planned River-Oriented Development
District
PROD
Mixed Use Transitional District MUT
General Industrial District G-I
Riverfront Business Park District RBP
Public Access Waterfront District PAW
Special Conservation District S-C
§ 245-4. Zoning Map.
In conjunction with the amendments as heretofore made, the aforesaid
districts228 are bounded and defined on a map entitled "Zoning Districts -
Monaca Borough," adopted with this chapter and made a part thereof as
certified by the Borough Secretary.229
§ 245-5. Boundaries of districts.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
map entitled "Zoning Districts - Monaca Borough," the following rules shall
apply:
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such center
lines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following municipal limits shall
be construed as following municipal limits.
228. Editor's Note: See § 245-3.
229. Editor's Note: Said Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 245-3 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-5
237:603
D. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated
in Subsections A through C above shall be so construed. Distances not
specifically indicated on the map entitled "Zoning Districts - Monaca
Borough" shall be determined by the scale of the map.
E. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the map entitled "Zoning Districts -
Monaca Borough," or in other circumstances not covered by
Subsections A through D above, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
interpret the district boundaries.
§ 245-5 MONACA CODE § 245-5
237:604
ARTICLE III
Application of Regulations
§ 245-6. Use of property.
No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or
part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered unless in conformity with
and permitted by the regulations herein specified for the district in which it
is located.
§ 245-7. Restrictions.
A. No building shall hereafter be erected or altered to:
(1) Exceed the height;
(2) Accommodate a greater number of families;
(3) Occupy a greater percentage of lot area;
(4) Have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards or side yards than
are specified herein for the district in which such building is
located; or
(5) Be on a site that has experienced periodic flooding.
B. No part of a yard or other open space required about any building for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
included as a part of a yard or other open space similarly required for
another building.
C. Lots containing a slope of 3 to 1 (three feet horizontal to one foot
vertical) or greater for a distance of 50% of their total depth shall have
a minimum of 25% total increase in lot depth than is required by this
chapter before a building permit is granted.
D. This chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed building or
extension thereof used or to be used by public utility corporations if,
upon petition of the corporation, the Public Utility Commission shall,
after a public hearing, decide that the present or proposed situation of
the building in question is reasonably necessary for the convenience or
welfare of the public.
§ 245-6 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-7
237:605

ARTICLE IV
Zoning District Regulations
[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
§ 245-8. R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
A. Purpose statement. The purpose of this district is to preserve
established neighborhoods of single-family dwellings on larger lots and
to protect them from encroachment by incompatible land uses while
providing for customary accessory uses and compatible public and
semipublic uses as permitted uses, uses by special exception and
conditional uses.
B. Permitted uses by right. In the R-1 Single-Family Residential District,
only the following uses shall be authorized as permitted uses by right:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Bicycle and pedestrian trails.
(b) Churches.
(c) Communications antenna mounted on an existing public utility
storage or transmission structure, subject to § 245-45.
(d) Essential services.
(e) Noncommercial recreation.
(f) Public buildings.
(g) Public recreation.
(h) Schools, public or private.
(i) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Domiciliary care.
(b) Fences, subject to § 245-32.
(c) Keeping of domestic pets.
(d) No-impact home-based business, subject to § 245-47.
(e) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article V.
(f) Private garages and accessory storage buildings.
(g) Private residential swimming pools, subject to § 245-41.
(h) Signs, subject to Article VI.
(i) Small wind energy system, subject to § 245-49.
§ 245-8 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-8
237:607
(j) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, use by special exception or
conditional use authorized in this district.
C. Uses by special exception. In the R-1 Single-Family Residential District,
only the following uses by special exception shall be authorized, subject
to approval by the Zoning Hearing Board:
(1) Principal uses: none.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Family day care home, subject to § 245-61K.
(b) Home occupation, subject to § 245-61O.
D. Conditional uses. In the R-1 Single-Family Residential District, only the
following conditional uses shall be authorized, subject to approval by
Borough Council:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Conversion of surplus school space, subject to § 245-61I.
(b) Mobile home park, subject to § 245-61R.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Solar energy systems. It is the purpose of this regulation to
promote the safe, effective and efficient use of solar energy
systems installed to reduce the on-site consumption of utility
supplied energy and/or hot water as an accessory use by
conditional use, while protecting the health, safety and welfare
of adjacent and surrounding land uses through appropriate
zoning and land use controls. A solar energy system shall be
permitted as a conditional use accessory to a principal use
herein and subject to specific criteria as set forth below. Where
said general standards and specific criteria overlap, the
specific criteria shall supersede the general standards.
(b) The installation and construction of a solar energy system shall
be subject to the following development and design standards:
[1] A solar energy system is permitted in this zoning district
as a conditional accessory to a principal use.
[2] A solar energy system shall provide power for the principal
use and/or accessory use of the property on which the
solar energy system is located and shall not be used for the
generation of power for the sale of energy to other users,
although this provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit
the sale of excess power generated from time to time to
the local utility company.
§ 245-8 MONACA CODE § 245-8
237:608
[3] A solar energy system connected to the utility grid shall
provide written authorization from the local utility
company to the Borough of Monaca acknowledging and
approving such connection.
[4] A solar energy system may be roof mounted (see Figure 1
for illustrative purposes only) or ground mounted (see
Figure 2 for illustrative purposes only).230
[5] A roof-mounted system may be mounted on a principal
building or accessory building. A roof-mounted system,
whether mounted on the principal building or accessory
building, may not exceed the maximum principal building
height or accessory building height specified for the
building type in this zoning district. In no instance shall
any part of the solar energy system extend beyond the
edge of the roof.
[6] A ground-mounted system shall not exceed the maximum
building height for accessory buildings.
[7] The surface area of a ground-mounted system, regardless
of the mounted angle, shall be calculated as part of the
overall lot coverage.
[8] A ground-mounted system or system attached to an
accessory building shall not be located within the required
front yard setback.
[9] The minimum solar energy system setback distance from
the property lines shall be equivalent to the building
setback or accessory building setback requirement of the
underlying zoning district.
[10] All mechanical equipment associated with and necessary
for the operation of the solar energy system shall comply
with the following:
[a] Mechanical equipment shall be screened from any
adjacent property that is residentially zoned or used
for residential purposes. The screen shall consist of
shrubbery, trees, or other noninvasive plant species
which provides a visual screen. In lieu of a planting
screen, a decorative fence meeting the requirements
of the Code of the Borough of Monaca relating to
zoning may be used.231
230. Editor's Note: Figures 1 and 2 are included at the end of this chapter.
231. Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Fences, Hedges and Walls, and § 245-32, Fences or hedges.
§ 245-8 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-8
237:609
[b] Mechanical equipment shall not be located within the
minimum front yard setback of the underlying zoning
district.
[c] Mechanical equipment shall comply with the setbacks
specified for accessory structures in the underlying
zoning district.
[d] Solar panels shall be placed such that concentrated
solar radiation or glare shall not be directed onto
nearby properties or roadways.
[e] Solar panels shall not be placed in the vicinity of any
airport in a manner that would interfere with airport
flight patterns. Acknowledgement from the Federal
Aviation Administration may be necessary.
[f] All power transmission lines from a ground-mounted
solar energy system to any building or other structure
shall be located underground.
[g] A solar energy system shall not be used to display
advertising, including signage, streamers, pennants,
spinners, reflectors, ribbons, tinsel, balloons, flags,
banners or similar materials. The manufacturers and
equipment information, warning or indication of
ownership shall be allowed on any equipment of the
solar energy provided they comply with the prevailing
sign regulations.
[h] A solar energy system shall not be constructed until a
building/zoning permit has been approved and issued.
[i] The design of the solar energy system shall conform to
applicable industry standards. A building permit shall
be obtained for a solar energy system per the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code (UCC), Act
45 of 1999, as amended, and the regulations adopted
by the Department of Labor and Industry. All wiring
shall comply with the applicable version of the
National Electric Code (NEC). The local utility
provider shall be contacted to determine grid
interconnection and net metering policies. The
Applicant shall submit certificates of design
compliance obtained by the equipment manufacturer
from a certifying organization and any such design
shall be certified by an engineer registered in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
[j] The solar energy system shall comply with all
applicable Monaca Borough ordinances and codes so
§ 245-8 MONACA CODE § 245-8
237:610
as to ensure the structural integrity of such solar
energy system.
[k] Before any construction can commence on any solar
energy system the property owner must acknowledge
that he/she is the responsible party for owning and
maintaining the solar energy system.
[l] If a ground-mounted solar energy system is removed,
any earth disturbance as a result of the removal of the
ground-mounted solar energy system shall be graded
and reseeded.
[11] If a ground-mounted solar energy system has been
abandoned (meaning not having been in operation for a
period of six months) or is defective or is deemed to be
unsafe by the Borough of Monaca Building Code Official,
the solar energy system shall be required to be repaired by
the owner to meet federal, state and local safety
standards, or be removed by the property owner within a
reasonable time period allowed by the Borough of Monaca
Building Code Official. If the owner fails to remove or
repair the defective or abandoned solar energy system, the
Borough of Monaca may pursue a legal action to have the
system removed at the owner's expense.
E. Area and bulk regulations. In the R-1 Single-Family Residential District,
all uses shall be subject to the following regulations except as they may
be modified by the express standards and criteria for the specific uses
by special exception or conditional uses contained in § 245-61.
(1) Minimum lot area requirements:
(a) Residential lots having no public sanitary sewer: 20,000 square
feet per single-family dwelling.
(b) Residential lots having all public utilities: 7,500 square feet per
single-family dwelling.
(c) Public recreation and noncommercial recreation: no minimum.
(d) Essential services:
[1] Underground: no minimum.
[2] Buildings: same as all other uses.
[3] Aboveground, other than buildings: no minimum.
(e) All other uses: one acre.
(2) Minimum lot width requirements:
(a) Lots having no public sanitary sewers: 80 feet.
§ 245-8 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-8
237:611
§ 245-9. R-2 Single-Family and Two-Family Residential District.
(b) Lots having all public utilities: 50 feet.
(c) Public recreation and noncommercial recreation: no minimum.
(3) Minimum front yard requirement: 25 feet.
(4) Minimum side yard requirements:
(a) Principal uses: 10 feet total; five feet minimum on one side.
(b) Principal uses; street side of corner lot: equal to the front yard
depth on the adjoining street.
(c) Accessory uses to the rear of the principal structure:
[1] Interior lot line: five feet.
[2] Street side on corner lot: 25 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard requirements:
(a) Principal uses: 25 feet.
(b) Accessory uses: 10 feet.
(6) Maximum building height:
(a) Essential services:
[1] Underground with aboveground accessory structures:
same as all accessory structures.
[2] Buildings: 2 1/2 stories, not to exceed 35 feet.
[3] Aboveground, other than buildings:
[a] Storage or transmission towers: 150 feet.
[b] All others: 35 feet.
(b) All other principal structures: 2 1/2 stories, not to exceed 35
feet.
(c) All accessory structures: 20 feet.
(7) Maximum lot coverage requirements:
(a) Principal uses: 50% of the total lot area.
(b) Accessory uses: 40% of the rear yard area.
F. Off-street parking requirements: see Article V.
G. Signs: See Article VI.
§ 245-8 MONACA CODE § 245-9
237:612
A. Purpose statement. The purpose of this district is to preserve
established neighborhoods of single-family dwellings and duplexes on
smaller lots and to protect them from encroachment by incompatible
land uses while providing for customary accessory uses and compatible
public and semipublic uses as permitted uses, uses by special exception
and conditional uses. This district is also intended to provide
opportunities for infill housing to encourage the upgrading of older
residential neighborhoods.
B. Permitted uses by right. In the R-2 Single-Family and Two-Family
Residential, District, only the following uses shall be authorized as
permitted uses by right:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Bicycle and pedestrian trails.
(b) Churches.
(c) Communications antenna mounted on an existing public utility
storage or transmission structure, subject to § 245-45.
(d) Essential services.
(e) Noncommercial recreation.
(f) Public buildings.
(g) Public recreation.
(h) Schools, public or private.
(i) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Domiciliary care:
(b) Fences, subject to § 245-32.
(c) Keeping of domestic pets.
(d) No-impact home-based business, subject to § 245-47.
(e) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article V.
(f) Private garages and accessory storage buildings.
(g) Private residential swimming pools, subject to § 245-41.
(h) Signs, subject to Article VI.
(i) Small wind energy system, subject to § 245-49.
§ 245-9 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-9
237:613
(j) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, use by special exception or
conditional use authorized in this district.
C. Uses by special exception. In the R-2 Single-Family and Two-Family
Residential District, only the following uses by special exception shall
be authorized, subject to approval by the Zoning Hearing Board:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Conversion apartments, subject to § 245-61H.
(b) Duplexes, subject to § 245-61J.
(c) Infill housing, subject to § 245-61P.
(d) Nursing homes, subject to § 245-61S.
(e) Personal care boarding home, subject to § 245-61N.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Family day care home, subject to § 245-61K.
(b) Home occupation, subject to § 245-61O.
D. Conditional uses. In the R-2 Single Family and Two-Family Residential
District, only the following conditional uses shall be authorized, subject
to approval by Borough Council:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Conversion of surplus school space, subject to § 245-61I.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Solar energy systems. It is the purpose of this regulation to
promote the safe, effective and efficient use of solar energy
systems installed to reduce the on-site consumption of utility
supplied energy and/or hot water as an accessory use by
conditional use, while protecting the health, safety and welfare
of adjacent and surrounding land uses through appropriate
zoning and land use controls. A solar energy system shall be
permitted as a conditional use accessory to a principal use
herein and subject to specific criteria as set forth below. Where
said general standards and specific criteria overlap, the
specific criteria shall supersede the general standards.
(b) The installation and construction of a solar energy system shall
be subject to the following development and design standards:
[1] A solar energy system is permitted in this zoning district
as a conditional accessory to a principal use.
§ 245-9 MONACA CODE § 245-9
237:614
[2] A solar energy system shall provide power for the principal
use and/or accessory use of the property on which the
solar energy system is located and shall not be used for the
generation of power for the sale of energy to other users,
although this provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit
the sale of excess power generated from time to time to
the local utility company.
[3] A solar energy system connected to the utility grid shall
provide written authorization from the local utility
company to the Borough of Monaca acknowledging and
approving such connection.
[4] A solar energy system may be roof mounted (see Figure 1
for illustrative purposes only) or ground mounted (see
Figure 2 for illustrative purposes only).232
[5] A roof-mounted system may be mounted on a principal
building or accessory building. A roof-mounted system,
whether mounted on the principal building or accessory
building, may not exceed the maximum principal building
height or accessory building height specified for the
building type in this zoning district. In no instance shall
any part of the solar energy system extend beyond the
edge of the roof.
[6] A ground-mounted system shall not exceed the maximum
building height for accessory buildings.
[7] The surface area of a ground-mounted system, regardless
of the mounted angle, shall be calculated as part of the
overall lot coverage.
[8] A ground-mounted system or system attached to an
accessory building shall not be located within the required
front yard setback.
[9] The minimum solar energy system setback distance from
the property lines shall be equivalent to the building
setback or accessory building setback requirement of the
underlying zoning district.
[10] All mechanical equipment associated with and necessary
for the operation of the solar energy system shall comply
with the following:
[a] Mechanical equipment shall be screened from any
adjacent property that is residentially zoned or used
for residential purposes. The screen shall consist of
shrubbery, trees, or other noninvasive plant species
232. Editor's Note: Figures 1 and 2 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 245-9 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-9
237:615
which provides a visual screen. In lieu of a planting
screen, a decorative fence meeting the requirements
of the Code of the Borough of Monaca relating to
zoning may be used.233
[b] Mechanical equipment shall not be located within the
minimum front yard setback of the underlying zoning
district.
[c] Mechanical equipment shall comply with the setbacks
specified for accessory structures in the underlying
zoning district.
[d] Solar panels shall be placed such that concentrated
solar radiation or glare shall not be directed onto
nearby properties or roadways.
[e] Solar panels shall not be placed in the vicinity of any
airport in a manner that would interfere with airport
flight patterns. Acknowledgement from the Federal
Aviation Administration may be necessary.
[f] All power transmission lines from a ground-mounted
solar energy system to any building or other structure
shall be located underground.
[g] A solar energy system shall not be used to display
advertising, including signage, streamers, pennants,
spinners, reflectors, ribbons, tinsel, balloons, flags,
banners or similar materials. The manufacturers and
equipment information, warning or indication of
ownership shall be allowed on any equipment of the
solar energy provided they comply with the prevailing
sign regulations.
[h] A solar energy system shall not be constructed until a
building/zoning permit has been approved and issued.
[i] The design of the solar energy system shall conform to
applicable industry standards. A building permit shall
be obtained for a solar energy system per the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code (UCC), Act
45 of 1999, as amended, and the regulations adopted
by the Department of Labor and Industry. All wiring
shall comply with the applicable version of the
National Electric Code (NEC). The local utility
provider shall be contacted to determine grid
interconnection and net metering policies. The
Applicant shall submit certificates of design
compliance obtained by the equipment manufacturer
233. Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Fences, Hedges and Walls, and § 245-32, Fences or hedges.
§ 245-9 MONACA CODE § 245-9
237:616
from a certifying organization and any such design
shall be certified by an engineer registered in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
[j] The solar energy system shall comply with all
applicable Monaca Borough ordinances and codes so
as to ensure the structural integrity of such solar
energy system.
[k] Before any construction can commence on any solar
energy system the property owner must acknowledge
that he/she is the responsible party for owning and
maintaining the solar energy system.
[l] If a ground-mounted solar energy system is removed,
any earth disturbance as a result of the removal of the
ground-mounted solar energy system shall be graded
and reseeded.
[11] If a ground-mounted solar energy system has been
abandoned (meaning not having been in operation for a
period of six months) or is defective or is deemed to be
unsafe by the Borough of Monaca Building Code Official,
the solar energy system shall be required to be repaired by
the owner to meet federal, state and local safety
standards, or be removed by the property owner within a
reasonable time period allowed by the Borough of Monaca
Building Code Official. If the owner fails to remove or
repair the defective or abandoned solar energy system, the
Borough of Monaca may pursue a legal action to have the
system removed at the owner's expense.
E. Area and bulk requirements. In the R-2 Single-Family and Two-Family
Residential District, all uses shall be subject to the following
regulations except as they may be modified by the express standards
and criteria for the specific uses by special exception or conditional
uses contained in § 245-61:
(1) Minimum lot area requirements:
(a) Lots having no public sanitary sewers: 20,000 square feet per
dwelling unit.
(b) Lots having public sanitary sewers:
[1] Single-family dwelling: 5,000 square feet.
[2] Duplex: 3,500 square feet per dwelling unit.
(c) Public recreation and noncommercial recreation: no minimum.
(d) Essential services:
§ 245-9 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-9
237:617
[1] Underground: no minimum.
[2] Buildings: same as all other uses.
[3] Aboveground, other than buildings: no minimum.
(e) All other uses: 20,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width requirements:
(a) Lots having no public sanitary sewers: 80 feet.
(b) Lots having public sanitary sewers:
[1] Single-family dwellings and duplexes: 50 feet.
[2] Public recreation and noncommercial recreation: no
minimum.
[3] All other uses: 80 feet.
(3) Minimum front yard requirements: 25 feet.
(4) Minimum side yard width requirements:
(a) Principal uses: 10 feet total; five feet minimum on one side.
(b) Street side of corner lot: 20% of the lot width up to a maximum
of 35 feet.
(c) Any lot platted prior to the enactment of this chapter which is
less than 50 feet wide may reduce the two side yards by nine
inches for each foot of difference to a total width not less than
12 feet. Under such circumstances, the width of the narrower
of the two side yards shall not be less than five feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard requirements:
(a) Principal uses: 25 feet.
(b) Accessory uses: five feet.
(6) Maximum building height:
(a) Essential services:
[1] Underground with aboveground accessory structures:
same as all accessory structures.
[2] Buildings: 2 1/2 stories, not to exceed 35 feet.
[3] Aboveground, other than buildings:
[a] Storage or transmission towers: 150 feet.
[b] All others: 35 feet.
§ 245-9 MONACA CODE § 245-9
237:618
§ 245-10. R-3 Multifamily Residential District.
(b) All other principal structures: 2 1/2 stories, not to exceed 35
feet.
(c) All accessory structures: 20 feet.
(7) Maximum lot coverage requirements:
(a) Principal uses: 50% of total lot area.
(b) Accessory uses: 40% of rear yard area.
F. Off-street parking requirements: see Article V.
G. Signs: see Article VI.
A. Purpose statement. The purpose of this district is to preserve
neighborhoods of medium density housing, including single-family
dwellings on small lots, duplexes and multifamily dwellings and to
protect them from encroachment by incompatible land uses while
providing for customary accessory uses and compatible public and
semipublic uses as permitted uses, uses by special exception and
conditional uses. This District is also intended to provide opportunities
for infill housing to encourage the upgrading of older residential
neighborhoods.
B. Permitted uses by right. In the R-3 Multifamily Residential District, only
the following uses shall be authorized as permitted uses by right:
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Bicycle and pedestrian trails.
(b) Churches.
(c) Communications antenna mounted on an existing building,
subject to § 245-45.
(d) Communications antenna mounted on an existing public utility
storage or transmission structure, subject to § 245-45.
(e) Duplexes.
(f) Essential services.
(g) Noncommercial recreation.
(h) Public buildings.
(i) Public recreation.
(j) Schools, public or private.
(k) Single-family dwellings.
§ 245-9 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-10
237:619
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Domiciliary care.
(b) Fences, subject to § 245-32.
(c) Keeping of domestic pets.
(d) No-impact home-based business, subject to § 245-47.
(e) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article V.
(f) Private garages and accessory storage buildings.
(g) Private residential swimming pools, subject to § 245-41.
(h) Signs, subject to Article VI.
(i) Small wind energy system, subject to § 245-49.
(j) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, use by special exception or
conditional use authorized in this district.
C. Uses by special exception. In the R-3 Multifamily Residential District,
only the following uses by special exception shall be authorized, subject
to approval by the Zoning Hearing Board:
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Conversion apartments, subject to § 245-61H.
(b) Garden apartments, subject to § 245-61M.
(c) Infill housing, subject to § 245-61P.
(d) Mid-rise apartments, subject to § 245-61M.
(e) Personal care boarding home, subject to § 245-61N.
(f) Townhouses, subject to § 245-61M.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Family day care home, subject to § 245-61K.
(b) Home occupation, subject to § 245-61O.
(c) Off-site parking, subject to § 245-61T.
D. Conditional uses. In the R-3 Multifamily Residential District, only the
following conditional uses shall be authorized, subject to approval by
Borough Council:
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Conversion of surplus school space, subject to § 245-61I.
§ 245-10 MONACA CODE § 245-10
237:620
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Solar energy systems. It is the purpose of this regulation to
promote the safe, effective and efficient use of solar energy
systems installed to reduce the on-site consumption of utility
supplied energy and/or hot water as an accessory use by
conditional use, while protecting the health, safety and welfare
of adjacent and surrounding land uses through appropriate
zoning and land use controls. A solar energy system shall be
permitted as a conditional use accessory to a principal use
herein and subject to specific criteria as set forth below. Where
said general standards and specific criteria overlap, the
specific criteria shall supersede the general standards.
(b) The installation and construction of a solar energy system shall
be subject to the following development and design standards:
[1] A solar energy system is permitted in this zoning district
as a conditional accessory to a principal use.
[2] A solar energy system shall provide power for the principal
use and/or accessory use of the property on which the
solar energy system is located and shall not be used for the
generation of power for the sale of energy to other users,
although this provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit
the sale of excess power generated from time to time to
the local utility company.
[3] A solar energy system connected to the utility grid shall
provide written authorization from the local utility
company to the Borough of Monaca acknowledging and
approving such connection.
[4] A solar energy system may be roof mounted (see Figure 1
for illustrative purposes only) or ground mounted (see
Figure 2 for illustrative purposes only).234
[5] A roof-mounted system may be mounted on a principal
building or accessory building. A roof-mounted system,
whether mounted on the principal building or accessory
building, may not exceed the maximum principal building
height or accessory building height specified for the
building type in this zoning district. In no instance shall
any part of the solar energy system extend beyond the
edge of the roof.
[6] A ground-mounted system shall not exceed the maximum
building height for accessory buildings.
234. Editor's Note: Figures 1 and 2 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 245-10 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-10
237:621
[7] The surface area of a ground-mounted system, regardless
of the mounted angle, shall be calculated as part of the
overall lot coverage.
[8] A ground-mounted system or system attached to an
accessory building shall not be located within the required
front yard setback.
[9] The minimum solar energy system setback distance from
the property lines shall be equivalent to the building
setback or accessory building setback requirement of the
underlying zoning district.
[10] All mechanical equipment associated with and necessary
for the operation of the solar energy system shall comply
with the following:
[a] Mechanical equipment shall be screened from any
adjacent property that is residentially zoned or used
for residential purposes. The screen shall consist of
shrubbery, trees, or other noninvasive plant species
which provides a visual screen. In lieu of a planting
screen, a decorative fence meeting the requirements
of the Code of the Borough of Monaca relating to
zoning may be used.235
[b] Mechanical equipment shall not be located within the
minimum front yard setback of the underlying zoning
district.
[c] Mechanical equipment shall comply with the setbacks
specified for accessory structures in the underlying
zoning district.
[d] Solar panels shall be placed such that concentrated
solar radiation or glare shall not be directed onto
nearby properties or roadways.
[e] Solar panels shall not be placed in the vicinity of any
airport in a manner that would interfere with airport
flight patterns. Acknowledgement from the Federal
Aviation Administration may be necessary.
[f] All power transmission lines from a ground-mounted
solar energy system to any building or other structure
shall be located underground.
[g] A solar energy system shall not be used to display
advertising, including signage, streamers, pennants,
spinners, reflectors, ribbons, tinsel, balloons, flags,
235. Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Fences, Hedges and Walls, and § 245-32, Fences or hedges.
§ 245-10 MONACA CODE § 245-10
237:622
banners or similar materials. The manufacturers and
equipment information, warning or indication of
ownership shall be allowed on any equipment of the
solar energy provided they comply with the prevailing
sign regulations.
[h] A solar energy system shall not be constructed until a
building/zoning permit has been approved and issued.
[i] The design of the solar energy system shall conform to
applicable industry standards. A building permit shall
be obtained for a solar energy system per the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code (UCC), Act
45 of 1999, as amended, and the regulations adopted
by the Department of Labor and Industry. All wiring
shall comply with the applicable version of the
National Electric Code (NEC). The local utility
provider shall be contacted to determine grid
interconnection and net metering policies. The
Applicant shall submit certificates of design
compliance obtained by the equipment manufacturer
from a certifying organization and any such design
shall be certified by an engineer registered in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
[j] The solar energy system shall comply with all
applicable Monaca Borough ordinances and codes so
as to ensure the structural integrity of such solar
energy system.
[k] Before any construction can commence on any solar
energy system the property owner must acknowledge
that he/she is the responsible party for owning and
maintaining the solar energy system.
[l] If a ground-mounted solar energy system is removed,
any earth disturbance as a result of the removal of the
ground-mounted solar energy system shall be graded
and reseeded.
[11] If a ground-mounted solar energy system has been
abandoned (meaning not having been in operation for a
period of six months) or is defective or is deemed to be
unsafe by the Borough of Monaca Building Code Official,
the solar energy system shall be required to be repaired by
the owner to meet federal, state and local safety
standards, or be removed by the property owner within a
reasonable time period allowed by the Borough of Monaca
Building Code Official. If the owner fails to remove or
repair the defective or abandoned solar energy system, the
§ 245-10 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-10
237:623
Borough of Monaca may pursue a legal action to have the
system removed at the owner's expense.
E. Area and bulk regulations. In the R-3 Multifamily Residential District,
all uses shall be subject to the following regulations except as they may
be modified by the express standards and criteria for the specific uses
by special exception and conditional uses contained in § 245-61:
(1) Minimum lot area requirements:
(a) Lots having no public sanitary sewers: 20,000 square feet per
dwelling unit.
(b) Lots having public sewerage:
[1] Single-family dwellings: 4,000 square feet per dwelling
unit.
[2] Duplexes: 3,500 square feet per dwelling unit.
[3] Townhouses: 3,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
[4] Garden apartments and mid-rise apartments: 2,500 square
feet per dwelling unit.
(c) Public recreation and noncommercial recreation: no minimum.
(d) Essential services:
[1] Underground: no minimum.
[2] Buildings: same as all other uses.
[3] Aboveground, other than buildings: no minimum.
(e) All other uses: 20,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width requirements:
(a) Lots having no public sewers: 80 feet.
(b) Lots having public sewerage:
[1] Single-family dwellings and duplexes: 50 feet.
[2] Townhouses: 20 feet per dwelling unit.
[3] Garden apartments and mid-rise apartments: 60 feet per
building.
(3) Minimum front yard requirements: 25 feet.
(4) Minimum side yard width requirements:
(a) Total width:
§ 245-10 MONACA CODE § 245-10
237:624
[1] Garden apartments and mid-rise apartments: 1/2 the
height of the building or 16 feet, whichever is greater.
[2] All other dwelling units: 10 feet total; five feet minimum on
one side.
(b) Street side of corner lot: 20% of the lot width up to a maximum
of 35 feet.
(5) Maximum building height requirements:
(a) Mid-rise apartments: six stories, not to exceed 72 feet.
(b) Garden apartments: three stories, not to exceed 45 feet.
(c) Townhouses, Duplexes and single-family dwellings: 2 1/2
stories, not to exceed 35 feet.
(d) Essential services:
[1] Underground with aboveground accessory structures:
same as all accessory structures.
[2] Buildings: 2 1/2 stories, not to exceed 35 feet.
[3] Aboveground, other than buildings:
[a] Storage or transmission towers: 150 feet.
[b] All others: 35 feet.
(e) All other principal structures: three stories, not to exceed 45
feet.
(f) Accessory structures: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum rear yard requirements:
(a) Principal uses:
[1] Garden apartments and mid-rise apartments: 40 feet.
[2] Townhouses, duplexes and single-family dwellings: 25 feet.
(b) Accessory uses: five feet.
(7) Maximum lot coverage requirements:
(a) Garden apartments and mid-rise apartments: 30% of total lot
area.
(b) Townhouses, duplexes and single-family dwellings: 50% of
total lot area.
F. Off-street parking requirements: see Article V.
G. Signs: see Article VI.
§ 245-10 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-11
237:625
§ 245-11. C-C Core Commercial District.
A. Purpose statement. The purpose of this district is to preserve the
Borough's downtown business district and to promote its revitalization;
to provide retail, shopping, entertainment and services to residents of
the Borough and surrounding communities; to take advantage of the
regional traffic traversing the Borough enroute to the Beaver Valley
Mall; and to develop a market niche complementary to the regional mall
businesses.
B. Permitted uses by right. In the C-C Core Commercial, District only the
following uses shall be authorized as permitted uses by right:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Antiques, interior decorating.
(b) Apparel and accessories store.
(c) Appliance or home furnishing store.
(d) Art, book, stationery store.
(e) Art, music or photography studio.
(f) Bakery, retail.
(g) Bar or tavern.
(h) Beverage distributor.
(i) Bicycle and pedestrian trails.
(j) Business or professional offices.
(k) Business services.
(l) Candy or ice cream store.
(m) Card and gift shop.
(n) Commercial indoor recreation.
(o) Commercial school.
(p) Communications antenna mounted on an existing building,
subject to § 245-45.
(q) Communications antenna mounted on an existing public utility
storage or transmission structure, subject to § 245-45.
(r) Convenience store.
(s) Custom print shop.
(t) Day-dare center.
§ 245-11 MONACA CODE § 245-11
237:626
(u) Day spa.
(v) Delicatessen.
(w) Drugstore.
(x) Dry-cleaning pick-up store.
(y) Educational studio.
(z) Essential services.
(aa) Financial institution.
(bb) Fire and emergency medical services.
(cc) Florist shop, excluding greenhouse.
(dd) General merchandise store.
(ee) Grocery store.
(ff) Hardware store.
(gg) Health club.
(hh) Hobby shop.
(ii) Hotel or motel.
(jj) Laundromat.
(kk) Libraries.
(ll) Medical clinic.
(mm) Museums.
(nn) Newsstand.
(oo) Other retail stores not specifically listed in this § 245-11B(1).
(pp) Outdoor cafe, subject to § 245-48.
(qq) Personal services.
(rr) Pet grooming.
(ss) Pet services.
(tt) Private club.
(uu) Public buildings.
(vv) Public parking garage, subject to § 245-20.
(ww) Public parking lot, subject to § 245-20.
§ 245-11 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-11
237:627
(xx) Public recreation.
(yy) Restaurant, carry-out.
(zz) Restaurant, fast-food.
(aaa) Restaurant, sit-down.
(bbb) Veterinary clinic.
(ccc) Video store, excluding adult video store.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Drive-through facilities, subject to § 245-46.
(b) Historic markers.
(c) Monuments, statuary.
(d) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article V.
(e) Private garages.
(f) Signs, subject to Article VI.
(g) Small wind energy systems, subject to § 245-49.
(h) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, use by special exception or
conditional use authorized in this district.
C. Uses by special exception. In the C-C Core Commercial District, only
the following uses by special exception shall be authorized, subject to
approval by the Zoning Hearing Board:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Apartment in combination with business, subject to § 245-61B.
(b) Comparable uses not specifically listed, subject to § 245-61F.
(c) Funeral home, subject to § 245-61L.
(d) Personal care boarding home, subject to § 245-61N.
(e) Repair shop, subject to § 245-61X.
(f) Service station, subject to § 245-61AA.
(g) Temporary use or structure, subject to § 245-61EE.
(h) Vehicle accessories sales and installation, subject to 245-61FF.
(i) Vehicle rental, sales and service, subject to § 245-61GG.
(j) Vehicle repair shop, subject to § 245-61HH.
§ 245-11 MONACA CODE § 245-11
237:628
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Off-site parking, subject to § 245-61T.
(b) Outdoor sales, subject to § 245-61U.
D. Conditional uses. In the C-C Core Commercial, District only the
following uses shall be authorized, subject to approval by Borough
Council:
(1) Principal uses: none.
(2) Accessory uses: none.
E. Area and bulk regulations. In the C-C Core Commercial District, all uses
shall be subject to the following regulations except as they may be
modified by the express standards and criteria for the specific uses by
special exception or conditional uses contained in § 245-61:
(1) Minimum lot area requirement: 1,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width requirement: 20 feet.
(3) Minimum front yard: none required.
(4) Minimum side yard requirement: none required.
(5) Minimum rear yard requirement:
(a) Adjoining existing alleys of record: 30 feet from the center line
of the alley.
(b) All others: none required.
(6) Maximum building height:
(a) Essential services:
[1] Underground with aboveground accessory structures:
same as all accessory structures.
[2] Buildings: four stories, not to exceed 50 feet.
[3] Aboveground, other than buildings:
[a] Storage or transmission towers: 150 feet.
[b] All others: 50 feet.
(b) All other principal structures: four stories, not to exceed 50
feet.
(c) All accessory structures: 20 feet.
§ 245-11 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-11
237:629
§ 245-12. PROD Planned River-Oriented Development District.
(7) Maximum lot coverage: none required, except as necessary to meet
the requirements of this chapter to provide off-street parking and
loading.
F. Off-street parking requirements: see Article V.
G. Signs: see Article VI.
A. Purpose statement. The purpose of this district is to promote the
private redevelopment of properties for higher-density residential use
in an area of the Borough that has easy access to the river and the
Borough's business district and to take advantage of views of the river,
the recreational opportunities afforded by the river and the pump
station, as well as the shopping and services available within walking
distance in the business district.
B. Permitted uses by right. In the PROD Planned River-Oriented
Development District, only the following uses shall be authorized as
permitted uses by right:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Bicycle and pedestrian trails.
(b) Churches.
(c) Communications antenna mounted on an existing building,
subject to § 245-45.
(d) Communications antenna mounted on an existing public utility
storage or transmission structure, subject to § 245-45.
(e) Duplexes existing on January 1, 2010.
(f) Essential services.
(g) Noncommercial recreation.
(h) Public buildings.
(i) Public recreation.
(j) Single-family dwellings existing on January 1, 2010.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Fences, subject to § 245-32.
(b) Keeping of domestic pets.
(c) No-impact home-based business, subject to § 245-47.
(d) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article V.
§ 245-11 MONACA CODE § 245-12
237:630
(e) Private garages and accessory storage buildings.
(f) Private residential swimming pools, subject to § 245-41.
(g) Signs, subject to Article VI.
(h) Small wind energy system, subject to § 245-49.
(i) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, use by special exception or
conditional use authorized in this district.
C. Uses by special exception. In the PROD Planned River-Oriented
Development District, only the following uses by special exception shall
be authorized, subject to approval by the Zoning Hearing Board:
(1) Principal uses: none.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Bed-and-breakfast, subject to § 245-61C.
(b) Family day care home, subject to § 245-61K.
(c) Home occupation, subject to § 245-61O.
(d) Off-site parking, subject to § 245-61T.
D. Conditional uses. In the PROD Planned River-Oriented Development
District, only the following conditional uses shall be authorized, subject
to approval by Borough Council:
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Planned River-Oriented Development, subject to § 245-61-V,
including one or more of the following uses:
[1] Garden apartments.
[2] High-rise apartments.
[3] Hotel or motel.
[4] Mid-rise apartments.
[5] Townhouses.
(b) Riverfront sit-down restaurant, subject to § 245-61Y.
(c) Single-family dwellings or duplexes reconstructed after
January 1, 2010, subject to § 245-61CC.
(d) Street floor commercial uses in a Planned River-Oriented
Development, subject to § 245-61DD, including and limited to
only the following uses:
§ 245-12 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-12
237:631
[1] Business or professional offices.
[2] Day-care center.
[3] Day spa.
[4] Delicatessen.
[5] Health club.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Solar energy systems. It is the purpose of this regulation to
promote the safe, effective and efficient use of solar energy
systems installed to reduce the on-site consumption of utility
supplied energy and/or hot water as an accessory use by
conditional use, while protecting the health, safety and welfare
of adjacent and surrounding land uses through appropriate
zoning and land use controls. A solar energy system shall be
permitted as a conditional use accessory to a principal use
herein and subject to specific criteria as set forth below. Where
said general standards and specific criteria overlap, the
specific criteria shall supersede the general standards.
(b) The installation and construction of a solar energy system shall
be subject to the following development and design standards:
[1] A solar energy system is permitted in this zoning district
as a conditional accessory to a principal use.
[2] A solar energy system shall provide power for the principal
use and/or accessory use of the property on which the
solar energy system is located and shall not be used for the
generation of power for the sale of energy to other users,
although this provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit
the sale of excess power generated from time to time to
the local utility company.
[3] A solar energy system connected to the utility grid shall
provide written authorization from the local utility
company to the Borough of Monaca acknowledging and
approving such connection.
[4] A solar energy system may be roof mounted (see Figure 1
for illustrative purposes only) or ground mounted (see
Figure 2 for illustrative purposes only).236
[5] A roof-mounted system may be mounted on a principal
building or accessory building. A roof-mounted system,
whether mounted on the principal building or accessory
building, may not exceed the maximum principal building
236. Editor's Note: Figures 1 and 2 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 245-12 MONACA CODE § 245-12
237:632
height or accessory building height specified for the
building type in this zoning district. In no instance shall
any part of the solar energy system extend beyond the
edge of the roof.
[6] A ground-mounted system shall not exceed the maximum
building height for accessory buildings.
[7] The surface area of a ground-mounted system, regardless
of the mounted angle, shall be calculated as part of the
overall lot coverage.
[8] A ground-mounted system or system attached to an
accessory building shall not be located within the required
front yard setback.
[9] The minimum solar energy system setback distance from
the property lines shall be equivalent to the building
setback or accessory building setback requirement of the
underlying zoning district.
[10] All mechanical equipment associated with and necessary
for the operation of the solar energy system shall comply
with the following:
[a] Mechanical equipment shall be screened from any
adjacent property that is residentially zoned or used
for residential purposes. The screen shall consist of
shrubbery, trees, or other noninvasive plant species
which provides a visual screen. In lieu of a planting
screen, a decorative fence meeting the requirements
of the Code of the Borough of Monaca relating to
zoning may be used.237
[b] Mechanical equipment shall not be located within the
minimum front yard setback of the underlying zoning
district.
[c] Mechanical equipment shall comply with the setbacks
specified for accessory structures in the underlying
zoning district.
[d] Solar panels shall be placed such that concentrated
solar radiation or glare shall not be directed onto
nearby properties or roadways.
[e] Solar panels shall not be placed in the vicinity of any
airport in a manner that would interfere with airport
flight patterns. Acknowledgement from the Federal
Aviation Administration may be necessary.
237. Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Fences, Hedges and Walls, and § 245-32, Fences or hedges.
§ 245-12 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-12
237:633
[f] All power transmission lines from a ground-mounted
solar energy system to any building or other structure
shall be located underground.
[g] A solar energy system shall not be used to display
advertising, including signage, streamers, pennants,
spinners, reflectors, ribbons, tinsel, balloons, flags,
banners or similar materials. The manufacturers and
equipment information, warning or indication of
ownership shall be allowed on any equipment of the
solar energy provided they comply with the prevailing
sign regulations.
[h] A solar energy system shall not be constructed until a
building/zoning permit has been approved and issued.
[i] The design of the solar energy system shall conform to
applicable industry standards. A building permit shall
be obtained for a solar energy system per the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code (UCC), Act
45 of 1999, as amended, and the regulations adopted
by the Department of Labor and Industry. All wiring
shall comply with the applicable version of the
National Electric Code (NEC). The local utility
provider shall be contacted to determine grid
interconnection and net metering policies. The
Applicant shall submit certificates of design
compliance obtained by the equipment manufacturer
from a certifying organization and any such design
shall be certified by an engineer registered in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
[j] The solar energy system shall comply with all
applicable Monaca Borough ordinances and codes so
as to ensure the structural integrity of such solar
energy system.
[k] Before any construction can commence on any solar
energy system the property owner must acknowledge
that he/she is the responsible party for owning and
maintaining the solar energy system.
[l] If a ground-mounted solar energy system is removed,
any earth disturbance as a result of the removal of the
ground-mounted solar energy system shall be graded
and reseeded.
[11] If a ground-mounted solar energy system has been
abandoned (meaning not having been in operation for a
period of six months) or is defective or is deemed to be
unsafe by the Borough of Monaca Building Code Official,
the solar energy system shall be required to be repaired by
§ 245-12 MONACA CODE § 245-12
237:634
the owner to meet federal, state and local safety
standards, or be removed by the property owner within a
reasonable time period allowed by the Borough of Monaca
Building Code Official. If the owner fails to remove or
repair the defective or abandoned solar energy system, the
Borough of Monaca may pursue a legal action to have the
system removed at the owner's expense.
E. Area and bulk regulations. In the PROD Planned River-Oriented
Development District, all uses shall be subject to the following
regulations except as they may be modified by the express standards
and criteria for the specific uses by special exception or conditional
uses in § 245-61:
(1) Minimum lot area requirement:
(a) Single-family dwelling existing on January 1, 2010: none
required.
(b) Duplex existing on January 1, 2010: none required.
(c) Public recreation or noncommercial recreation: 7,500 square
feet.
(d) Planned river-oriented development:
[1] Townhouses or garden apartments: 15,000 square feet.
[2] Mid-rise apartments or high-rise apartments: 40,000
square feet.
(e) Riverfront sit-down restaurant: 20,000 square feet.
(f) Essential services:
[1] Underground: no minimum.
[2] Buildings: same as all other uses.
[3] Aboveground, other than buildings: no minimum.
(g) All other uses: 20,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width:
(a) Single-family dwelling or duplex existing on January 1, 2010:
as recorded on existing lot of record.
(b) Single-family dwelling or duplex reconstructed after January 1,
2010: as recorded on existing lot of record.
(c) Public recreation or noncommercial recreation: 50 feet.
(d) Planned river-oriented development: 100 feet.
(e) Riverfront sit-down restaurant: 100 feet.
§ 245-12 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-12
237:635
(f) All other uses: 75 feet.
(3) Maximum lot coverage:
(a) Single-family dwelling or duplex existing on January 1, 2010:
50%,
(b) Single-family dwelling or duplex reconstructed after January 1,
2010: 50%.
(c) Planned river-oriented development: as specified in conditional
use approval.
(d) All other uses: 50%.
(4) Maximum dwelling unit density:
(a) Garden apartments: 24 units per acre.
(b) Mid-rise apartments: 36 units per acre.
(c) High-rise apartments: 52 units per acre.
(d) Townhouses: 18 units per acre.
(5) Minimum front yard:
(a) Single-family dwelling or duplex existing on January 1, 2010:
25 feet.
(b) Single-family dwelling or duplex reconstructed after January 1,
2010: 25 feet.
(c) Planned river-oriented development: as specified in conditional
use approval.
(d) All other uses: 25 feet.
(6) Minimum rear yard:
(a) Single-family dwelling or duplex existing on January 1, 2010:
15 feet.
(b) Single-family dwelling or duplex reconstructed after January 1,
2010: 15 feet.
(c) Planned river-oriented development: as specified in conditional
use approval.
(d) All other principal uses: 30 feet.
(e) All accessory structures: five feet.
(7) Minimum side yard:
§ 245-12 MONACA CODE § 245-12
237:636
§ 245-13. MUT Mixed Use Transitional District.
(a) Single-family dwelling or duplex existing on January 1, 2010:
five feet one side; 10 feet total.
(b) Single-family dwelling or duplex reconstructed after January 1,
2010: five feet one side; 10 feet total.
(c) Planned river-oriented development: as specified in conditional
use approval.
(d) All other principal uses: 15 feet.
(e) All accessory structures: five feet.
(8) Minimum riverfront setback: 50 feet from the top of the bank.
(9) River access points: at least two points of pedestrian and/or
vehicular access to the river shall be provided for any property that
has 300 or more feet of frontage along the river. For properties that
have less than 300 feet of frontage along the river, at least one
point of pedestrian and/or vehicular access to the river shall be
provided.
(10) Maximum height:
(a) High-rise apartments in a PROD: nine stories, but no more than
120 feet.
(b) Mid-rise apartments in a PROD: six stories, but no more than
72 feet.
(c) Essential services:
[1] Underground with aboveground accessory structures:
same as all accessory structures.
[2] Buildings: 2 1/2 stories, not to exceed 35 feet.
[3] Aboveground, other than buildings:
[a] Storage or transmission towers: 150 feet.
[b] All others: 35 feet.
(d) All other principal structures: three stories, but no more than
45 feet.
(e) All accessory structures: one story, but no more than 20 feet.
F. Off-street parking and loading: see Article V.
G. Signs: see Article VI.
§ 245-12 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-13
237:637
A. Purpose statement. The purpose of this district is to provide for the
transition between the commercial and industrial corridor along
Pennsylvania and Beaver Avenues and the residential neighborhoods to
the south and to provide for group living arrangements in an area
where there is an existing mix of residential and heavy commercial
uses.
B. Permitted uses by right. In the MUT Mixed Use Transitional District
only the following uses shall be authorized as permitted uses by right:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Bicycle and pedestrian trails.
(b) Business or professional offices.
(c) Carpentry, electrical, plumbing, heating or sheet metal shop.
(d) Commercial indoor recreation.
(e) Communications antenna mounted on an existing public utility
storage or transmission structure, subject to § 245-45.
(f) Custom print shop.
(g) Essential services.
(h) Machine shop.
(i) Product assembly.
(j) Product packaging.
(k) Repair shop.
(l) Single-family dwelling.
(m) Upholstery or furniture repair shop.
(n) Vehicle accessories sales and installation.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article V.
(b) Private garages.
(c) Signs, subject to Article VI.
(d) Small wind energy system, subject to § 245-49.
(e) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, use by special exception or
conditional use authorized in this district.
§ 245-13 MONACA CODE § 245-13
237:638
C. Uses by special exception. In the MUT Mixed Use Transitional District,
only the following uses by special exception shall be authorized, subject
to approval by the Zoning Hearing Board:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Comparable uses not specifically listed, subject to § 245-61F.
(b) Group care facility, subject to § 245-61N.
(c) Temporary use or structure, subject to § 245-61EE.
(d) Transitional dwelling, subject to § 245-61N.
(e) Vehicle repair shop, subject to § 245-61HH.
(2) Accessory uses: none.
D. Conditional uses. In the MUT Mixed Use Transitional, District only the
following uses shall be authorized, subject to approval by Borough
Council:
(1) Principal uses: none.
(2) Accessory uses: none.
E. Area and bulk regulations. In the MUT Mixed Use Transitional District,
all uses shall be subject to the following regulations except as they may
be modified by the express standards and criteria for the specific uses
by special exception or conditional uses contained in § 245-61:
(1) Minimum lot area requirement:
(a) Single-family dwelling, group care facility, transitional
dwelling: 3,000 square feet.
(b) Business or professional offices: 6,000 square feet.
(c) Essential services:
[1] Underground: no minimum.
[2] Buildings: same as all other uses.
[3] Aboveground, other than buildings: no minimum.
(d) All other principal uses: 10,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width requirement:
(a) Single-family dwellings: 20 feet.
(b) All other principal uses: 40 feet.
(3) Minimum front yard requirement: 10 feet.
(4) Minimum side yard requirement: three feet.
§ 245-13 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-13
237:639
§ 245-14. RBP Riverfront Business Park District.
(5) Minimum rear yard requirement:
(a) Adjoining existing alleys of record: 30 feet from the center line
of the alley.
(b) All others: 10 feet.
(6) Maximum building height:
(a) Essential services:
[1] Underground with aboveground accessory structures:
same as all accessory structures.
[2] Buildings: 2 1/2 stories, not to exceed 35 feet.
[3] Aboveground, other than buildings:
[a] Storage or transmission towers: 150 feet.
[b] All others: 35 feet.
(b) All other principal structures: 2 1/2 stories, not to exceed 35
feet.
(c) All accessory structures: 20 feet.
(7) Maximum lot coverage: none required, except as necessary to meet
the requirements of this chapter to provide off-street parking and
loading.
F. Off-street parking requirements: see Article V.
G. Signs: see Article VI.
A. Purpose statement. The purpose of this district is to promote the
development of river-oriented residential uses, offices, research and
development and limited light industrial uses that take advantage of the
waterfront setting by accommodating both water-dependent and nonwater-
dependent uses in a well-planned campus-style setting.
B. Permitted uses by right. In the RBP Riverfront Business Park District,
only the following uses shall be authorized as permitted uses by right:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Bicycle and pedestrian trails.
(b) Communications antenna mounted on an existing building,
subject to § 245-45.
(c) Communications antenna mounted on an existing public utility
storage or transmission structure, subject to § 245-45.
§ 245-13 MONACA CODE § 245-14
237:640
(d) Communications antenna mounted on an approved
communications tower, subject to § 245-45.
(e) Essential services.
(f) Fire and emergency medical services.
(g) Public parking garage, subject to § 245-20.
(h) Public parking lot, subject to § 245-20.
(i) Public recreation.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article V.
(b) Private garages.
(c) Signs, subject to Article VI .
(d) Small wind energy system, subject to § 245-49.
(e) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, use by special exception or
conditional use authorized in this district.
C. Uses by special exception:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Comparable uses not specifically listed, subject to § 245-61F.
(b) Temporary use or structure, subject to § 245-61EE.
(2) Accessory uses: none.
D. Conditional uses. In the RBP Riverfront Business Park District, only the
following conditional uses shall be authorized, subject to approval by
Borough Council:
(1) Principal uses. All of the following uses shall be subject to the
express standards and criteria specified in § 245-61G of this
chapter:
(a) Boat launch ramps, further subject to § 245-61D.
(b) Business or professional offices.
(c) Carpentry, electrical, plumbing or sheet metal shop.
(d) Commercial indoor entertainment.
(e) Commercial outdoor entertainment.
(f) Commercial laundry or dry-cleaning plant.
§ 245-14 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-14
237:641
(g) Communications tower, further subject to § 245-61E.
(h) Contracting business.
(i) Garden apartments.
(j) Highrise apartments.
(k) Hotel or motel.
(l) Manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or
treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics,
pharmaceuticals, toiletries and food products.
(m) Manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of
articles of merchandise from the following previously prepared
materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt,
fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or
semiprecious metals or stone, shell, textiles, tobacco, wax,
wood and yarn.
(n) Manufacture of ceramic products, using only previously
pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas.
(o) Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, rubber or
metal stamps and other small molded rubber products.
(p) Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic
instruments and devices.
(q) Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packing or
treatment, excluding such uses or processes which produce or
emit dust, smoke, refuse matter, toxic or noxious odors, gases
and fumes, excessive noise or vibration, similar substances and
conditions.
(r) Marinas.
(s) Mid-rise apartments.
(t) Mini-warehouse or self-storage facility, further subject to
§ 245-61Q.
(u) Product assembly.
(v) Product packaging.
(w) Public buildings.
(x) Public utility building or structure.
(y) Repair shop, further subject to § 245-61X.
(z) Research and development.
(aa) Supply yard.
§ 245-14 MONACA CODE § 245-14
237:642
(bb) Townhouses.
(cc) Truck terminal.
(dd) Upholstery or furniture repair shop.
(ee) Vehicle repair shop, further subject to § 245-61HH.
(ff) Warehousing and distribution.
(gg) Wholesaling.
(hh) Oil and natural gas exploration, drilling and extraction
operations; oil and/or gas well site(s); natural gas processing
plant(s); or any similar facilities performing the equivalent
functions, all further subject to § 245-61II of this chapter.
[Added 10-9-2012 by Ord. No. 929]
(2) Accessory uses: none.
E. Area and bulk regulations. In the RBP Riverfront Business Park District,
all uses shall be subject to the following regulations except as they may
be modified by the express standards and criteria for the specific uses
by special exception or conditional uses contained in § 245-61:
(1) Minimum lot area requirements:
(a) Essential services:
[1] Underground: no minimum.
[2] Buildings: same as all other uses.
[3] Aboveground, other than buildings: no minimum.
(b) All other uses: 30,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width requirements: 150 feet.
(3) Minimum front yard requirements: 35 feet.
(4) Minimum side yard requirements: 20 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard requirements: 35 feet.
(6) Minimum setback from river and railroad: 30 feet.
(7) Minimum riverfront setback: 50 feet from the top of the bank.
(8) River Access Points: At least two points of pedestrian and/or
vehicular access to the river shall be provided for any property that
has 300 or more feet of frontage along the river. For properties that
have less than 300 feet of frontage along the river, at least one
point of pedestrian and/or vehicular access to the river shall be
provided.
§ 245-14 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-14
237:643
§ 245-15. G-I General Industrial District.
(9) Maximum dwelling unit density:
(a) Garden apartments: 24 units per acre.
(b) Mid-rise apartments: 36 units per acre.
(c) High-rise apartments: 52 units per acre.
(d) Townhouses: 18 units per acre.
(10) Maximum building height requirement:
(a) High-rise apartments: nine stories, but no more than 120 feet.
(b) Mid-rise apartments: six stories, but no more than 72 feet.
(c) Essential services:
[1] Underground with aboveground accessory structures:
same as all accessory structures.
[2] Buildings: 2 1/2 stories, not to exceed 35 feet.
[3] Aboveground, other than buildings:
[a] Storage or transmission towers: 150 feet.
[b] All others: 35 feet.
(d) All other principal structures: four stories, not to exceed 60
feet.
(e) All accessory uses: one story, not to exceed 20 feet.
(11) Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
F. Off-street parking and loading: see Article V.
G. Signs: see Article VI.
A. Purpose statement. The purpose of this district is to preserve the
Borough's industrial base while accommodating compatible industrial
uses in appropriate locations in the Borough to take advantage of rail
and water transportation while minimizing impacts on the Borough's
residential neighborhoods.
B. Permitted uses by right. In the G-I General Industrial District, only the
following uses shall be authorized as permitted uses by right:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Bicycle and pedestrian trails.
(b) Business or professional offices.
§ 245-14 MONACA CODE § 245-15
237:644
(c) Carpentry, electrical, plumbing, heating or sheet metal shop.
(d) Commercial laundry or dry-cleaning plant.
(e) Communications antenna mounted on an existing building,
subject to § 245-45.
(f) Communications antenna mounted on an existing public utility
storage or transmission structure, subject to § 245-45.
(g) Communications antenna mounted on an approved
communications tower, subject to § 245-45.
(h) Contracting business.
(i) Essential services.
(j) Fire and emergency medical services.
(k) Machine shop.
(l) Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging or
treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics,
pharmaceuticals, toiletries and food products.
(m) Manufacturing, compounding, assembling or treatment of
articles of merchandise from the following previously prepared
materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt,
fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or
semiprecious metals or stone, shell, textiles, tobacco, wax,
wood and yarn.
(n) Manufacturing of ceramic products, using only previously
pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas.
(o) Manufacturing of musical instruments, toys, novelties, rubber
or metal stamps and other small molded rubber products.
(p) Manufacturing or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic
instruments and devices.
(q) Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packing or
treatment, excluding such uses or processes which produce or
emit dust, smoke, refuse matter, toxic or noxious odors, gases
and fumes, excessive noise or vibration, similar substances and
conditions.
(r) Product assembly.
(s) Product packaging.
(t) Public parking garage.
(u) Public parking lot.
§ 245-15 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-15
237:645
(v) Public utility building or structure.
(w) Repair shop.
(x) Research and development.
(y) Supply yard.
(z) Truck terminal.
(aa) Upholstery or furniture repair shop.
(bb) Vehicle repair shop.
(cc) Warehousing and distribution.
(dd) Wholesaling.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article V.
(b) Private garages.
(c) Signs, subject to Article VI.
(d) Small wind energy system, subject to § 245-49.
(e) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, use by special exception or
conditional use authorized in this district.
C. Uses by special exception. In the G-I General Industrial District, only
the following uses by special exception shall be authorized, subject to
approval by the Zoning Hearing Board:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Comparable uses not specifically listed, subject to § 245-61F.
(b) Miniwarehouse or self-storage facility, subject to § 245-61Q.
(c) Temporary use or structure, subject to § 245-61EE.
(2) Accessory uses: none.
D. Conditional uses:
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Adult business, subject to § 245-61A.
(b) Communications tower, subject to § 245-61E.
(2) Accessory uses: none.
E. Prohibited uses. Uses specifically prohibited include:
§ 245-15 MONACA CODE § 245-15
237:646
(1) Abattoirs or slaughterhouses.
(2) Dead animal or offal reduction.
(3) Fertilizer manufacture.
(4) Other similar manufacturing processes that may create nuisances
or violate the performance standards of § 245-62.
F. Area and bulk requirements. In the G-I General Industrial District, all
uses shall be subject to the following regulations except as they may be
modified by the express standards and criteria for the specific uses by
special exception or conditional uses contained in § 245-61:
(1) Minimum lot area requirements:
(a) Essential services:
[1] Underground: no minimum.
[2] Buildings: same as all other uses.
[3] Aboveground, other than buildings: no minimum.
(b) All other lots having no public sewer: 20,000 square feet.
(c) All other lots having all utilities: 7,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width requirements:
(a) Lots having no public sewer: 80 feet.
(b) Lots having all utilities: 60 feet.
(3) Minimum front yard requirements:
(a) Facing an R-1, R-2 or R-3 District: 30 feet.
(b) All other front yards: 25 feet.
(4) Minimum side yard requirements: 20 feet total; eight feet minimum
one side.
(5) Minimum rear yard requirements:
(a) Adjoining an R-1, R-2 or R-3 District: 40 feet.
(b) All other rear yards: 25 feet.
(6) Maximum building height:
(a) Essential services:
[1] Underground with aboveground accessory structures:
same as all accessory structures.
[2] Buildings: 2 1/2 stories, not to exceed 35 feet.
§ 245-15 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-15
237:647
§ 245-16. PAW Public Access Waterfront District.
[3] Aboveground, other than buildings:
[a] Storage or transmission towers: 150 feet.
[b] All others: 150 feet.
(b) All other principal structures: four stories, not to exceed 50
feet.
(c) All accessory structures: 25 feet.
(7) Maximum lot coverage: 50%.
G. Off-street parking and loading requirements: See Article V.
H. Signs: See Article VI.
A. Purpose statement. The purpose of this district is to provide public
access to the waterfront; to preserve habitat and protect the natural
environment by limiting the construction of buildings; and to promote
preservation of open space and recreational use of a portion of the
Borough's waterfront.
B. Permitted uses by right. In the PAW Public Access Waterfront District,
only the following uses shall be authorized as permitted uses by right:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Bicycle and pedestrian trails.
(b) Communications antenna mounted on an approved
communications tower, subject to § 245-45.
(c) Communications antenna mounted on an existing public utility
storage or transmission structure, subject to § 245-45.
(d) Essential services.
(e) Marina.
(f) Public parking lot, subject to § 245-20.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Historic markers.
(b) Monuments, statuary.
(c) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article V.
(d) Public restrooms.
(e) Signs, subject to Article VI.
§ 245-15 MONACA CODE § 245-16
237:648
(f) Small wind energy system, subject to § 245-49.
(g) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, use by special exception or
conditional use authorized in this district.
C. Uses by special exception. In the PAW Public Access Waterfront
District, only the following uses by special exception shall be
authorized, subject to approval by the Zoning Hearing Board:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Comparable uses not specifically listed, subject to § 245-61F.
(b) Temporary use or structure, subject to § 245-61EE.
(2) Accessory uses: none.
D. Conditional uses. In the PAW Public Access Waterfront District, only the
following conditional uses shall be authorized, subject to approval by
Borough Council:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Communications tower, subject to § 245-61E.
(b) River-oriented recreational uses, subject to § 245-61Z,
including, but not limited to:
[1] Amphitheaters.
[2] Boat docks, public or private.
[3] Boat launch ramps, public or private.
[4] Fishing piers.
[5] Nature interpretation centers.
[6] Public recreation.
[7] River overlooks.
(2) Accessory uses: none.
E. Area and bulk regulations. In the PAW Public Access Waterfront
District, all uses shall be subject to the following regulations except as
they may be modified by the express standards and criteria for the
specific uses by special exception or conditional uses contained in
§ 245-61:
(1) Minimum lot area requirements: no minimum.
(2) Minimum lot width requirements: no minimum.
(3) Minimum front yard requirements:
§ 245-16 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-16
237:649
(a) Facing an R-1, R-2 or R-3 District: 30 feet.
(b) All other front yards: 25 feet.
(4) Minimum side yard requirements:
(a) Facing an R-1, R-2 or R-3 District: 30 feet.
(b) All other front yards: 25 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard requirements:
(a) Adjoining an R-1, R-2 or R-3 District: 40 feet.
(b) All other rear yards: 25 feet.
(6) Minimum riverfront setback: 50 feet from the top of the bank.
(7) River access points: At least two points of pedestrian and/or
vehicular access to the river shall be provided for any property that
has 300 or more feet of frontage along the river. For properties that
have less than 300 feet of frontage along the river, at least one
point of pedestrian and/or vehicular access to the river shall be
provided.
(8) Maximum building height:
(a) Essential services:
[1] Underground with aboveground accessory structures:
same as all accessory structures.
[2] Buildings: 2 1/2 stories, not to exceed 35 feet.
[3] Aboveground, other than buildings:
[a] Storage or transmission towers: 150 feet.
[b] All others: 35 feet.
(b) All other principal structures: two stories, not to exceed 25
feet.
(c) All accessory structures: 20 feet.
(9) Maximum lot coverage: 20%.
F. Lighting.
(1) The appearance of the waterfront at night shall be a major planning
consideration, and a lighting plan shall be developed for the district
as a whole. Lighting shall be low level and low intensity. Light poles
and fixtures should be uniform throughout the district. Lighting
shall be used to dramatize the bridges and landmarks and
entryways to the Public Access Waterfront District.
§ 245-16 MONACA CODE § 245-16
237:650
§ 245-17. S-C Special Conservation District.
(2) Metal halide is the recommended light source. Where possible,
lights shall be located across from each other to give a sense of
balance. It is recommended that there should be 30 feet to 35 feet
of spacing between light fixtures with a pole height of 10 feet to 15
feet.
(3) Low-level lighting of walls, steps, greenery or pavement should be
located at a height below eye level. Lighting of walkways should be
10 feet to 15 feet high. Light fixtures should be 30 feet to 35 feet
apart. Walkway lighting should be decorative and cast a light of
warm tone. Lighting of parking and roadways shall be 25 to 30 feet
high. Lighting shall light the parking area or roadway without
illuminating the entire area. The following intensity standards shall
apply:
(a) Parking areas: an average of 1.5 footcandles throughout.
(b) Intersections: three footcandles.
(c) Maximum at property lines: 1.0 footcandles.
G. Off-street parking: see Article V.
H. Signs: see Article VI.
A. Purpose statement. The purpose of this district is to conserve open
space and natural resources; to protect steep slopes; to minimize the
impact of development on the environment in areas of sensitive natural
features; and to authorize appropriate low-density uses as permitted
uses by right, uses by special exception and conditional uses.
B. Permitted uses by right. In the S-C Special Conservation District, only
the following uses shall be permitted by right:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Bicycle and pedestrian trails.
(b) Communications antenna mounted on an approved
communications tower, subject to § 245-45.
(c) Communications antenna mounted on an existing public utility
storage or transmission structure, subject to § 245-45.
(d) Essential services.
(e) Noncommercial recreation.
(f) Public recreation.
(g) Tree nursery.
(2) Accessory uses.
§ 245-16 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-17
237:651
(a) Domiciliary care.
(b) Fences, subject to § 245-32.
(c) Keeping of domestic pets.
(d) No-impact home-based business, subject to § 245-47.
(e) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article V.
(f) Private garages and accessory storage buildings.
(g) Private residential swimming pools, subject to § 245-41.
(h) Signs, subject to Article VI.
(i) Small wind energy system, subject to § 245-49.
(j) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, use by special exception or
conditional use authorized in this district.
C. Uses by special exception. In the S-C Special Conservation District, only
the following uses by special exception shall be authorized, subject to
approval by the Zoning Hearing Board:
(1) Principal uses: none.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Family day care home, subject to § 245-61K.
(b) Home occupation, subject to § 245-61O.
D. Conditional uses. In the S-C Special Conservation District, only the
following conditional uses shall be authorized, subject to approval by
Borough Council:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Communications tower, subject to § 245-61E.
(b) Single-family dwellings, subject to § 245-61BB.
(2) Accessory uses: none.
E. Area and bulk requirements. In the S-C Special Conservation District,
all uses shall be subject to the following regulations except as they may
be modified by the express standards and criteria for the specific uses
by special exception or conditional uses contained in § 245-61:
(1) Minimum lot area requirements:
(a) Single-family dwellings: 20,000 square feet.
(b) Essential services:
§ 245-17 MONACA CODE § 245-17
237:652
[1] Underground: no minimum.
[2] Buildings: same as all other uses.
[3] Aboveground, other than buildings: no minimum.
(c) All other uses: 7,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width requirements:
(a) Single-family dwellings: 100 feet.
(b) All other uses: 60 feet.
(3) Minimum front yard requirements: 25 feet.
(4) Minimum side yard requirements: 30 feet total; 12 feet minimum
one side.
(5) Minimum rear yard requirements: 40 feet.
(6) Maximum building height:
(a) Essential services:
[1] Underground with aboveground accessory structures:
same as all accessory structures.
[2] Buildings: 2 1/2 stories, not to exceed 35 feet.
[3] Aboveground, other than buildings:
[a] Storage or transmission towers: 150 feet.
[b] All others: 35 feet.
(b) All other principal structures: 2 1/2 stories, not to exceed 35
feet.
(c) All accessory structures: 20 feet.
(7) Maximum lot coverage: 30%.
F. Off-street parking requirements: see Article V.
G. Signs: see Article VI.
§ 245-17 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-17
237:653

ARTICLE V
Off-Street Parking and Loading
[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918238]
§ 245-18. Off-street loading requirements.
§ 245-19. Off-street parking requirements.
A. Design requirements. For every building hereafter erected or altered,
or use hereafter established, there shall be provided off-street loading
spaces as required below.
(1) Each off-street loading space shall be an area 12 feet wide, 15 feet
high and 45 feet long, exclusive of access and turning area.
(2) All loading berths shall be located on the same lot with the
principal use they are intended to serve. No loading berth shall be
located in the minimum required front yard setback. Loading
berths shall be located at least 25 feet from the nearest point of
intersection of any two public streets.
(3) Loading berths shall be designed to provide sufficient turnaround
area so that vehicles are not required to back onto public streets
and the design shall be subject to review and approval by the
Borough Engineer. Loading berths shall have direct access to a
driveway and shall be maintained free from obstruction.
(4) Loading berths shall be screened by a minimum eight-foot-high
masonry wall or solid fence on all sides which face property in any
R-1, R-2 or R-3 Zoning District.
B. Loading berths required. In all zoning districts, every use that requires
the receipt or distribution, by tractor-trailer, of material or
merchandise, shall provide off-street loading berths in accordance with
the following requirements:
Gross Floor Area
(square feet) Number of Berths Required
Under 10,000 None
10,000 to 49,999 1
50,000 to 99,999 2
100,000 to 160,000 3
For each additional 80,000 1 additional
A. Parking spaces required.
238. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Articles V through XIII as Articles
VII through XV, respectively. Sections were renumbered appropriately.
§ 245-18 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-19
237:655
(1) Any new use or change of use in any zoning district shall comply
with the following minimum requirements for the provision of offstreet
parking spaces on the site of the principal use to which they
are accessory, unless conditional use approval is granted for a
reduction of parking space requirements in accordance with
§ 245-61W or approval of off-site parking in the R-3 District, the C-C
District or the PROD District is granted as a use by special
exception in accordance with § 245-61T.
(2) When the calculation of required parking spaces utilizing the
following table results in a requirement of a fractional parking
space, any fraction shall be counted as one parking space. Where
more than one use exists on a lot, parking requirements for each
use shall be provided.
Use Parking Requirements
Adult Business 1 space for each 250 square feet of
floor area devoted to retail sales; 1
space for each seat in a theater; 1
space for each viewing booth or
machine; 1 space for each sleeping
room in a motel; 1 space for each 75
square feet of net floor area devoted to
patron seating in a nightclub.
Apartment in
combination with
business
1 off-street parking space shall be
provided for each dwelling unit.
Banks and financial
institutions
1 space for each 300 square feet of
gross floor area, plus 1 space per
employee on peak shift, plus the
waiting spaces required by § 245-46 for
each drive-through window.
Bar or tavern;
restaurant, carry-out;
restaurant, fast-food;
restaurant, sit-down
1 space for each employee on peak
shift, plus 1 space for each 75 square
feet of net floor area devoted to patron
seating.
Bed-and-breakfast 1 space for each sleeping room in
addition to the parking required for the
single-family dwelling.
Boat launch ramp 20 spaces that accommodate vehicles
with trailers for each launching ramp.
Business or professional
offices; other than
medical clinic
1 space for each 200 square feet of
gross floor area.
Business services 1 space for each 300 square feet of net
floor area.
§ 245-19 MONACA CODE § 245-19
237:656
Use Parking Requirements
Church, theater,
auditorium, stadium, or
other place of assembly
1 space for each six seats or 160 lineal
inches of bleacher seating.
Commercial laundry or
dry-cleaning plant
1 space for each 1,500 square feet of
gross floor area or 1 space for each
employee on the peak working shift,
whichever is greater.
Commercial school 1 space for each faculty and employee,
plus 1 space for each 1.5 students.
Conversion apartments In addition to the 2 spaces required for
the existing single-family dwelling, 1
space for each new dwelling unit.
Day spa 1 space for each staff on peak shift,
plus 1 space for each service position
or treatment room.
Delicatessen 1 space for each 75 square feet of net
floor area devoted to customer seating
and/or service, plus 1 space for each
employee.
Drive-through facility See § 245-46 for the waiting space
requirements for each drive-through
position.
Duplexes 2 spaces per dwelling unit.
Educational studio 1 space for each employee, plus 1
space for each 2 students at maximum
occupancy.
Elderly housing 1 space per dwelling unit.
Family day care home 1 space for each employee
Fire and emergency
medical service
1 space for each 300 square feet of
area used for office, plus 1 space for
each 75 square feet of meeting rooms
or banquet hall excluding the kitchen
facilities, plus 1 space in an enclosed
garage for each vehicle or equipment.
Funeral homes 1 space per employee and 2 spaces for
the owner or operator, plus 1 space for
every 300 square feet of net floor area.
Garden apartments 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit.
Group care facility 1 space for each employee on peak
shift, plus 1 space for each resident
authorized to drive, plus 1 space for
each 6 beds.
§ 245-19 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-19
237:657
Use Parking Requirements
Health club 1 space for each 100 square feet of net
floor area accessible to members
excluding locker rooms.
High-rise apartments 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit.
Home occupation See § 245-61O.
Hotel or mote 1 space for each employee on peak
shift, plus 1 space for each sleeping
unit, plus 1 space for each 75 square
feet of floor area in shops, restaurants,
meeting rooms and similar facilities
that are accessible to the public.
Laundromat 1 space for each machine.
Library or museum 1 space for each 600 square feet of net
floor area.
Manufacturing 1 space for each 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area.
Marina 1.5 spaces for each boat slip.
Medical clinic 1 space for each staff, plus 3 spaces for
each examining or treatment room or
other patient service position.
Mid-rise apartments 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit.
Mini-warehouse or selfstorage
facility
2 spaces for manager's quarters, if
proposed, plus 1 space for each 20
storage units located throughout the
site, plus a minimum of 1 space located
near the office or manager's quarters to
be used by prospective clients.
Mobile home park 1 space for each mobile home lot, plus
1 additional off-street space for each 3
lots to provide for guest parking,
delivery and service vehicles.
Nursing home 1 space for each 3 beds, plus 1 space
for each employee on the peak working
shift.
Personal care boarding
home
1 space for each employee on peak
shift, plus 1 space for each resident
authorized to drive, plus 1 space for
each 6 beds.
Pet grooming; pet
services
1 space for each employee on peak
shift, plus 2 spaces for each service
position, plus 1 space for each 1,000
square feet of net floor area devoted to
display and sales.
§ 245-19 MONACA CODE § 245-19
237:658
Use Parking Requirements
Private club 1 space for each 400 square feet of net
floor area.
Public buildings 1 space for each 300 square feet of net
floor area devoted to offices, plus 1
space for each 75 square feet of net
floor area devoted to conference rooms
or public meeting rooms.
Public utility building or
structure
Any area of the building that is used for
business offices shall comply with the
parking requirements for that use, plus
any area of the building used for
storage of material, vehicles or other
equipment shall provide 1 space for
each employee on peak shift, plus 1
space for each service vehicle stored on
the lot.
Recreational uses,
indoor and outdoor
1 space for each 3,000 square feet of
gross lot area or gross floor area; 1
space for each 160 lineal inches of
bleacher seating, if any; 1 space for
each individual or team member on the
field or court during regulation play; 1
space for each practice position, if any.
Repair shop 1 space for each employee, plus 1
space for each 300 square feet of floor
area accessible to the public.
Research and
development
1 space for each employee on peak
shift, plus a minimum of 5 spaces
reserved for visitors for each 10,000
square feet of gross floor area.
Retail store 1 space for each 100 square feet of net
floor area.
School 5 spaces, plus 1 space for each 2
classrooms.
Service stations 1 space for each employee on peak
shift, plus 2 spaces for each service
bay, plus 1 space for each 200 square
feet of net floor area devoted to retail
sales.
Single-family dwellings 2 spaces per dwelling unit.
§ 245-19 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-19
237:659
Use Parking Requirements
Supply yard 1 space for each employee on site, plus
1 space for each 250 square feet of
floor area devoted to product display
and retail sales, plus 1 space for each
business vehicle or equipment.
Temporary use or
structure
Parking shall be based on the
requirement for the use listed in this
table that most closely conforms to the
temporary use or structure proposed.
Townhouses 2 spaces per dwelling unit.
Transitional dwelling 1 space for each employee on peak
shift, plus 1 space for each resident
authorized to drive, plus 1 space for
each 6 beds.
Tree nursery 1 space for each employee, plus 1
space for each 250 square feet of retail
sales area, plus 1 space for each 1,500
square feet of growing area that is
accessible to the public.
Truck terminal 1 space for each employee on peak
shift, plus 1 space for each service
vehicle stored on site.
Vehicle accessories sales
and installation
1 space for each employee on peak
shift, plus 1 space for each 1,000
square feet of indoor and outdoor
display and sales area.
Vehicle rental, sales and
service
1 space for each employee on peak
shift, plus 1 space for each 1,000
square feet of indoor display and sales
area.
Vehicle repair shop 4 spaces for each bay, plus 1 space for
each employee on peak shift, plus 1
space for each business vehicle kept on
the site.
Veterinary clinic 1 space for each doctor and employee,
plus 2 spaces for each treatment room.
Warehousing,
wholesaling
1 space for each 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area.
Other uses not
specifically listed
1 space for each 3 occupants at
maximum occupancy authorized by the
Uniform Construction Code (UCC)239 or
1 space for each 300 square feet of
gross floor area, whichever is greater.
§ 245-19 MONACA CODE § 245-19
237:660
B. Design of off-street parking. All parking spaces that were established
prior to January 1, 2010, that are not in conformance with the
provisions of this § 245-19B shall be allowed to continue as previously
laid out. Any new parking spaces that are created shall comply with
these provisions, including those spaces that are added to a parking
area that contains existing nonconforming parking spaces.
(1) Each parking space shall have minimum dimensions of 10 feet by
20 feet.
(2) In parking areas containing five or more parking spaces, all offstreet
parking spaces shall be located at least five feet from any
property line or street right-of-way line. The area between the edge
of the paving and the property line or street right-of-way line shall
be maintained in grass or ground cover.
(3) Off-street parking spaces located in parking areas containing five
or more spaces shall be striped and all vehicular entrances and
exits shall be clearly marked. Handicapped parking shall be
marked as required by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
(4) Except in the case of single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings
and townhouses, parking spaces shall be designed to provide
sufficient turnaround area so that vehicles are not required to back
onto the cartway of any public street.
(5) Except in the case of single-family dwellings, all newly constructed
parking spaces shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete or similar
material of adequate thickness to support the weight of fully loaded
vehicles that customarily park in them.
(6) In the case of single-family dwellings, all newly constructed
parking spaces shall be improved with a dust-free all-weather
surface such as gravel, brick pavers, asphalt, concrete or similar
material. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to
ensure that driveway surface materials and stormwater runoff do
not discharge onto a public street.
(7) Off-street parking on lots containing a single-family dwelling or
two-family dwelling shall be located in an enclosed garage, a
driveway leading to a garage or an approved parking pad that
meets the requirements of Subsection B(8), below. In no case shall
any vehicle be parked on any area of the lot other than an improved
driveway or approved parking pad.
(8) A parking pad may be constructed on a residential lot, provided all
of the following requirements are met:
239. Editor's Note: See Ch. 107, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 245-19 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-19
237:661
§ 245-20. Public parking garage or public parking lot.
Public parking garages or public parking lots shall meet all of the following
requirements:
(a) A parking pad for one vehicle shall not exceed 200 square feet;
a parking pad for two vehicles shall not exceed 400 square
feet.
(b) The maximum area devoted to a parking pad on any residential
lot shall be 400 square feet, excluding the driveway providing
access to it, provided the maximum coverage of the yard area
in which it is located required by Subsection B(8)(c) or (d)
below is not exceeded.
(c) If the parking pad is located in the front yard of a residential
lot, the portion of the front yard covered by the parking pad
shall not exceed 35% of the total area of the front yard
bounded by the front building line, the side lot lines and the
street right-of-way line.
(d) If the parking pad is located in the rear yard of a residential lot,
the area of the rear yard covered by the parking pad shall not
exceed 40% of the total area of the rear yard bounded by the
rear lot line, the side yard lines and the rear wall of the
dwelling.
(e) The parking pad shall be designed to have direct vehicular
access from a driveway, a public street or an alley.
(f) If a driveway leading to the parking pad is paved to the
property line, the parking pad may be paved to the property
line. All other parking pads shall be located at least five feet
from a side or rear property line. This five-foot setback area
shall be maintained in grass or ground cover.
(g) Parking pads in the front yard shall not be located in the public
street right-of-way without the approval of the Borough or
PennDOT, whichever owns the right-of-way.
A. All public parking lots or public parking garages shall be designed to
have direct vehicular access to an arterial or collector street, as defined
by this chapter.
B. All public parking lots or public parking garages shall be designed to
minimize traffic congestion on the site or within the garage and for
traffic entering or leaving the site or parking lot or parking garage.
C. The design of any parking garage proposed to be located on property
that adjoins property in an R-1, R-2 or R-3 District shall take into
account the height, visual, light and air impacts on adjoining residences
and shall utilize architectural materials for the exterior walls facing
§ 245-19 MONACA CODE § 245-20
237:662
those residential areas that are compatible with the residential
character of adjoining properties.
D. Any public parking garage structure, whether proposed as a principal
structure or an accessory structure, shall comply with the yard
requirements for a principal structure.
E. Any public parking lot that has parking spaces reserved, in part, for the
customers or employees of a specific use shall be located within 300
feet of the specific use that it is intended to serve.
§ 245-20 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-20
237:663

ARTICLE VI
Signs
[Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]240
§ 245-21. Types and classes of signs.
Signs in all zoning districts shall be categorized according to the types and
classes described below and shall comply with the requirements for those
types and classes described in this § 245-21.
A. Sign types.
(1) Freestanding sign: a sign supported on a foundation or by one or
more uprights, poles or braces permanently affixed to the ground
and not attached to any building or other structures.
(2) Wall sign: a sign painted on or attached to and erected parallel to
the face of an outside wall of a building projecting outward from
the wall of the building no more than 12 inches.
(3) Monument sign: a freestanding sign located at the entrance to a
multitenant development such as a shopping plaza, business park
or industrial park that identifies the name of the development and
that may include the names of one or more businesses in the
development.
(4) Canopy or awning sign: a sign that also functions as a roof-like
shelter, either permanent, retractable or removable, made of
canvas or other durable material that is affixed to a building or is
self-supporting and provides protection from sun, rain, snow and
other elements.
(5) Marquee sign: a sign painted on, integral to or attached to a
permanent overhanging structure that projects from a building
wall and forms a roof-like shelter.
(6) Bulletin sign: a type of manual changeable copy sign constructed to
allow letters or symbols to be changed periodically to announce
events such as those used by churches, schools, institutions and
community organizations and which contains no commercial
advertising.
(7) Roof sign: a sign erected and maintained upon or above the roof of
any building which projects no more than six feet above the highest
point of the roof.
(8) Projecting sign: a sign supported by and affixed perpendicular to a
building wall whose leading edge extends beyond such building
240. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Articles V through XIII as Articles
VII through XV, respectively. Sections were renumbered appropriately.
§ 245-21 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-21
237:665
wall, but not including awnings, canopies or marquees otherwise
authorized by this chapter.
(9) Changeable copy sign: a sign that is designed so that characters,
letters or illustrations can be manually or electronically changed or
rearranged without altering the face or surface of the sign.
(10) Animated flashing or moving sign: any sign that flashes, blinks,
oscillates, rotates, revolves or has lighting that is not maintained
stationary and/or constant in intensity and color at all times.
(11) Portable sign: a freestanding temporary sign attached to wood or
metal frames designed to be self-supporting and movable that is
not permanently affixed to a building, a structure or the ground and
which is designed to be moved from place to place.
(12) Attention-getting device: a pennant, flag, valance, banner,
propeller, spinner, streamer, search light, balloon or other
inflatable device, or similar object or representation of a product,
vehicle, equipment or other advertising image or any
ornamentation that is designed or used for the purpose of
promoting, advertising or attracting attention.
(13) Indirectly illuminated sign: a sign that is lighted by means of lamps
or lighting devices external to, and reflected on, the sign, which
lighting is stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times
and which is shielded so that the illumination is concentrated on
the face of the sign and there is no spillover of illumination or glare
beyond the face of the sign.
(14) Internally illuminated sign: a sign that is lighted by means of lamps,
lighting devices or gas internal to the sign, which lighting is either
behind the face of the sign or is an integral part of the sign
structure and the advertising effect.
(15) Festoon lighting: a group of two or more light bulbs of more than
20 watts each hung or strung overhead, not on a building or
structure, that are exposed to view by persons on a public right-ofway,
or that are not shaded or hooded to prevent the direct rays of
light from being visible from the property line, but not including the
temporary erection of lights as part of a holiday celebration, or
small lights of less than 20 watts each.
(16) Abandoned sign: any sign erected on and/or related to the use of a
property which becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of six
months or more, or any sign which no longer advertises a bona-fide
business conducted or product sold on the premises, or which is
related to a time, event or purpose which has passed.
(17) Exterior sign: any sign affixed to the walls, windows or doors of a
building or any part of the external portion of a structure or which
§ 245-21 MONACA CODE § 245-21
237:666
is placed on or affixed to the ground and is surrounded by open
space.
(18) Interior sign: any sign displayed within a building which is
intended primarily to be seen from inside the building.
(19) Advertising panel: that portion of a sign structure upon which the
message or graphic display is presented, excluding any framework,
ornamentation or supporting members.
B. Sign classes.
(1) Identification signs:
(a) Property identification sign: a sign containing only the name
and address of the occupant of the premises.
(b) Home occupation identification sign: a sign containing only the
name, credentials and address of the occupant of the premises
and their occupation which shall contain no logos or other
commercial advertising.
(c) Residential plan identification sign: a permanent wall or
freestanding sign containing only the name and address of a
plan of subdivision or a multifamily building or development.
(d) Business identification sign: a sign that contains the name and
address of a business and the goods, services, facilities or
events available on the premises.
(2) Temporary signs:
(a) Real estate sign: a temporary sign advertising the sale or
rental of premises. The sign may also bear the words "sold,"
"sale pending" or "rented."
(b) Development sign: a temporary sign erected during the period
of construction and/or development of a property by the
developer, contractor or their agents.
(c) Contractor's sign: a temporary sign announcing the name of
contractors, mechanics or artisans engaged in performing
work on the premises.
(d) Temporary special event sign: a banner, flag, pennant, portable
sign or similar display constructed of durable material and
affixed to the wall of a building or the supporting structure of
an approved freestanding business identification sign or, if a
portable sign, adequately affixed to the ground, erected for a
period not exceeding 30 days whose sole purpose is to
advertise a special event or promotion.
§ 245-21 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-21
237:667
(e) Private sale sign: a temporary sign advertising private sales by
residents of personal property such as house sales, auctions,
garage sales, yard sales and the like.
(f) Political sign: a temporary sign that indicates the name, cause
or affiliation of anyone seeking public office or that refers to an
issue concerning which a public election is scheduled to be
held.
(3) Informational signs:
(a) Public sign: a sign displayed in the public interest, erected by,
or on the order of, a public officer in the performance of any
public duty, such as official signs and notices of any public or
governmental agency, or erected by or on the order of a court
or public officer which bears no commercial advertising,
including official traffic signs, public notices, government flags
and other signs warning of hazardous or dangerous conditions.
(b) Notification sign: signs bearing legal and/or property notices
such as: "no trespassing," "private property," "no turnaround,"
"safety zone," "no hunting" and similar messages and signs
posted by a landowner or governmental agency for traffic
control or the safety of the general public.
(c) On-premises directional sign: a sign that directs and/or
instructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic relative to parking
areas, proper exits, loading areas, entrance points and similar
information on the premises on which it is located.
(d) Off-premises directional sign: a sign located on property other
than where a business or event is located to direct traffic to the
site of the business or event and which bears no commercial
advertising.
(e) Memorial/historical plaques: a commemorative plaque
recognized by an agency of the Borough, county,
commonwealth or federal government or a nonprofit historical
or veteran's organization.
(f) Real estate management sign: a sign containing the name,
address and telephone number of a real estate management
company, but no commercial advertising.
(4) Advertising signs:
(a) Window signs: a sign or group of signs affixed to the inside of a
display window in a commercial establishment that advertises
a product or service available on the premises or that
announces or promotes a special sale or special event.
(b) Billboard or off-premises advertising sign: an off-premises sign
or any portion of an on-premises sign that advertises an
§ 245-21 MONACA CODE § 245-21
237:668
§ 245-22. General regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to signs in all zoning districts:
establishment, activity, person, product or service that is
unrelated to or unavailable on the premises where the sign is
located.
A. Calculating the surface area of a sign. The surface area of a sign shall
be measured as described below. For two-sided signs, only one side is
counted in computing the surface area.
(1) In the case of an advertising panel, the surface area of the sign
shall be the total area enclosed by one continuous line connecting
the extreme points or edges of the advertising panel containing
letters and/or graphic displays;
(2) In the case of freestanding ground or pole signs, the area shall not
include the main supporting structure; however, logos, ornamental
attachments and framework around or connections between
advertising panels shall be included;
(3) In the case of freestanding letters, figures or characters mounted
on a wall or other surface, the surface area of the sign shall be the
sum of the areas of each individual letter calculated by measuring
the distance between the highest and lowest points of each letter
and multiplying that distance by the distance between the longest
horizontal distance across the letter;
(4) In the case of letters that are painted on or affixed to an awning,
canopy or marquee, the surface area of the sign shall be the area of
the geometric shape formed by outlining the height and width of all
the letters, including free space between the letters.
B. Sign location.
(1) Except when this chapter authorizes certain signs to be located off
premises, all signs shall be located on the premises they are
intended to serve.
(2) No portion of any freestanding sign shall be located closer than 10
feet to a property line or public street right-of-way.
C. Visibility. No sign shall be located in such a position that it will cause a
hazard by obstructing visibility for traffic on a street or obscuring a
traffic signal or other traffic control device. No sign, other than official
traffic signs and authorized temporary off-premises directional signs,
shall hang over or be erected within the right-of-way of any street. No
sign shall be located within the clear sight triangle defined by § 245-2 of
this chapter.
D. Lots with multiple street frontages.
§ 245-21 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-22
237:669
(1) In the S-C, R-1, R-2, R-3, PAW and PROD Districts, lots with
multiple street frontages shall be permitted to have only one of
each type of sign authorized, and the sign shall be located on the
street address frontage.
(2) In the C-C, MUT, RBP and G-I Districts, lots fronting on more than
one street shall be permitted to have one of each type of sign
authorized for the lot on each street frontage, provided no such
sign faces an R-1, R-2 or R-3 District.
E. Illumination.
(1) Signs in the S-C, R-1, R-2, R-3 and PAW Districts shall not be
illuminated. Signs in the PROD, C-C, MUT, RBP and G-I Districts
may be indirectly or internally illuminated, unless otherwise
restricted by § 245-23.
(2) Illumination, when authorized by this chapter, shall be directed
upon the advertising panel and not towards adjoining properties or
streets. Flashing or oscillating signs shall not be permitted.
Lighting shall be stationary and constant in intensity and color at
all times, except that electronic changeable copy signs, where
authorized, may have a changing message, provided each message
is stationary for at least three seconds. The intensity of any source
of illumination of any sign, whether indirect or internal, shall be
controlled so as to not exceed a maximum of 0.2 footcandle at the
property line.
F. Design, construction, maintenance and inspection. All signs shall be
designed to be compatible with the architecture of the principal use to
which they are accessory. All signs shall be constructed of a durable
material and shall be maintained legible and in good condition. All
freestanding signs shall be designed to withstand a sustained onehundred-
mile-per-hour wind load. Any sign found to be in an unsafe
condition upon inspection shall be declared to be a public nuisance and
the Zoning Officer shall give notice to the owner, in writing, in
accordance with § 245-84 of this chapter, to repair or remove the sign
within 10 days. Upon failure of the owner to comply, the Borough shall
remove the sign at the owner's expense. The Borough may lien the
property for the cost of removing the sign and all legal fees and costs
incurred with filing and enforcing the lien.
G. Removal of temporary signs. All temporary signs authorized by this
chapter shall be removed within 30 days of the completion of sales or
construction or the event they are erected to promote.
H. Removal of abandoned signs. Whenever any business is discontinued or
vacated with no intention to reopen under the same name, all
advertising panels on an abandoned sign that contain the name of the
discontinued or vacated business shall be removed within 30 days of the
vacation or discontinuance of the business. Upon failure of the owner to
comply, the Borough may remove the sign at the owner's expense. The
§ 245-22 MONACA CODE § 245-22
237:670
Borough may lien the property for the cost of removing the sign and all
legal fees and costs incurred with filing and enforcing the lien.
I. Sign permits required.
(1) Permits shall not be required for the following signs described in
§ 245-21: contractor's sign, memorial/historical plaque, notification
sign, political sign, private sale sign, property identification sign,
public sign, real estate sign, real estate management sign and
window sign.
(2) Permits shall be required for all other signs authorized by § 245-23.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall record and file all applications for sign
permits and shall conduct an annual inspection of all signs.
(4) Applications for sign permits shall be filed on application forms
provided by the Borough. One application form may be used to
describe and permit multiple sign installations on the same
property, provided that complete information is provided for each
sign.
(5) No permit shall be issued unless and until the required fee is paid
in full and the application is in compliance with these regulations.
Said application shall be accompanied by an application/license fee
in the amount of $25 flat fee and $4 state fee and $2 per square foot
of sign area per advertising panel. This fee may be amended from
time to time by resolution of Borough Council.
(6) The sign permit application form shall contain the following
information:
(a) Applicant name, address and telephone number.
(b) A plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of the building,
structure or lot to which the sign is to be attached or erected,
and showing the position of the sign in relation to the property
lines, adjoining or nearby buildings, streets or highways.
(c) A description of the dimensions, shape, color, material,
supports, anchoring and height of the sign and the intensity of
illumination.
(d) A sketch of the sign, drawn to scale, illustrating the style of
letters, words, symbols or other graphics.
(e) Name of the person or firm constructing, altering or moving
the sign.
(f) Written consent of the property owner, if different from the
applicant.
§ 245-22 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-22
237:671
(g) Any other conditions which the Zoning Officer may require to
demonstrate full compliance with this chapter and other
applicable laws of the Borough.
(h) All requests for a permit for signs which have a vertical height
which exceeds the horizontal distance to any highway or rightof-
way or property line shall be accompanied by stress sheets
and calculations showing the sign structure is designed for
dead load and wind pressure in any direction in accordance
with the Uniform Construction Code (UCC) specifications for
wind pressure on signs.
J. Exempt signs. The following signs are authorized in every zoning
district, however, they are exempt from regulation by this chapter from
the requirement to obtain a permit:
(1) Holiday decorations displayed for recognized federal or state
holidays, provided they do not interfere with traffic safety or do not,
in any way, become a public safety hazard;
(2) Interior signs, as defined in § 245-21;
(3) Memorial/historical plaques, as defined in § 245-21;
(4) Notification signs, as defined in § 245-21;
(5) Public signs, as defined in § 245-21;
K. Prohibited signs. The following signs shall not be permitted in any
zoning district:
(1) Attention-getting devices, as defined in § 245-21;
(2) Portable signs, as defined in § 245-21 in all districts, except the C-C
Core Commercial District;
(3) Festoon lighting, as defined in § 245-21;
(4) Animated, flashing or moving signs, as defined in § 245-21, except
for that portion of an authorized sign that indicates time or
temperature or an authorized electronic changeable copy sign;
(5) Search-lights, banners, flags, pennants, spinners or streamers,
except when authorized by this chapter as a temporary special
event display;
(6) Signs attached to trees, utility poles or official traffic control
devices or signs within the public right-of-way;
(7) Signs that imitate traffic control devices;
(8) Signs painted on walls or chimneys of a building or on fences or
freestanding walls;
§ 245-22 MONACA CODE § 245-22
237:672
§ 245-23. Authorized signs.
(9) Signs on or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers that are parked on a
public right-of-way, or on any public property or private property
other than the site of the business it advertises, except for
maintenance, repair, loading, unloading or rendering a service at
any location, where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product
or direct people to a business or activity located on nearby
property;
(10) Any sign not expressly permitted in a given zoning district by this
chapter;
(11) Any sign which violates any provision of federal or state law or any
Borough ordinance;
(12) Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a public
right-of-way or required door, window, fire escape or other exit way
or which interferes with the proper functioning of the building.
L. Nonconforming signs. All signs existing at the time this article is
enacted which do not conform to one or more applicable provisions
hereof shall be deemed to be nonconforming signs and shall be subject
to the following requirements:
(1) Any sign heretofore legally erected may continue to be maintained.
However, no such sign shall be enlarged, added to or replaced by
another nonconforming sign.
(2) A nonconforming sign may be temporarily removed for repair and
maintenance and re-erected provided the sign is restored within six
months of removal. Signs not restored within a six-month period
shall be deemed abandoned and the use of the nonconforming sign
shall terminate.
(3) Nonconforming signs or sign locations which are discontinued or
not used for a period of at least six months shall be deemed
abandoned and the use of the nonconforming sign shall terminate.
(4) Any nonconforming sign that becomes unsafe or which is destroyed
or damaged beyond repair shall be removed. Nonconforming signs
which are unsafe, destroyed or damaged beyond repair for a period
of six months or more shall be deemed abandoned and the use of
the nonconforming sign shall terminate.
A. Signs authorized in every zoning district. In addition to the signs
authorized in specific zoning districts by § 245-23B, the following signs
are authorized in every zoning district:
(1) Bulletin sign. One bulletin sign, as described in § 245-21, shall be
permitted per lot. Sign location shall comply with § 245-22B and C.
Illumination shall comply with § 245-22E. If the bulletin sign is a
§ 245-22 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-23
237:673
wall sign, the surface area shall not exceed 12 square feet. If
the bulletin sign is a freestanding sign, the surface area shall not
exceed 24 square feet.
(2) Real estate sign. One nonilluminated freestanding real estate sign,
as described in § 245-21, shall be permitted on each lot provided
the sign shall not exceed six feet in height. The real estate sign
shall not exceed 12 square feet in surface area when located in any
R-1, R-2, R-3, PROD or S-C zoning district and shall not exceed 32
square feet in any other zoning district. Such sign shall be removed
within 30 days of the sale or rental of the property on which it is
located. Sign location shall comply with § 245-22B and C.
(3) Real estate management sign. One nonilluminated freestanding or
wall real estate management sign, as described in § 245-21, shall
be permitted on each lot. A freestanding sign shall not exceed six
feet in height. The real estate management sign shall not exceed 12
square feet in surface area. Sign location shall comply with
§ 245-22B and C.
(4) Property identification sign. One property identification sign, as
described in § 245-21, shall be permitted on each lot provided the
sign shall not exceed one square foot in surface area and the
maximum height of any freestanding sign shall be two feet. The
property identification sign may be affixed to the wall of the
building or may be a freestanding sign located in the front yard.
The sign location shall comply with § 245-22B and C. Illumination
shall comply with § 245-22E.
(5) Home occupation identification sign. One nonilluminated home
occupation identification sign, as described in § 245-21, shall be
permitted for an approved home occupation, provided that the
surface area of the sign shall not exceed two square feet. The sign
may be wall mounted or may be freestanding in the front yard. Sign
location shall comply with § 245-22B and C.
(6) Development sign. One nonilluminated freestanding development
sign, as described in § 245-21, shall be permitted on each
development site provided the surface area of the sign shall not
exceed 32 square feet in surface area. If the development is
phased, the development sign shall be located in the phase that is
currently under construction. A second nonilluminated
development sign shall be permitted at the entrance to the
development, provided the surface area of the sign shall not exceed
16 square feet. The development sign shall not exceed eight feet in
height. Such sign shall be removed within 30 days of the sale or
rental of the last lot or completion of the proposed construction in
the development. Sign location shall comply with § 245-22B and C.
(7) Contractor sign. One nonilluminated freestanding contractor sign,
as described in § 245-21, shall be permitted on a lot, provided the
§ 245-23 MONACA CODE § 245-23
237:674
sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area nor six feet in height
and shall be removed within 30 days of the completion of the work.
Sign location shall comply with § 245-22B and C.
(8) Temporary special event signs for public and nonprofit
organizations.
(a) One nonilluminated temporary special event sign, as described
in § 245-21, shall be permitted to be erected by a public or
nonprofit organization on the face of a building or in the front
yard or over a public street, provided that the area of the sign
shall not exceed 40 square feet and provided the sign is
displayed for a period no longer than 30 days and is removed
within five days following the event that it is erected to
promote.
(b) Each organization shall be permitted to display a temporary
special event display sign no more than three times in any
twelve-month period for a maximum of 30 days each time. Sign
location shall comply with § 245-22E. If the temporary special
event sign is proposed to be displayed over a public street,
permission from the owner of the right-of-way shall be
obtained.
(9) Residential plan identification sign. One nonilluminated or
indirectly illuminated wall or freestanding residential plan
identification sign containing only the street address and/or name
of a residential subdivision plan or multifamily building or
development shall be permitted provided the sign shall not exceed
12 square feet in area. The residential plan identification sign may
be affixed to a freestanding decorative wall, rather than to a
building wall, provided that the decorative wall meets all applicable
chapter requirements and does not obstruct visibility for traffic
entering or leaving the plan in compliance with the clear sight
triangle required by § 245-28. Such signs shall not be located in any
public street right-of-way without the permission of the owner of
the right-of-way and an agreement for maintenance of the sign by a
homeowners' association or similar private organization.
(10) On-premises directional signs.
(a) On any lot that contains two or more multifamily or
nonresidential buildings and/or on any lot that provides more
than 20 parking spaces, on-premises directional signs shall be
permitted, provided that the surface area of any one sign shall
not exceed four square feet.
(b) On lots with areas less than one acre, a maximum of four
nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated on-premises
directional signs shall be permitted. On lots with areas of one
acre or more, a maximum of six nonilluminated or indirectly
illuminated on-premises directional signs shall be permitted on
§ 245-23 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-23
237:675
the first acre, and for each additional acre or fraction thereof
over one acre, two additional on-premises directional signs
shall be permitted.
(11) Political signs. Political signs, as described in § 245-21, that are
located on public property or within a public street right-of-way
shall not be located within the clear sight triangle, as defined in
§ 245-2. These political signs shall be removed within 72 hours
after the election for which they are erected. Political signs on
private property shall be exempt from these regulations.
(12) Private sale signs.
(a) Private sale signs, as described in § 245-21, shall be erected no
sooner than 48 hours prior to the event they advertise and
shall be removed within 48 hours of the conclusion of the
event. Signs not erected and/or removed within these time
limits shall be removed at the owner's expense.
(b) The maximum surface area of a private sale sign erected on the
site of the sale shall be four square feet. The maximum surface
area of an off-premises private sale sign shall be one square
foot. No more than six off-premises private sale signs shall be
permitted. Off-premises private sale signs shall be located only
within a one-half-mile radius of the lot on which the event is
held.
B. Signs authorized only in certain zoning districts.
(1) Business identification signs. The following business identification
signs shall be authorized only in the specific zoning districts
indicated, subject to the limitations described for the specific
zoning districts.
(a) Freestanding business identification signs.
[1] One freestanding business identification sign, as described
in § 245-21, shall be permitted on a lot in the C-C, MUT,
RBP and G-I Districts only, regardless of the number of
businesses on the lot. (Multitenant developments in the CC,
RBP and G-I Districts may be eligible for the monument
sign authorized by § 245-23B(3), below, if all applicable
requirements are met.)
[2] The freestanding business identification sign shall comply
with the location requirements of § 245-22B and C and the
illumination requirements of § 245-22E.
[3] The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be 20
feet. If pedestrian or vehicular traffic will circulate
beneath the sign, the minimum height of the bottom edge
§ 245-23 MONACA CODE § 245-23
237:676
of the advertising panel shall be not less than 12 feet
above the adjacent ground level.
[4] The maximum surface area of a freestanding business
identification sign shall be as specified for each Zoning
District in the following table:
Zoning
District
Maximum Sign Surface Area
(square feet)
One business on
the lot
Two or more
businesses on the
lot
C-C 32 64
MUT 16 32
RBP 64 100
G-I 64 100
[5] Neither dimension of such sign shall be less than five feet.
(b) Wall business identification signs.
[1] In the PROD, C-C, MUT, RBP and G-I Districts, the
cumulative total surface area of all wall signs shall not
exceed one square foot for each lineal foot of width of the
front wall of the building, or portion of the building,
occupied by the business.
[2] The wall sign shall not project more than 12 inches from
the building wall. The wall sign shall not extend above the
building façade or roof cornice and shall not project
beyond the ends of the wall to which it is attached.
[3] Illumination of wall signs shall comply with § 245-22E.
(2) Window signs. Window signs, as described in § 245-21, are
authorized only in the C-C District. The total surface area of all
window signs shall not exceed 30% of the area of the window in
which they are displayed. The total area of all permanent window
signs shall be included in the cumulative total authorized for wall
signs in § 245-23B(1)(b), above. Window signs may be indirectly or
internally illuminated provided the illumination complies with
§ 245-22E.
(3) Monument signs.
(a) One monument sign, as described in § 245-21, shall be
permitted on a lot in the C-C, RBP and G-I Districts, regardless
of the number of businesses on the lot, provided that none of
the businesses has or will have a freestanding business
identification sign. Sign location shall comply with § 245-22B
§ 245-23 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-23
237:677
and C. Sign illumination shall comply with § 245-22E. The base
of the monument sign shall be landscaped for a minimum
distance of three feet from the base of the sign.
(b) The maximum height of the monument sign shall not exceed 20
feet. The bottom edge of the lowest advertising panel shall not
be more than three feet above the adjacent ground level. The
maximum surface area of the monument sign in the C-C
District shall be 64 square feet. The maximum surface area of a
monument sign in the RBP and G-I Districts shall be 100
square feet.
(4) Awning, canopy or marquee signs.
(a) One awning or canopy sign, as described in § 245-21, shall be
permitted over any street level or ground floor entrance to a
building in the C-C District. One marquee sign, as described in
§ 245-21, shall be permitted over the main street level
entrance to a building in the C-C District. The top of any
awning or canopy sign or a marquee sign shall not project
beyond the floor elevation of the story immediately above.
(b) Illumination shall comply with § 245-22E. The maximum
surface area of an awning or canopy sign shall not exceed 12
square feet. The maximum surface area of a marquee sign shall
not exceed 45 square feet.
(5) Projecting signs.
(a) One projecting sign, as described in § 245-21, shall be
permitted for each business in the C-C District. The projecting
sign shall not be located above the elevation of the ceiling of
the street floor of the building. The projecting sign may be
mounted at a right angle to the building wall or diagonally to a
right angle corner of the building.
(b) There shall be a minimum clearance between the sign and the
sidewalk or adjacent ground level of nine feet. The maximum
surface area of a projecting sign shall not exceed nine square
feet. The horizontal projection of the sign shall not exceed 42
inches from the front wall of the building. Illumination shall
comply with § 245-22E.
(6) Roof signs.
(a) One roof sign, as described in § 245-21, shall be permitted on a
lot in the RBP and G-I Districts, regardless of the number of
businesses on the lot. A roof sign shall not be permitted if the
building on which it is to be erected already has or will have
one or more wall signs. Illumination shall comply with
§ 245-22E.
§ 245-23 MONACA CODE § 245-23
237:678
(b) Roof signs shall not project more than eight feet above the
highest point of the roof on which they are erected. The surface
area of a roof sign shall not exceed 1 1/2 square feet for each
two lineal feet of width of the front wall of the building or a
maximum of 200 square feet, whichever is less.
(7) Changeable copy signs.
(a) A rolling or continuously moving message or display shall not
be permitted on an electronic changeable copy sign. Each
message or display shall remain stationary for at least five
seconds. There shall not be any appearance of a visual dissolve
or fading in which any part of one electronic message or
display appears simultaneously with any part of another
electronic message or display.
(b) Electronic changeable copy signs shall be equipped with a
photoelectric cell and a dimmer control to regulate the
intensity of the lighting relative to the ambient light. The color
of the background, the color of the letters and the size of the
letters shall be designed to minimize glare, be compatible with
ambient light and be the minimum size and contrast necessary
to be readable given the speed of traffic on the adjacent street
and the distance between the sign and the travel lanes.
(c) Any changeable copy sign that contains advertising for
businesses, products, services, activities or entertainment not
available on the premises where the sign is erected shall be
subject to the Borough's off-premises advertising tax.
Noncommercial community service announcements for offpremises
activities or events conducted by governmental,
public or nonprofit organizations shall be exempt from this tax.
[1] Changeable copy signs erected by businesses.
[a] One manual or electronic changeable copy sign, as
described in § 245-21, shall be permitted on a lot in
the C-C District regardless of the number of
businesses on the lot. The changeable copy sign shall
be permanently affixed to the supporting structure of
a freestanding business identification sign on the lot if
a freestanding sign is authorized on the lot. If no
freestanding business identification sign exists or is
proposed on the lot, the changeable copy sign may be
affixed to a building wall, in which case the area of the
changeable copy sign shall not be included in the
calculation of the cumulative allowed area for all wall
signs. If no freestanding business identification sign
exists or is proposed, the changeable copy sign may be
erected as a freestanding sign, subject to the location
requirements of § 245-22B and C.
§ 245-23 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-23
237:679
[b] The surface area of a changeable copy sign shall not
exceed 32 square feet. The height of a freestanding
changeable copy sign that is not attached to the
supporting structure of a freestanding business
identification sign shall be eight feet above the
adjacent ground level.
[c] An electronic changeable copy sign in the C-C District
shall not be visible from property in an R-1, R-2 or R-3
District.
[2] Changeable copy signs erected by governmental, public or
nonprofit organizations.
[a] One manual or electronic changeable copy sign shall
be permitted on a lot in the C-C, PROD, G-I or RBP
District that is used by a governmental, public or
nonprofit organization. The changeable copy sign
shall be permanently affixed to the wall of the building
or to any existing freestanding sign on the lot. If no
freestanding sign exists or is proposed, the
changeable copy sign may be erected as a
freestanding sign, subject to the location
requirements of § 245-22B and C.
[b] The surface area of the changeable copy sign shall not
exceed 24 square feet. The height of a freestanding
changeable copy sign shall be six feet above the
adjacent ground level.
[c] Such sign shall not display any commercial
advertising. The display shall be limited to activities,
promotions and information about public,
governmental or nonprofit organizations.
(8) Portable signs.
(a) One portable sign, as described in § 245-21, shall be permitted
for each business in the C-C and PROD Districts and shall be
located on the site of the business it advertises. portable signs
shall not be illuminated. The dimensions of a portable sign
shall not exceed 24 inches wide by 42 inches high when
measured perpendicular to the sidewalk.
(b) The portable sign shall be located so that pedestrian traffic on
the sidewalk is not blocked, access to any on-street or off-street
parking spaces is not impeded and visibility for traffic on
adjoining streets and intersections is not obstructed. The
portable sign shall not be used during inclement weather
conditions such as high winds or heavy snowfall when the sign
could create a hazard for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
snow removal.
§ 245-23 MONACA CODE § 245-23
237:680
(c) The portable sign shall be displayed only during normal
daylight business hours and shall be removed and stored inside
a completely enclosed building after sunset or during the hours
when the business is closed.
(d) Merchants using portable signs within the public right-of-way
shall provide the Borough Zoning Officer with a certificate of
liability insurance for a minimum of $500,000. Additionally, a
hold harmless agreement, as provided by the Borough, shall be
executed and filed with the Borough prior to issuance of a sign
permit.
(9) Temporary special event signs for businesses. Temporary special
event signs shall be permitted on a lot in the C-C, MUT, G-I and RBP
Districts subject to the following regulations:
(a) No more than two signs or banners shall be permitted on any
business establishment at any one time;
(b) The temporary special event signs shall be securely attached to
the building or to the supporting structure of a freestanding
business identification sign;
(c) Temporary special event signs shall be displayed no more than
two times in any twelve-month period, provided each display
shall not exceed 30 days;
(d) The aggregate surface area of all temporary special event
signs shall not exceed 24 square feet per business
establishment. In the event that there is more than one
business establishment on a site, the maximum aggregate
surface area of all temporary special event signs on the site at
any one time shall not exceed 70 square feet.
(e) Portable signs shall not be used as temporary special event
display signs.
(f) Temporary special event signs shall not be illuminated.
(10)Off-premises directional signs. Any business, nonprofit
organization or public agency located in the Borough may erect a
maximum of four off-premises directional signs, as described in
§ 245-21, provided all of the following requirements are met:
(a) Off-premises directional signs shall only be located on streets
located within the C-C, G-I or RBP Districts and shall not be
permitted on any other streets in the Borough.
(b) Display materials on off-premises directional signs shall be
limited to the name of the nonprofit or public agency, a symbol
or logo, the distance thereto and direction.
§ 245-23 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-23
237:681
(c) The maximum surface area of an off-premises directional sign
shall be six square feet.
(d) Off-premises directional signs shall not be illuminated.
(e) Off-premises directional signs installed in the public right-ofway
shall be subject to approval of either PennDOT or the
Borough, whichever is applicable. Signs installed on private
property shall be subject to approval by the landowner.
Evidence of permission from the landowner shall be submitted
with the sign permit application.
(f) Off-premises directional signs shall be located at least two feet
from the edge of paving on any public street.
(g) No off-premises directional sign shall be located in such a
position that it will cause a hazard by obstructing visibility for
traffic on a street or by obscuring a traffic signal or other
traffic control device.
(h) No off-premises directional sign shall be located closer than
300 feet on either side of the street in either direction of
another off-premises directional sign for the same business or
organization.
(11) Billboards. Billboards shall be permitted only in the C-C, G-I, RBP
and PAW Districts, provided all of the following requirements are
met:
(a) Billboards shall be located only on properties where they are
visible from vehicles traveling on an arterial street, as defined
by this chapter.
(b) Billboards shall not be erected within 500 feet of the boundary
line of any R-1 or R-2 District or within 500 feet of any public or
private school or church. Said 500 feet being measured along
the radius of a circle from the centermost point of the billboard
structure extending in all directions.
(c) No billboard shall be located in any portion of a public street
right-of-way nor shall be located closer than 20 feet to any
public street right-of-way.
(d) If Subsection B(11)(b) above does not apply, the minimum side
and rear yard requirements applying to a principal structure as
set forth within the zoning district in which the billboard is to
be located shall apply to each billboard structure.
(e) Billboards shall maintain a lateral minimum spacing between
any existing or proposed billboard structure of 100 feet.
Required space shall be measured along both sides of the same
roadway frontage from the centermost point of the billboard
structure along a line extending from the centermost point of
§ 245-23 MONACA CODE § 245-23
237:682
the billboard which is parallel to the centerline of the roadway
to which the billboard is oriented.
(f) No billboard shall be erected in such a manner as to block the
view from the street of any existing business identification
sign, residential or nonresidential structure or limit or reduce
the light and ventilation requirements.
(g) No billboard shall be constructed within the clear-sight
triangle, as defined in § 245-2, of the public street on which it is
situated and shall not in any case obstruct or impede traffic
safety.
(h) No billboard shall be erected over any sidewalk or public rightof-
way.
(i) Billboards shall not be part of a roof or wall nor shall they be
mounted on the roof, wall or other part of a building or any
other structure.
(j) Size and height. A billboard shall have a maximum allowable
gross surface area of 672 square feet per advertising panel.
This gross surface area shall be permitted, provided all of the
following additional requirements are met:
[1] A billboard shall have no more than two advertising panels
per billboard structure which may be placed back to back
or in a V-shaped configuration having an interior angle of
90º or less.
[2] The dimensions of the gross surface area of the billboard's
advertising panel shall not exceed 14 feet in total height or
48 feet in total length, provided the total allowable gross
surface area for the sign is not exceeded.
[3] A billboard structure shall have a maximum height above
the curb of the roadway from which it is intended to be
viewed of 50 feet.
(k) Construction methods. Billboards shall be constructed in
accordance with applicable provisions of the Uniform
Construction Code (UCC), as now or hereafter adopted,241 and
shall meet all of the following additional requirements:
[1] A billboard structure shall have a maximum of one vertical
support being a maximum of three feet in diameter or
width and without additional bracing or vertical supports.
[2] A billboard advertising panel shall be independently
supported and have vertical supports of metal which are
galvanized or constructed of approved corrosive-resistant,
241. Editor's Note: See Ch. 107, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 245-23 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-23
237:683
noncombustible materials. Structures constructed with
galvanized metal shall be painted or otherwise coated.
[3] The one vertical support shall be capable of enabling the
entire advertising panel to be able to withstand a minimum
one-hundred-mile-per-hour wind load. Structural design
computations shall be made and certified by a registered
engineer and shall be submitted to the Borough with the
application for permit.
[4] The base shall be installed using a foundation and footings
approved by the Borough Engineer for the type of
construction proposed.
[5] The entire base of the billboard structure parallel to the
advertising panel shall be permanently landscaped with
suitable shrubbery and/or bushes of a minimum height of
three feet placed in such manner as to screen the
foundation of the structure.
[6] Landscaping shall be maintained by the sign owner in an
attractive and healthy manner in accordance with
accepted conservation practices.
[7] No bare cuts shall be permitted on a hillside.
[8] All cuts or fills shall be permanently seeded or planted.
[9] A billboard with display lighting shall be constructed so
that it does not produce glare upon adjoining properties
and shall not exceed a maximum of 1 1/2 footcandles of
illumination at the property boundary line.
[10] All or part of a billboard may be an electronic changeable
copy display using LED technology, rotating panels or
similar technology.
[11]No display lighting shall cause distraction, confusion,
nuisance, or hazard to traffic, aircraft or other properties.
(l) Maintenance.
[1] A billboard structure shall be entirely painted every three
years, unless constructed of an approved corrosiveresistant
material.
[2] Every five years, the owner of the billboard which was
erected following issuance of a building permit shall have
a structural inspection made of the billboard by a qualified
Pennsylvania registered engineer and shall provide to the
Borough a certificate from the engineer certifying that the
billboard is structurally sound.
§ 245-23 MONACA CODE § 245-23
237:684
[3] The Borough Zoning Officer may conduct annual visual
inspections. billboards found to be in violation of this
chapter shall be brought into compliance or removed
within 30 days upon proper notification by the Borough.
[4] Billboards using removable paper or other materials shall
be maintained in such condition as to eliminate loose or
frayed material protruding or hanging from the structure.
All paper and other waste materials shall be removed from
the site and disposed of properly whenever any advertising
panel is changed.
(m) Liability insurance. The applicant for a sign permit to erect a
billboard shall provide a certificate of insurance for public
liability and property damage which indemnifies and holds the
Borough harmless. The amount of insurance to be maintained
shall be determined and adjusted from time to time by the
Borough. The insurance certificate shall contain a clause
stating that the insurance shall not be canceled or reduced
without first giving 10 days notice to the Borough.
(n) Permits. Prior to submission of an application for a sign permit,
the applicant for a billboard shall obtain and submit with the
application approvals from the Beaver County Department of
Aviation or the United States Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA), when applicable.
(o) Approval. The issuance of a sign permit for a billboard which
has been granted approval shall be conditioned upon the
approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT) for billboards along state highways. If the applicant
fails to submit evidence of the required approval by PennDOT
within 30 days of the issuance of the sign permit, the sign
permit shall be revoked by the Building Code Official who shall
provide written notice to the applicant. The applicant may
reapply for the required sign permit, upon submission of
evidence of PennDOT approval, without payment of any
additional sign permit fee, provided the application is refiled
within six months.
(p) Fees. Application for a sign permit/license shall be
accompanied by an application/license fee in the amount of $5
per square foot of gross sign area, per advertising panel,
measured in square feet. The application must be renewed
every two years along with payment of the applicable license
renewal fee calculated as described above. This fee may be
amended from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council. The term of the license shall extend from January 1 to
December 31 of the following year. If application is made mid
year, then the term shall extend only to December 31 of the
§ 245-23 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-23
237:685
following year at which point application may be made for a
full two-year term.
(q) Damage or destruction. Any billboard which is damaged or
destroyed by more than 51% of its replacement value at the
time of damage or destruction shall be reconstructed only in
compliance with all provisions of this § 245-23B(11).
C. Summary table of authorized signs. The following table summarizes the
signs by type and class that are authorized by § 245-23A and B in each
zoning district. If there is a conflict between this § 245-23C and
§ 245-23A or B, the provisions of § 245-23A and B shall control.242
242. Editor's Note: Said table is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 245-23 MONACA CODE § 245-23
237:686
ARTICLE VII
Supplementary Regulations
§ 245-24. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be subject to such additions or
modifications as herein provided by the following supplementary
regulations.
§ 245-25. Additional dwellings prohibited.
Individual lots or subdivided parcels 10 acres or less in size shall have no
building or buildings in addition to the main building on the same lot used
for living purposes.
§ 245-26. Annexed areas.
For zoning purposes all areas annexed to the municipality after adoption of
this chapter shall be classified R-1 Low-Density Residential until such time
as is required to officially amend this chapter to include the annexed areas
and classify these areas with the General Development Plan.
§ 245-27. Cellar dwellings.
No living quarters shall be placed in a basement structure or in any other
room or space having less than four feet of ceiling clearance above the
ground level as measured from the front to rear of the structure.
§ 245-28. Clear sight triangle requirements.
In order to prevent the creation of a traffic hazard by limiting visibility at a
intersection, no structure, building, earthen bank or vegetation exceeding 3
1/2 feet in height above the finished paved area at the center of the roadway
shall be allowed within the clear sight triangle, measured back 75 feet from
the intersection along the center lines.
§ 245-29. Dwellings located to the rear prohibited.
No building in the rear of a main building on the same lot may be used for
living purposes in any district.
§ 245-30. Dwellings on small lots.
Notwithstanding the limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter,
the Zoning Hearing Board may permit erection of a dwelling on any lot of
record (in a residential district where permitted by this chapter) separately
owned or under contract for sale and containing an area or width smaller
than required for a single-family dwelling at the time of the effective date of
this chapter. In no case shall any dwelling be permitted within five feet of a
lot line in any residential district.
§ 245-24 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-31
237:687
§ 245-31. Essential services.
Essential services, as defined in this chapter, (See § 245-2 of this chapter)
shall be permitted in all districts, subject to restrictions approved by the
Planning Commission with respect to use, design, yard area, setback and
height.
§ 245-32. Fences or hedges.243
Fences, hedges or other plantings, structures or walls at street corners shall
not be located so as to interfere with the clear sight triangle on corner lots.
The height of such objects is restricted to 3 1/2 feet within the clear sight
triangle.244
§ 245-33. Height exceptions.
The height regulations (see especially §§ 245-8 to 245-17 of this chapter)
of this chapter shall not apply to flagpoles, church spires, belfries, domes
or similar projections not used for human occupancy, nor to chimneys,
ventilators, skylights, water tanks, public utility facilities, bulkheads, silos,
antennas and other necessary mechanical and operational apparatus
usually carried above the roof level.
§ 245-34. Height measurement.
§ 245-35. Lot area measurement.
For purposes of measuring lot area on exceptionally deep lots, only that part
of the depth which is less than six times the average width of the lot may be
utilized in calculations.245
A. Measurement of height shall be the vertical height from the average
elevation of finished grade at the front of the structure to:
(1) In the case of flat roof structure, the highest point of coping.
(2) In the case of mansard roof structure, the deck line of the roof.
(3) In the case of gable or hipped roof, the average height of the roof.
B. A habitable attic shall be counted as a story when determining height as
required in this chapter.
243. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 120, Fences, Hedges and Walls.
244. Editor's Note: Former § 245-28, Open space cluster development, as renumbered, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918.
245. Editor's Note: Former §§ 245-32, Off-street parking and loading, 245-33, Supplementary
space requirements for off-street parking and loading, and 245-34, Reduction of parking
requirements as conditional use, as renumbered, which sections immediately followed this
section, were repealed 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918. See now Art. V, Off-Street Parking and
Loading.
§ 245-31 MONACA CODE § 245-36
237:688
§ 245-36. Reduction in lot area.
Once utilized, no building site, though it may consist of one or more
adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in area so that the lot area per
family, lot width, building area or other requirements of this chapter are not
maintained, public utilities excepted.
§ 245-37. Setback.
Where one or more preexisting structures are located on adjacent lots
within 100 feet in either direction of a proposed structure, the setback
of the proposed structure shall conform with the average setbacks of the
preexisting structures.
§ 245-38. Storage of commercial equipment.
Commercial equipment, including trucks (11,000 pounds gross vehicle
weight or larger), tandems, tractor-trailers, tractors or other commercial
or construction and cargo-moving vehicles or equipment shall not under
any conditions be stored or parked overnight in any residential district. The
parking of trucks, less than 11,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, shall be
limited to one such truck per residential household.
§ 245-39. Outdoor storage. [Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
A. Storage of waste.
(1) No lot or premises in any zoning district shall be used as a storage
area for one or more junk automobiles, appliances or the storage,
collection or deposit of any litter or debris outside of an enclosed
container, including, but not limited to, animal, vegetable, mineral
or other organic garbage, waste, paper, ashes, scrap metal,
household objects and effects.
(2) All organic rubbish and discarded materials shall be placed in tight
vermin-proof containers located in the side or rear yard. Containers
shall be emptied at least once a week. On properties where food is
served in paper containers, covered waste receptacles shall be
conspicuously located on the premises for use by patrons. The
management shall be responsible for maintaining the property free
of litter. All nonresidential uses shall provide dumpsters or trash
receptacles that are secured to keep them from moving and to
protect against windblown refuse.
B. Outdoor storage of products related to business.
(1) In the C-C Core Commercial District, in the case of businesses that
require outside storage of products or materials offered for sale,
outside storage areas larger than 1,000 square feet shall be
completely enclosed by a security fence and shall be screened by
an opaque fence or hedge that is at least six feet in height.
§ 245-36 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-39
237:689
(2) In the G-I General Industrial and RBP Riverfront Business Park
Districts, any materials or equipment stored outside an enclosed
building shall be incidental to the principal use of the lot and shall
be stored to the rear of the building or in an alternative location
that screens the outdoor storage area from public view from the
street or immediately adjacent property in an R-1, R-2 or R-3
District. If existing buildings do not screen the outdoor storage
area from public view from the street or adjacent property in an
R-1, R-2 or R-3 District, the area shall be screened by a hedge,
masonry wall or opaque fence at least eight feet in height.
C. Temporary portable storage unit(s).
(1) A Monaca Borough temporary portable storage unit permit shall be
required whenever a temporary portable storage unit is placed on
private, commercial, industrial or residential property. The permit
shall be valid for a maximum period of 60 days. The permit holder
may, due to special circumstances, apply for an extension of the
placement of a temporary portable storage unit in excess of 60
days, provided the extension request is filed prior to the expiration
of the sixty-day period of the permit. The Borough, when
considering the request for an extension of the allowed sixty-day
period, may set conditions of approval and establish a special fee.
No permit extension shall exceed 120 days.
(2) The maximum size of any temporary portable storage unit shall not
exceed eight feet in width, eight feet in height and 16 feet in length.
The maximum number of placements per lot is two per calendar
year for a maximum number of 60 consecutive days per placement
or 120 days per calendar year, unless an extension is obtained
pursuant to Subsection C(1) above.
(3) The maximum number of temporary portable storage units that can
be on a lot at one given time is one unless an exemption and
approved conditions are first obtained from the Borough.
(4) The temporary portable storage unit cannot encroach on Borough
property, Borough rights-of-way, neighboring property, sidewalks
or any other right-of-way, whether private or public. The unit must
be sited on an asphalt, concrete, gravel or other hard surface
between the front property line and the rear building line of the
principal structure. The setback between the temporary portable
storage unit and the side property line is 10 feet. The ten-foot side
yard setback may be waived if the applicant's neighbors' consent,
in writing, to a side yard setback placement that is less than 10 feet
and the Code Enforcement Official confirms the neighbor's
consent. The applicant may, due to special circumstances, apply for
an exemption from any other placement requirements. When
considering such request, the Borough may set reasonable
conditions.
§ 245-39 MONACA CODE § 245-39
237:690
§ 245-40. Storage of recreational vehicles. [Amended 9-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 918; 11-25-2014 by Ord. No. 939]
(5) All temporary portable storage units shall be free of rust, peeling
paint or other visible forms of deterioration and shall be painted or
covered in a manner that is aesthetically consistent with nearby
and surrounding structures so as not to diminish the quality of
living, property values, and health, safety and welfare of residents
of Monaca Borough. Temporary portable storage units shall not be
used to house animals or humans.
(6) Temporary portable storage units shall only be allowed upon
application for, and the issuance of, a permit. The permit shall be
displayed either on the front exterior surface of the unit in a plastic
liner or in the front window of the residence or front window of the
premises' principal structure. The Code Enforcement Official or
designated representative shall have the discretion to grant a
grace period not to exceed five days for a new first-time residential
property owner or residential tenant.
(7) Responsibilities of lessor/lessee and user. The lessor/lessee and
user of the temporary portable storage unit shall be jointly
responsible to ensure that the portable storage unit is in good
condition, free from evidence of deterioration, weathering,
discoloration, rust, ripping, tearing or other holes or breaks. When
not in use, the portable storage unit shall be kept locked. Lids and
doors shall be kept tightly and completely closed when not in use.
No hazardous substances are permitted to be stored or kept within
a portable storage unit. The area surrounding the portable storage
unit shall be kept clean and free of loose debris. The lessor/lessee
and user shall clearly indicate their name and contact telephone
number on the temporary portable storage unit.
(8) Any temporary portable storage unit placed on a property without
the issuance of a permit or in excess of the time limit permitted for
temporary placement shall be subject to the enforcement
provisions of § 245-84. Both the owner of the real property and the
owner of the temporary portable storage unit are subject to the
requirements and sanctions set forth in this chapter.
A. Definitions. Within this section and subsections, the following words
shall be construed to have the following meanings, and the depictions
are meant to be for illustrative purposes. Any vehicle possessing
substantially similar visual and other characteristics to these depictions
shall be considered to be these types of vehicles:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — Any open motor vehicle, usually having one
seat and three or more wheels fitted with tires and which is designed
primarily for recreational use on off-road terrain.
§ 245-39 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-40
237:691
ANIMAL TRAILER — Any towable unit which typically connects to a
truck or other vehicle with towing capability and which is designed and
designated for transporting animals of any kind.
CAMPER — Commonly referred to as a "van camper" or "bus camper";
any vehicle equipped with living quarters or other similar features
rendering them capable of providing lodging and passenger
transportation as part of a single unit, but which is not a motor home.
ENCLOSED UTILITY TRAILER — Any enclosed, towable unit which
typically connects to a truck or other vehicle with towing capability
and which is designed to transport goods, equipment or other personal
effects.
FIFTH WHEEL TRAILER — A towable unit which typically connects to
a truck or other vehicle with towing capability, directly above the rear
axle, by way of a wheel hitch.
§ 245-40 MONACA CODE § 245-40
237:692
FIFTH WHEEL UTILITY TRAILER — Any fifth wheel trailer, whether
enclosed or open, which is commonly used to transport personal effects
or equipment and which is commonly not used as living quarters.
MOTOR HOME — A motorized, wheeled vehicle built on a bus, van or
other chassis, regardless of class, usually possessing the characteristics
of having self-contained living quarters with independent electrical,
sewage and plumbing facilities.
OPEN UTILITY TRAILER — Any unenclosed, towable unit which
typically connects to a truck or other vehicle with towing capability by
means of a bumper or frame hitch and which is designed to transport
personal effects or equipment.
§ 245-40 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-40
237:693
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, corporation or other entity.
PICKUP TRUCK CAMPER — A unit, or shell, which is typically mounted
and carried in the bed of a truck or other similar vehicle and which is
commonly used as lodging or living quarters.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES — Hereinafter referred to as "RVs";
watercraft, travel trailers, tent trailers, fifth wheel trailers, fifth wheel
utility trailers (open and enclosed), animal trailers and utility trailers
(open and enclosed) utilized for storing recreational or other
equipment, and all-terrain vehicles stored on trailers utilized for
recreational purposes; pickup truck camper shells which have been
removed from the vehicle and stored.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE STORAGE — On-site parking of a
recreational vehicle of any type in an area approved by this section and
which is separate from the required off-street parking required for a
single-family residence.
RV FRONT YARD — For the purposes of RV storage, a space extending
the width of a parcel between the front property line and the front of
the residence and not less than the required front setback for the zone.
If the front of the residence varies relative to the front property line, the
RV front yard shall follow the front of the residence, not an imaginary
straight line taken from the nearest wall of the residence to the street.
RV YARD AREA — Areas on a residentially zoned parcel where an RV
may or may not be stored relative to the main residential building and
orientation to the street.
TENT TRAILER — A towable unit which typically connects to a truck
or other vehicle with towing capability by means of a bumper or frame
hitch and which commonly has a folding canvas or other fabric shelter
which is capable of being expanded to provide camping and/or lodging
facilities.
§ 245-40 MONACA CODE § 245-40
237:694
TRAVEL TRAILER — A towable unit which typically connects to a truck
or other vehicle with towing capability by means of a bumper or frame
hitch.
WATERCRAFT — Any vehicle or craft with the capability of aiding
surface or subsurface water movement, regardless of the manner in
which it is propelled.
B. Zoning districts permitting RV storage.
(1) In accordance with the regulations set forth herein, recreational
vehicles may be stored on any lot zoned for residential use.
(2) Recreational vehicles may be stored on any lot located in a
multiple-family zoned district so long as there exists on said lot a
single-family structure which is occupied and the storage of which
RV is in accordance with the regulations set forth herein.
C. Number of vehicles; registration and ownership requirements.
(1) No more than two recreational vehicles may be kept or stored on
one property at any given time.
(2) If the RV is one which must be registered pursuant to this section
or any federal or state law, the owner must at all times maintain a
current license, registration and valid inspection sticker.
D. Permitted storage areas.
(1) RV front yard. RV storage on private, residential property is
prohibited in the front yard area or in front of the main residence of
the property unless the RV is parked on a driveway leading to a
garage. RV storage within the front setback and/or in front of the
main residence on driveway leading to a garage shall not encroach
the sidewalk area or public right-of way.
§ 245-40 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-40
237:695
(2) RV storage is permitted in any other yard area so long as the RV
storage:
(a) Does not encroach any sidewalk area or public right-of-way;
(b) Does not encroach closer than five feet to any adjoining
property; and
(c) Does not obstruct visibility for vehicles entering or leaving any
adjacent lot or the lot on which there exists an RV storage lot
or any adjacent lot.
E. Access to storage area.
(1) Access to any RV storage area shall be from the existing driveway.
(2) If the only means of access to any RV storage area requires a
recreational vehicle to be moved over a curb and sidewalk, the
property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair
and/or replacement of any curb or sidewalk damaged by such use.
F. Prohibited storage and activities.
(1) Recreational vehicles shall not be used at any time as living
quarters when stored on residential or commercial property within
the Borough.
(2) Recreational vehicle storage is not permitted on any public right-ofway.
(3) A recreational vehicle is not permitted on property if its gross
weight exceeds the weight limits of the public highways that it
would need to travel on to access the owner's property.
G. Property and vehicle maintenance.
(1) RV storage shall be permitted on any surface so long as the surface
is maintained pursuant to the Borough of Monaca Property
Maintenance Code.246
(2) All recreational vehicles shall be maintained in a clean, well-kept
state so as not to detract from the appearance of the surrounding
area. All coverings must be clean and secure and also be in
acceptable condition free from holes, tears or other unsightly
blemishes.
H. Penalties. Any person whom the Neighborhood Services Officer of the
Borough of Monaca determines to be in violation of any provision of this
section shall receive a written warning from the Neighborhood Services
Officer. The written warning shall describe the violation, along with the
time(s) and date(s) on which the violations(s) occurred, and shall set
forth a date by which the violation must be remedied. Any person who,
246. Editor's Note: See Ch. 169, Property Maintenance.
§ 245-40 MONACA CODE § 245-40
237:696
§ 245-41. Swimming pools.
after receiving a written warning, is found to be in violation of any
provision of this section, after receiving notice of a violation from the
Neighborhood Services officer, shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to
pay fine of up to $250. For any subsequent convictions for violations of
any provision this section, such person shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $250 nor more than $500. Each day a violation is found
to have occurred shall constitute a separate offense.
I. Severability. If any provision of this section or the application thereof to
any person or circumstances is held invalid, such holding shall not
affect the other provisions or applications of this section which can be
given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end,
the provisions of this section are declared severable.
J. Repealer; when effective.
(1) All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent
herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
(2) This section shall be effective upon enactment hereof.
A. Enclosure around in-ground swimming pools. Any new or existing inground
swimming pool shall be completely surrounded by a secure
fence, wall, portion of a building and/or similar enclosure not less than
four feet in height. This enclosure shall be constructed to make it very
difficult for small children to climb up or slip through the enclosure. All
gates or door openings through the enclosure (other than a door to a
building) shall be self-closing and shall include a self-latching device on
the swimming pool side for keeping the gate or door securely closed
during times when not in use.
B. Enclosure around aboveground swimming pool. The swimming pools
shall be equipped with an access ladder that can be raised and locked in
a position so that it is a minimum of four feet above the surrounding
ground level or otherwise completely inaccessible to children when the
swimming pool is unattended.
C. Location. A swimming pool and any deck or shelter that is elevated
above the average surrounding ground level shall meet the applicable
setback requirement for an accessory building. Patios around
swimming pools that are level with the average surrounding ground
level are not required to meet setbacks. A swimming pool is not
permitted within a required front yard.
D. Drainage. A proper method shall be provided for drainage of the water
from the swimming pool that will not overload or flood any on-lot septic
system or portion of a building or property not owned by the owner of
the swimming pool. A swimming pool shall not be located so as to
interfere with the operation of a well or on-lot septic system.
§ 245-40 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-42
237:697
§ 245-42. Utility tap-ins.
Permission must be acquired to tap into sewer and waterlines, serving
previously unserviced lots, prior to approval of the zoning permit
application, except where Borough Council may deem otherwise.
§ 245-43. Yard requirements.
§ 245-44. Satellite antennas.
Satellite antennas shall be permitted accessory structures in all zoning
districts and shall meet the minimum setback requirements for an accessory
use in the zoning district in which they are located. If there are no minimum
setback requirements for an accessory use, then the minimum setback
requirements for the principal use shall apply. The following regulations
shall only apply within a residential district for a satellite antennae that is
visible from a street or an adjacent lot line:
§ 245-45. Communications antennas. [Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
All communications antennas, as defined herein, whether mounted on an
approved communications tower, an existing building or public utility
storage or transmission structure, shall be subject to the following:
A. The following may project into the required yards as established herein:
(1) Steps or stoops not exceeding 24 square feet in area.
(2) Eaves, cornices and belt courses not exceeding two feet in width.
(3) Open fire escapes not exceeding 54 inches in width.
B. Applicants seeking to construct patios, decks, porches, balconies or
verandas will be exempt so long as they are not converted into a new
room or additional dwelling through the construction of walls and/or
windows.247
A. Maximum diameter: 11 feet.
B. Maximum total height of 15 feet above ground level.
A. Building-mounted antennas shall not be permitted on any single-family,
duplex or townhouse building. Building-mounted antennas may be
erected on any garden apartment, mid-rise apartment or high-rise
apartment building, any public or nonresidential building or structure
or any public utility storage or transmission structure in the districts
where authorized by this chapter.
247. Editor's Note: Former §§ 245-43, Home occupations, and 245-44, Other uses not listed, as
renumbered, which sections immediately followed this section, were repealed 9-28-2010
by Ord. No. 918. See now § 245-61F and O.
§ 245-42 MONACA CODE § 245-45
237:698
B. The applicant shall demonstrate that the electromagnetic fields
associated with the proposed antennas comply with safety standards
now or hereafter established by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC).
C. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) and any applicable airport zoning
regulations.
D. Building-mounted antennas shall be permitted to exceed the height
limitations of the district in which they are located by no more than 20
feet.
E. Omnidirectional or whip antennas shall not exceed 20 feet in height or
seven inches in diameter.
F. Directional or panel antennas shall not exceed five feet in height or two
feet in width.
G. Satellite and microwave dish antennas shall not exceed six feet in
diameter.
H. The applicant proposing a building-mounted antenna shall submit
evidence from a structural engineer certifying that the proposed
installation will not exceed the structural capacity of the building
considering wind and other loads associated with the antenna's
location.
I. Evidence of lease agreements and easements necessary to provide
access to the building or structure for installation and maintenance of
the antennas and placement of the equipment cabinet or equipment
building shall be provided to the Borough.
J. The placement of the equipment cabinet or equipment building shall
not obstruct the free flow of traffic on the site, shall not reduce any
parking required or available for other uses on the site and shall not
obstruct any right-of-way or easement without the permission of the
owner or grantor of the right-of-way or easement.
K. Unless located within a secured building, the equipment cabinet or
equipment building shall be enclosed by a ten-foot-high chain link
security fence with locking gate. If the equipment cabinet or equipment
building is visible from any public street or adjoining property in an R-1,
R-2 or R-3 District, the equipment cabinet or equipment building shall
be screened by a minimum six-foot-high compact evergreen hedge.
L. If vehicular access to the equipment cabinet or equipment building is
not provided from a public street or paved driveway or parking area, an
easement or right-of-way shall be provided that has a minimum width of
20 feet improved with a dust-free all-weather surface for its entire
length.
§ 245-45 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-45
237:699
§ 245-46. Drive-through facilities. [Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
All businesses that propose drive-through facilities, as defined by this
chapter, as accessory uses or principal uses shall meet all of the following
requirements:
§ 245-47. No-impact home-based business. [Added 9-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 918]
All no-impact home-based businesses, as defined herein, shall comply with
the following:
M. At least one off-street parking space shall be provided on the site within
a reasonable walking distance of the equipment cabinet or equipment
building to facilitate periodic visits by maintenance workers.
A. Standing spaces. In addition to the parking spaces required for the
principal use, a minimum of five standing spaces, in one lane, with a
total length of 100 feet, in direct line with each service position shall be
provided for vehicles to wait in line. The standing space shall not
interfere with the use of any required parking spaces and shall not
inhibit the free flow of traffic on the property. The standing spaces shall
be designed so that waiting vehicles shall not stand in any right-of-way
or overflow onto adjacent properties, streets or berms.
B. Markings and signs. Entrances, exits and standing spaces shall be
adequately indicated with pavement markings and/or directional signs.
C. Circulation patterns. Parking areas and circulation patterns shall be
adequately striped and marked to facilitate traffic circulation on the
property.
D. Setback from residential properties. No service position or standing
lane shall be located within 150 feet of any property line adjoining
property in an R-1, R-2 or R-3 District.
A. The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
B. The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
C. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling of
inventory of a substantial nature.
D. There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
E. No on-site parking of commercially identified vehicles shall be
permitted.
§ 245-45 MONACA CODE § 245-47
237:700
§ 245-48. Outdoor café. [Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
The serving of food in an outdoor setting shall comply with all of the
following requirements:
F. The business activity shall not use any equipment or process that
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
that is detectable in the neighborhood.
G. The business activity shall not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
H. The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
shall not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area of the
dwelling.
I. The business shall not involve any illegal activity.
A. An outdoor cafe shall only be permitted as an accessory use on property
where a tavern or restaurant is the principal use.
B. If located entirely on private property, the seating area shall be subject
to the setbacks for accessory structures in the district in which it is
located.
C. If all or part of an outdoor cafe is proposed on a public sidewalk, the
seating area shall not obstruct any sidewalk or public right-of-way nor
shall it obstruct the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the
site or adjoining the site. On any sidewalk, there shall be maintained a
minimum of five feet unobstructed width for the passage of pedestrians
and in the case where there is parallel parking permitted along such
sidewalk, a minimum of four feet adjacent to the curb to permit the
discharging of passengers shall be provided. These required
unobstructed areas on the sidewalk may be combined into one area at
least five feet wide along the curb.
D. An outdoor cafe shall not occupy any designated parking spaces on the
site.
E. Tables and chairs shall be adequately secured or stored inside when not
in use to eliminate the possibility of wind or theft hazards.
F. Seating areas on a sidewalk may be enclosed or demarcated by a
railing, fence, bollards, planters or similar structures, provided the
unobstructed area required by Subsection C above is maintained.
G. Restroom facilities for the principal use shall be available to the patrons
of the outdoor cafe.
§ 245-47 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-48
237:701
§ 245-49. Small wind energy systems. [Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
The construction and installation of a small wind energy system, as defined
herein, shall be subject to compliance with all of the following criteria:
H. No noise or odor shall emanate from the outdoor cafe that would
adversely affect any adjoining property in an R-1, R-2 or R-3 District
located within 300 feet of the outdoor cafe.
I. Adequate parking for the outdoor cafe shall be provided either on the
site, on the adjacent street or in a public parking lot located within 300
feet of the site.
J. The outdoor cafe shall obtain necessary approvals from the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board (PA LCB), if the establishment is
licensed.
K. The outdoor cafe shall maintain the necessary permits from the
Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Food Safety and
Laboratory Services.
L. The owner of the outdoor cafe shall provide the Borough with a
certificate of insurance, in an amount at least equal to $2,000,000 per
occurrence and $3,000,000 aggregate, indemnifying the Borough
against any liability resulting from such use.
A. A zoning permit shall be secured from the Borough Zoning Officer.
B. A building permit shall be secured from the Borough Building Inspector.
C. A building permit shall also be required for any physical modification to
an existing small wind energy system or for the temporary installation
of a meteorological (met) tower.
D. In the C-C Core Commercial District, only a vertical axis wind turbine
(VAWT) shall be permitted.
E. A meteorological (met) tower shall be permitted as a temporary
structure for a period not to exceed 18 months and shall be removed
upon installation of a small wind energy system or the expiration of the
eighteen-month period, whichever occurs first.
F. Applications for approval of a small wind energy system shall contain a
site plan along with the following information:
(1) Property lines and physical dimensions of the applicant's property.
(2) Location, dimensions and types of existing principal structures on
the property.
(3) Location of the proposed small wind energy system, foundations,
guy anchors and associated equipment.
§ 245-48 MONACA CODE § 245-49
237:702
(4) Tower foundation blueprints or drawings.
(5) Tower blueprints or drawings.
(6) Setback requirements as outlined in this chapter.
(7) The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with the
property.
(8) Any overhead utility lines.
(9) Small wind energy system specifications, including manufacturer,
model, rotor diameter, tower height, tower type, nameplate
generation capacity.
(10) Small wind energy systems that will be connected to the power grid
shall include a copy of the application for interconnection with their
electric utility provider.
(11) Sound level analysis prepared by the wind generator manufacturer
or qualified engineer.
(12) Electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of installation conforms to the
Uniform Construction Code (UCC)248 prevailing from time to time
in the Borough of Monaca.
(13) Evidence of compliance or nonapplicability with Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) requirements.
(14) List of abutting property owners to the applicant's property.
(15) Proof of liability insurance. The owner/applicant shall maintain a
current general liability insurance policy covering bodily injury and
property damage with limits of at least $100,000 per occurrence
and $1,000,000 in the aggregate at all times during the installation
and operation of the small wind energy system. Certificates shall be
made available to the Borough of Monaca upon request.
G. The application shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer and the
Building Inspector to determine compliance with this subsection as a
prerequisite to issuing a zoning permit and a building permit.
H. Appropriate warning signage regarding electrical or other hazards
shall be placed on the wind turbine and electrical equipment.
I. The small wind energy system generators and alternators shall be
constructed so as to prevent the emission of radio and television
signals. The applicant shall correct any signal disturbance problem
identified after initiation of the operation within 90 days of
identification and notice by the Borough.
248. Editor's Note: See Ch. 107, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 245-49 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-49
237:703
J. All wind turbines shall have an automatic braking, governing or
feathering system to prevent uncontrolled rotation, overspeeding or
excessive pressure on the tower structure, rotor blades and turbine
components.
K. Setbacks.
(1) The setback shall be calculated by multiplying the minimum
setback requirement number in the following table by the system
height and shall be measured from the center of the tower base to
property line, public roads or nearest point on the foundation of an
occupied building.
Minimum Setback Requirements
Occupied
Buildings on
Participating
Landowner
Property
Occupied
Buildings on
Abutting
Property
Property
Lines of
Abutting
Property and
Utility Lines Public Roads
0 1.5 1.1 1.5
(2) Guy wires used to support the tower are exempt from the small
wind energy system setback requirements.
L. Tower. The maximum tower height shall be restricted to 35 feet.
M. Sound level. The small wind energy system shall not exceed 60 decibels
using the A scale (dBA), as measured at the site property line, except
during short-term events such as severe wind storms and utility
outages.
N. Shadow flicker. Small wind energy systems shall be sited in a manner
that does not result in significant shadow flicker impact. Significant
shadow flicker is defined as more than 30 hours per year on abutting
occupied buildings. The applicant has the burden of proving that the
shadow flicker will not have significant adverse impact on neighboring
or adjacent uses. Potential shadow flicker will be addressed either
through siting or mitigation measures.
O. Signs. All signs including flags, streamers and decorative items, both
temporary and permanent, are prohibited on the small wind energy
system, except for manufacturer identification or appropriate warning
signs.
P. Code compliance. The small wind energy system shall comply with all
applicable sections of the Uniform Construction Code (UCC) as adopted
by the Borough of Monaca.249
Q. Aviation. The small wind energy system shall be built to comply with all
applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations.
249. Editor's Note: See Ch. 107, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 245-49 MONACA CODE § 245-49
237:704
R. Visual impacts. It is inherent that small wind energy systems may pose
some visual impacts due to the tower height needed to access wind
resources. The purpose of this subsection is to reduce the visual
impacts, without restricting the owner's access to the optimal wind
resources on the property.
(1) The applicant shall demonstrate through project site planning and
proposed mitigation that the small wind energy system's visual
impact will be minimized for surrounding neighbors and the
community. This may include, but not be limited to, information
regarding site selection, wind generator design or appearance,
buffering and screening of ground-mounted electrical and control
equipment. All electrical conduits shall be underground, except
when the financial costs are prohibitive.
(2) The color of the small wind energy system shall either be the stock
color from the manufacturer or painted with a nonreflective,
unobtrusive color that blends in with the surrounding environment.
Approved colors include, but are not limited to, white, off-white or
gray.
(3) The small wind energy system shall not be artificially lit unless such
lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). If
lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a copy of the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) determination to establish
the required markings and/or lights for the small wind energy
system.
(4) Streetlight-mounted vertical access wind turbines (VAWTs) with
permission of the appropriate utility and the Borough may be
mounted on streetlights along the public right-of-way at a height
not to exceed 35 feet above grade. Those that are mounted on
buildings may request a variance on height restrictions.
S. Approved wind generators. The manufacturer and model of the wind
generator to be used in the proposed small wind energy system must
have been approved by the State of Pennsylvania, if applicable.
T. Utility connection. If the proposed small wind energy system is to be
connected to the power grid through net metering, it shall adhere to
utility guidelines.
U. Access. The tower shall be designed and installed so as not to provide
step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum
height of eight feet above the ground. All ground-mounted electrical
and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent
unauthorized access.
V. Clearing. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is
necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the small
wind energy system and as otherwise prescribed by applicable laws,
regulations and ordinances.
§ 245-49 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-49
237:705
W. Abandonment. At such time that a small wind energy system is
scheduled to be abandoned or discontinued, the applicant shall notify
the Borough Building Inspector by certified U.S. mail of the proposed
date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations.
(1) Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the owner shall
physically remove the small wind energy system within 90 days
from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. This
period may be extended at the request of the owner and at the
discretion of the Building Inspector. "Physically remove" shall
include, but shall not be limited to:
(a) Removal of the wind generator and tower and related abovegrade
structures.
(b) Restoration of the location of the small wind energy system to
its natural condition, except that any landscaping, grading or
below-grade foundation may remain in its same condition at
initiation of abandonment.
(2) In the event that an applicant fails to give such notice of
abandonment to the Building Inspector, the system shall be
considered abandoned or discontinued if the system is out of
service for a continuous twelve-month period. After the 12 months
of inoperability, the Building Inspector may issue a notice of
abandonment to the owner of the small wind energy system.
(3) The owner shall have the right to respond to the notice of
abandonment within 30 days from notice of receipt date. After
review of the information provided by the owner, the Building
Inspector shall determine if the small wind energy system has been
abandoned. If it is determined that the small wind energy system
has not been abandoned, the Building Inspector shall withdraw the
notice of abandonment and notify the owner of the withdrawal.
(4) If the owner fails to respond to the notice of abandonment or if,
after review by the Building Inspector, it is determined that the
small wind energy system has been abandoned or discontinued, the
owner of the small wind energy system shall remove the wind
generator and tower, at the owner's sole expense, within three
months of receipt of the notice of abandonment. If the owner fails
to physically remove the small wind energy system after the notice
of abandonment procedure, the Building Inspector may pursue
legal action to have the small wind energy system removed at the
owner's expense.
§ 245-49 MONACA CODE § 245-49
237:706
ARTICLE VIII
Floodplain Management250
§ 245-50. Purpose.
§ 245-51. Adoption of Borough floodplain/flood-prone maps.
A. Certain areas of Monaca Borough are subject to periodic flooding and/
or mudslides from streams and other waters causing damage to
properties and improvements within the reach of such waters.
B. Monaca desires the insurance coverage for its citizens, residents and
properties within the Borough offered by the National Flood Insurance
Act of 1968, as amended, to protect against loss resulting from flooding
and/or mudslides.
C. The Borough Council of Monaca Borough has determined to participate
in the National Flood Insurance Program.
D. Regulations promulgated by the Federal Insurance Administrator under
the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, require the
Borough Council to enact adequate regulations of land use for those
areas subject to the hazards of flooding or mudslides consistent with
the criteria set forth in Section 1910 of the National Flood Insurance
Program Regulations, as amended.
A. The boundaries of floodplain or flood-prone areas within the Borough of
Monaca are shown and detailed in the Federal Emergency Management
Agency Flood Insurance Rate Map, bearing the date of December 4,
1979, and consisting of one sheet designated as a "panel" and further
identified by Community - Panel Number 420114 0001 B. Said Flood
Insurance Rate Map and any revisions thereto are hereby deemed and
declared a part of this chapter, and same are incorporated herein by
reference and are hereby adopted as the Borough of Monaca
Floodplain/Flood-Prone Map.
B. Said Floodplain/Flood-Prone Map may be revised from time to time due
to the occurrence of natural or man-made changes causing changes in
floodplain or flood-prone areas and/or due to more detailed studies
conducted or undertaken by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers, a River Basin Commission or other qualified agency or
individual which documents the need for a change; provided however,
that prior to such revision, approval thereof must be obtained from or
be directed by the Federal Insurance Administration or its successor,
and, upon such approval or directive being made, such floodplain and/
or flood-prone areas and/or maps shall be deemed applicable hereto
and made part hereof.
250. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 131, Flood Damage Prevention, and Ch. 199, Stormwater
Management.
§ 245-50 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-51
237:707
§ 245-52. Regulation of floodplain/flood-prone areas.
C. The Floodplain/Flood-Prone Map shall be an overlay to the zoning
districts established by this this chapter, and the provisions of this
section shall supplement and be in addition to all other applicable
requirements established by this chapter for each zoning district
involved.
D. The various classifications of flood-prone areas delineated in the Flood
Insurance Study referenced in Subsection A above are as follows:
(1) The FW (Floodway Area).
(a) The FW (Floodway Area) shall be delineated for purposes of
this chapter using the criteria that a certain area within the
floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the onehundred-
year flood without increasing the water surface
elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point. The
areas included in this area are specifically defined in the
Floodway Data Table contained in the above-referenced Flood
Insurance Study and shown on the accompanying Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map.
(b) Within any FW (Floodway Area), the following provisions
apply:
[1] Any new construction, development, use, activity or
encroachment that would cause any increase in flood
heights shall be prohibited.
[2] No new construction or development shall be allowed,
unless a permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Dams and Waterway
Management.
(2) The FF (Flood-Fringe Area). The FF (Flood-Fringe Area) shall be
that area of the one-hundred-year floodplain not included in the
floodway. The basis for the outermost boundary of this district shall
be the one-hundred-year-flood elevations contained in the flood
profiles as shown on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map.
(3) The FA (General Floodplain Area). The FA (General Floodplain
Area) shall be that floodplain area for which no detailed flood
elevations or floodway information is provided. For these areas,
elevation and floodway information from other federal,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or other acceptable source shall be
used when available. When such other acceptable information is
not available, the elevation shall be determined by using the
elevation of a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain
area which is nearest the construction site.
§ 245-51 MONACA CODE § 245-52
237:708
§ 245-53. Application for floodplain permit.
An application for a floodplain permit shall be submitted to the Borough
of Monaca, with one original and six copies thereof, together with a fee
in accordance to a fee schedule adopted and set by resolution of the
Borough Council from time to time.251 Such application for a floodplain
permit shall include and provide all the necessary information in sufficient
detail and clarity to enable the Council of Monaca Borough and/or its
designated agents, officers, personnel or other agency or commission that
such application may be referred to for review and comment by said Council
to determine that the proposed development or substantial improvement,
construction, use or activity is consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable laws, regulations and/or ordinances of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and/or the Borough of Monaca; that all utilities and facilities
as may be involved, including but not limited to sewer, gas, electric and
water systems, are and shall be located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage; and that adequate drainage is or shall be provided
so as to reduce exposure to flood. Such application for a floodplain permit,
in addition to the foregoing requirements of including pertinent data and
information, shall include and contain the following information:
A. Any new development, substantial improvement, construction, uses or
activities undertaken or allowed within any identified floodplain or
flood-prone area shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the
provisions of this section of this chapter and all other applicable laws,
codes, ordinances or regulations. In the event that there is a conflict
between the provisions of this section and any other provisions of this
this chapter, the more restrictive provisions will apply.
B. No development or substantial improvement shall be commenced or
undertaken in any floodplain or flood-prone area until a floodplain
permit or a special floodplain permit is issued therefor by the Zoning
Officer. Such floodplain permit or special floodplain permit shall be an
additionally required permit to any of the permits that may be required
by Article X of this this chapter or any other ordinance of the Borough of
Monaca.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of the owner of the land involved.
C. A brief description of the proposed development, substantial
improvement, construction, use or activity proposed and the estimated
cost thereof.
D. A location plan map that clearly identifies the entire project site in
relation to the municipal boundaries of Monaca Borough.
251. Editor's Note: See Ch. A256, Fee Schedule.
§ 245-52 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-53
237:709
E. A detailed set of plans of the entire project site, clearly and legibly
drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 100 feet or less as may be
necessary to display the details hereinafter required, which set of plans
shall show and include the following:
(1) North arrow, scale and date of preparation.
(2) A clear identification of the floodplain or flood-prone portion of the
project site or that the total project site is within a floodplain or
flood-prone area.
(3) Topographic contour lines of the entire site at intervals to indicate
differences of not less than 20 feet in elevation in nonfloodplain or
non-flood-prone areas of the project site and one-foot differences in
elevation in the floodplain or flood-prone areas of the project site.
(4) The location of all existing structures, streets, drives and other
accessways, bodies of water or watercourses, surface water
drainage conditions, direction of flow thereof and velocity and
quantity as to all such existing water bodies or courses within the
project site.
(5) The proposed location of any new structures, streets, drives and
other accessways, utility, sewage and/or water supply facilities or
other improvements, including but not limited to surface water
drainage slopes or courses that are desired to be implemented
therewith on the project site.
F. As to any proposed building, structure or other improvements of the
project site, or as to any existing building, structure or other
improvement that will be retained on the project site per the concept of
the proposed development, a set of plans as to each such building,
structure or other improvement, drawn at a suitable scale, as necessary
to show:
(1) The lowest floor elevation of any proposed building or structure
and the lowest floor elevation of any existing building or structure
that will be retained or remain in existence as a part of the
proposed development or substantial improvement, construction,
use or activity for which the floodplain permit is sought, which
lowest floor elevation shall be based upon the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929.
(2) The one-hundred-year-flood elevation as to such buildings or
structures, particularly in reference to the lowest floor level
thereof.
(3) Detailed information concerning any proposed flood-proofing
measures.
(4) Detailed information displaying and identifying that any proposed
building or structure, or alteration or remodeling of an existing
§ 245-53 MONACA CODE § 245-53
237:710
building or structure, shall and will be accomplished in such
manner and according to such specifications as may be required
now, or hereafter, at the time of approval of an application for
the floodplain permit, in a floodplain or flood-prone area, by any
law, regulation or ordinance now or hereafter enacted, adopted
or promulgated by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any of
its agencies, the Federal Insurance Administration or other federal
agency and/or the Borough of Monaca.
G. A written certification by registered professional engineers and/or
architects that states and assures that the proposed development,
substantial improvement, construction, uses or activities involved and
detailed in the application for the floodplain permit:
(1) Have been adequately designed to withstand the one-hundredyear-
flood elevation, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces
associated with the one-hundred-year-flood elevation as shall be
determined in accordance to the requirements of this chapter.
(2) Comply with all requirements of this chapter and all applicable
laws, codes and regulations as promulgated and enacted by the
United States Government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
their agencies, departments and/or bureaus, as shall be in effect at
the time of the application being submitted for review and
consideration, and further that:
(a) Any proposed structure or proposed alteration of an existing
structure is designed to fully protect the health and safety of
the general public and any occupants thereof and that such
structure is designed to survive inundation by waters of the
one-hundred-year-flood elevation without any lateral
movement or damage to either the structure itself or to any of
its equipment and contents, with the ability to provide inside
refuge for occupants for an indefinite period of time so as to
permit safe evacuation of such occupants; and
(b) No facet of the proposal will cause any unlawful increase of the
one-hundred-year-flood elevation.
H. An application for a floodplain permit shall be reviewed by the Zoning
Officer and the Council of Monaca Borough and shall either be granted
preliminary approval, final approval or be denied within 90 days
following the first general public meeting of the Borough Council held
after receipt of the application and required fee.
(1) The decision of preliminary approval, final approval or denial of the
application for a floodplain permit must be sent to the applicant, in
writing, by the Borough within 15 days after the decision is made.
Reasons for denial or for preliminary approval, only the latter being
due to conditions or items that must be completed before final
approval will be granted, shall be included in said written notice to
the applicant.
§ 245-53 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-53
237:711
§ 245-54. Specific requirements regulating development.
No development or substantial improvement, construction, use or activity
shall be commenced, undertaken or permitted within the Borough of
(a) If preliminary approval only is granted, the applicant shall have
six months, unless an extension of time is requested and
granted by the Zoning Officer, from the date of the written
notice by the Borough to complete the designated conditions or
items and submit compliance data to the Borough, otherwise
the application for floodplain permit shall be deemed denied.
(b) Written notice required herein may be personally delivered to
the applicant or mailed, by regular mail, to the applicant at the
address designated by the applicant on the application for the
floodplain permit. The deposit of such written notice so
addressed in the United States postal system is deemed and
hereby declared delivery of same to the applicant.
(c) Upon receipt of the application for a floodplain permit, in the
form as above required with the certification of the applicants
registered engineer and/or architect therein included, the
Borough shall forward, for review purposes only, one complete
copy thereof to the Borough Planning Commission, the Beaver
County Planning Commission, the Borough Engineer and to
any other entity or person that it deems advisable for review
and comment thereon.
(d) A floodplain permit may be revoked in the event that a permit
holder fails to adhere to the requirements of this chapter,
applicable codes, regulations, other ordinances or laws or if
compliance to the approved plans is not being adhered to in the
course of implementation thereof and use of the subject lands
violates the provisions of this chapter, applicable codes,
regulations, other ordinances or laws governing use of
floodplain/flood-prone areas.
(e) In the event of denial or revocation of a floodplain permit, the
applicant or permit holder, or subsequent landowner of the
involved lands, may file an appeal within 30 days from the
denial or revocation, which appeal shall be to the Borough
Council, which shall set a hearing thereon within 30 days of
receipt of such appeal. Said hearing shall be held in
accordance to the Local Agency Law,252 and if the appellant is
aggrieved by the decision rendered, the appellant may appeal
therefrom to the court as provided by the laws of this
commonwealth, including the Pennsylvania Floodplain
Management Act.253
252. Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq. and § 751 et seq.
253. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 245-53 MONACA CODE § 245-54
237:712
Monaca contrary to the provisions and requirements of this chapter, the
Pennsylvania Flooplain Management Act254 or regulations promulgated
under the latter. Restrictions or prohibitions as to development or
substantial improvements, construction, use or activity shall include the
following:
A. No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be made
to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be
affected by such action have been notified by the Borough and until all
required permits or approvals have been first obtained from the proper
bureau or division of the Department of Environmental Resources. In
addition, the Federal Insurance Administrator and proper bureau or
division of the Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs shall be
notified prior to alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
B. In any area designated or determined to be a floodplain or flood-prone
area, no new development, substantial improvement or construction
shall be located within an area measured 50 feet landward from the top
of the bank of any watercourse unless a permit is first obtained from the
proper bureau or division of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources.
C. No use, building, structure, development or substantial improvement
shall adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any
watercourse, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system.
D. All new or replacement water supply and/or sanitary sewage systems
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into such systems and/or to minimize or eliminate discharges from such
systems into floodwaters.
E. All new or replacement on-site waste disposal systems shall be located
so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination therefrom by
flooding.
F. All public utilities and facilities shall be located and be constructed to
minimize flood damage.
G. Within any floodplain or flood-prone area, structures shall be subject to
the following elevation and/or floodproofing requirements:
(1) New residential structures. The lowest floor (including basement)
of any new or substantially improved residential structure shall be
at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year-flood elevation.
(2) New nonresidential structures. The lowest floor level (including
basement) of any new or substantially improved nonresidential
structure shall be at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-yearflood
elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed by such structure shall remain either completely or
254. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 245-54 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-54
237:713
essentially dry during any flood up to that height, in which event
said nonresidential structure shall be designed and constructed to
be completely or essentially dry in accordance with the standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
(United States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, or any
subsequent publication issued in replacement thereof), or some
other equivalent standard, for that type of construction.
(3) Existing structures, residential or nonresidential. Any modification,
alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind to an
existing structure, residential or nonresidential, to an extent or
amount of 50% or more of its market value shall constitute a
substantial improvement, and such activity shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provisions of this section, including
but not limited to the preceding Subsection G(1) and (2) of this
subsection. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or
improvement of any kind to an existing structure, residential or
nonresidential, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its
market value shall be done so as to elevate and/or floodproof the
same to the greatest extent possible.
(4) No enclosed area, e.g., an enclosed empty space, shall be permitted
below the herein required lowest floor level of any new structure or
substantial improvement to an existing structure, residential or
nonresidential.
H. In addition to any other requirement, the following standards shall
apply to any or all development, substantial improvement, construction,
activity or use in any area of the Borough of Monaca, including but not
limited to a floodplain or flood-prone area:
(1) If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points of the building.
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills or
dumping of hazardous wastes, vehicle tires and/or discarded
appliances and/or similar articles discarded by mankind is
prohibited unless a separate permit for use of such fill is
obtained from the proper bureau or division of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring or settling.
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal, unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to
and approved by Monaca Borough.
(e) Be used only to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
§ 245-54 MONACA CODE § 245-54
237:714
(2) Drainage. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the
flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner and shall
ensure proper drainage along streets and roads and provide
positive drainage away from buildings, and shall be so designed,
constructed and/or graded to prevent the discharge of excess
runoff of stormwaters onto adjacent or other properties. As to
surface water drainage and runoff, reference is hereby made to the
Pennsylvania Stormwater Management Act and any regulations as
may be promulgated thereunder.255
(3) Water and sanitary sewage facilities and systems. Such facilities or
systems shall be subject to the following:
(a) All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities and/
or systems shall be located, designed and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage and the infiltration of
floodwater.
(b) Sanitary sewer facilities and/or sewage systems shall be
designed to prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into
floodwaters and/or stormwater runoff.
(c) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within
any identified or known floodplain or flood-prone area except
in strict compliance with all Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, such system shall be located and constructed so as
to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a
flood or other flow of stormwater runoff.
(4) Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical lines,
telephone systems or other communication systems shall be
located, constructed and elevated, where possible, to minimize the
chance of impairment during a flood.
(5) Placement of buildings or structures. All buildings or structures
shall be designed, located and constructed so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
(6) Anchoring to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement. All
buildings, structures or man-made improvements, and pertinent
parts or fixtures thereto, shall be designed and constructed to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement by the pressure or
inundation of and by floodwaters or stormwater runoff, and:
(a) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
255. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 245-54 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-54
237:715
(b) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks and other similar
objects or components located within or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement due to floodwaters.
(7) Electrical components or systems of buildings and structures. All
electrical components or systems of any building and structure
shall be designed and constructed so that:
(a) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the one-hundred-year-flood elevation.
(b) Separate electrical circuits that shall serve any area below said
three feet above the one-hundred-year-flood elevation shall be
dropped from the above distribution panels and be so designed
and constructed so as to be able to be turned off and not be
carrying live or hot electrical current when threatened with or
in fact being inundated with floodwaters.
(8) Mechanical and utility equipment and/or fixtures of any building or
structure. No water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and
ventilating units or other electrical, mechanical or utility
equipment or apparatus shall be located below the regulatory flood
elevation. All such mechanical and utility equipment shall be
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
(9) Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be
designed and constructed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters
and/or stormwater runoff into the system and/or to prevent
discharge from said systems into floodwaters and/or stormwater
runoff. Additional provisions shall be made to such systems to
provide for a method of drainage of such fuel systems in a safe and
prudent manner in the event that floodwater or stormwater
infiltration occurs to same.
I. Mobile homes or modular homes and/or manufactured homes as the
latter are defined for particular application of this section may be
located in a floodplain or flood-prone area, provided that all such mobile
homes, modular homes or manufactured homes and any additions
thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors
in accordance with the American National Standards Institute and/or
the National Fire Protection Association Standard as specified in the
Standard for Installation of Mobile Home Park Requirements, as
amended, for Mobile Homes in Hurricane Zones, and such similar
regulations now promulgated by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) under the terminology of
"manufactured home" and FEMA's manual (FEMA No. 85)
Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas, as published
§ 245-54 MONACA CODE § 245-54
237:716
§ 245-55. Special floodplain permits.
No hospitals, nursing homes, jails or prisons and/or mobile home park
or modular home subdivision within the Borough of Monaca shall be
constructed and/or substantially improved or expanded in a floodplain or
flood-prone area without the issuance of a permit by the Zoning Officer.
September 1985, or any subsequent publication revision thereto, or
other appropriate standards such as the following:
(1) Over-the-top ties shall be at each of the four corners of the mobile
home or modular home, with two additional such ties per side at
intermediate locations for units less than 50 feet in length and four
additional ties per side for units more than 50 feet in length.
(2) Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of a mobile home or
modular home, with four additional ties per side for units less than
50 feet and five additional ties per side for units more than 50 feet
in length.
(3) All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.
(4) The stands or lots where the mobile home or modular home is to be
situate shall be elevated on compacted fill, or on pilings, so that the
lowest floor of the mobile home or modular home (including
basement, if one is constructed thereunder) will be 1 1/2 feet or
more above the elevation of the one-hundred-year-flood elevation.
(5) Adequate surface water drainage facilities are provided.
(6) Adequate access for a hauler is provided.
(7) Where pilings are used for elevation, the lots shall be large enough
to permit steps; piling foundations shall be placed in stable soil no
more than 10 feet apart; reinforcement shall be provided for pilings
that will extend for six or more feet above the original ground level.
(8) The lowest floor of a mobile home shall be at least 1 1/2 feet above
the one-hundred-year-flood elevation. This requirement shall be
applicable as to any placement of a mobile home, modular home
and/or manufactured home after the effective date of this chapter,
including placement on a site where such type of structure had
been previously placed but removed from such site. An evacuation
plan for a mobile home park, indicating alternate vehicular access
and escape routes to same in the event of flooding, shall be filed at
the Borough Office by the owner and/or operator of the mobile
home park.
(9) All mobile homes shall be placed on a permanent foundation.
A. In accordance to the regulations promulgated by Pennsylvania
Community Affairs under and pursuant to the Pennsylvania Floodplain
§ 245-54 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-55
237:717
Management Act,256 or such other regulations as may hereafter be
promulgated under said Act or its replacement legislation, the special
floodplain permit that is required by this section of this chapter is
the special permit as now or hereafter required by said regulations. If
application for a special floodplain permit is necessary, such application
will be the sole floodplain/flood-prone application necessary to be made
to the Borough of Monaca under this section of this chapter.
B. An application for a special floodplain permit, in addition to containing
all the data as required and otherwise complying with § 245-52 of this
chapter as to the contents, data and information applicable to an
application for a floodplain permit, shall include and contain the
following additional data, information and certifications:
(1) Topographical contour lines of the entire lands or site upon which
the activity for which the special floodplain permit is required,
based on the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929, at intervals
of two feet, subject to the requirement of § 245-53E(3), that the
portion of the tract of land being within the floodplain or floodprone
areas be in one-foot intervals.
(2) All property of the site shall be depicted by survey plotting,
including complete course and dimensions thereof, with the size of
the entire site or tract of land involved being expressed in acres or
square feet.
(3) In addition to identifying the location of existing structures, streets,
drives and other access ways, bodies of water, watercourses and all
other natural and/or man-made features existing on the proposed
site or tract of land, the application shall include data as to the
dimensions of same and the composition or construction materials
included in same.
(4) The floodplain or flood-prone area or portion of the site or tract of
land shall be clearly indicated and spot elevation data shall be
provided relative to the one-hundred-year-flood elevation as to said
site or tract of land.
(5) The plans as to any proposed building or structure or any building
or structure that will remain on the site or tract of land shall
include detailed floor plans and drawings; elevation data as to each
floor thereof as to the one-hundred-year-flood elevation; and the
capabilities of same to withstand pressures, velocities, impact and
uplift forces and other related factors associated with the onehundred-
year flood.
(6) Cross-section drawings, plans and profiles of all streets, drives,
other access routes, parking lots or other facilities for vehicular
use, both existing and proposed, shall be included.
256. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 245-55 MONACA CODE § 245-55
237:718
(7) Plans and profiles of all existing or proposed sanitary sewage
facilities and stormwater drainage facilities, along with the water
supply system and other utility and facility services, shall be
provided and included with the application.
C. Said application for a special floodplain permit shall be accompanied
with the following certifications and documents:
(1) Certification from and by the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel or tract of land, owned by the applicant or the client
that he represents.
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
designed to protect against damage from a one-hundred-year flood.
(3) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or other qualified person, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the nature and extent of pollution that
might possibly occur from the development during the course of a
one-hundred-year flood, including a statement concerning the
effects such pollution may have on human life.
(4) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the effects the proposed development will
have on the one-hundred-year-flood elevations and flows.
(5) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the one-hundred-year-flood elevation and the effects such
materials or debris may have on the one-hundred-year-flood
elevation and flows.
(6) The appropriate component of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources' Planning Module for Land Development.
(7) As to any excavation or grading as to the proposed development, a
plan detailing and meeting the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection to implement and
maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
(8) A copy of any other applicable permits required by agencies or
bureaus of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including but not
limited to a permit for an activity regulated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection under Section 302 of Act
No. 166 of 1978.
§ 245-55 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-55
237:719
(9) An evacuation plan which fully details and explains the manner in
which the site will be safely evacuated before and/or during the
course of flooding.
D. Review of the application for a special floodplain permit by the Borough
of Monaca, in that same is in lieu of the necessity of making application
for a floodplain permit per se, shall be in accordance with the procedure
and methods provided and set forth in § 245-53H; provided however,
that initially the Borough can give only preliminary approval to an
application for a special floodplain permit, pending review by the
Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs, and:
(1) Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying
documentation shall be forwarded to the Beaver County Planning
Commission, by registered or certified mail, for its review and
recommendations. Copies of the application shall also be
forwarded to the Borough Planning Commission and the Borough
Engineer for review and comment.
(2) If an application is received that is incomplete, the Borough shall
notify the applicant, in writing, stating in what respect the
application is deficient.
(3) If the Borough decides to disapprove an application, it shall notify
the applicant, in writing, stating the reasons for the disapproval.
(4) If the Borough decides to preliminarily approve an application, it
shall file written notification, together with a complete copy of the
application and all pertinent information, with the Department of
Community Affairs, by registered or certified mail, within five
working days after the date of such preliminary approval by the
Borough.
(5) Before granting final approval and issuance of a special floodplain
permit, the Borough shall allow the Department of Community
Affairs 30 days, after receipt of the notification by the Department
of Community Affairs, to review the application and decision of the
Borough to preliminarily approve the application.
(6) If the Borough does not receive any communication from the
Department of Community Affairs during the thirty-day review
period, the Borough may grant final approval to the application and
issue a special floodplain permit thereon.
(7) If the Department of Community Affairs should decide to
disapprove the application, it shall notify the Borough and the
applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval, and the
Borough shall not grant final approval to the application nor issue a
special floodplain permit thereon.
§ 245-55 MONACA CODE § 245-55
237:720
§ 245-56. Regulation of hazardous/dangerous substances.
(8) Any applicant aggrieved by a denial of final approval may proceed
to have such denial reviewed pursuant to the provisions of the
Local Agency Law,257 and will proceed accordingly depending on
whether the denial was initially by the Borough or, after the
Borough's preliminary approval, by and pursuant to decision of said
Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs.
A. No development, substantial improvement, construction, use or activity
shall be commenced, carried on or occur within a floodplain or floodprone
area within the Borough of Monaca which may endanger human
life from the production and/or storage of hazardous or dangerous
materials or substances.
B. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act258
and regulations promulgated thereunder, as such regulations now exist
or as may hereafter be amended, any new or substantially improved
structure which will be used for the production and/or storage of
dangerous or hazardous materials or substances; and/or which will be
used for any activity requiring the applicant of such denial, in writing,
and shall include therein the reasons for such disapproval. Such notice
of disapproval must be mailed, certified mail, to the Borough and
applicant and be received by the Borough within the aforesaid thirtyfive-
day period.
C. Any applicant aggrieved by a denial of final approval may proceed to
have such denial reviewed pursuant to the provisions of the Local
Agency Law,259 and will proceed accordingly depending on whether the
denial was initially by the Borough or, after the Borough's preliminary
approval, by the Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs.
D. All requirements detailed in § 245-54 as to a development which
requires a floodplain permit shall be applicable requirements to a
development requiring a special floodplain permit; provided, however,
that the following shall be additional requirements applicable to a
proposed development requiring a special floodplain permit to the
extent that the following are more restrictive:
(1) Any structure, improvement or activity to be located within a
development site requiring a special floodplain permit shall be so
located, designed, constructed and maintained so that:
(a) The health and safety of the general public and any person
occupying any structure or improvement will be fully
protected, and any structure on such development site shall be
so located, designed and constructed so that maintenance of a
257. Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq. and § 751 et seq.
258. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
259. Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq. and § 751 et seq.
§ 245-55 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-56
237:721
§ 245-57. One-hundred-year-flood elevation.
supply of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume,
of any dangerous or hazardous materials or substances on the
premises, and/or that will involve the production, storage or
use of any amount of radioactive substances, in addition to
all other requirements of this chapter, shall be subject to the
special provisions of this section.
(b) For the purpose of this section, dangerous or hazardous
materials or substances include but are not necessarily limited
to the following list:
[1] Acetone.
[2] Ammonia.
[3] Benzene.
[4] Calcium carbide.
[5] Carbon disulfate.
[6] Celluloid.
[7] Chlorine.
[8] Hydrochloric acid.
[9] Hydrocyanic acid.
[10] Magnesium.
[11] Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
[12] Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
[13] Phosphorus.
[14] Potassium.
[15] Sodium.
[16] Sulphur and sulphur products.
[17] Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and
rodenticides).
[18]Radioactive substances or materials, insofar as such
substances are not otherwise regulated.
A. The one-hundred-year-flood elevation, which is the basis for regulations
and requirements under this section of this chapter, is and shall be
determined from the elevation at a given point on the boundary or edge
of an identified floodplain or flood-prone area which is nearest the site
§ 245-56 MONACA CODE § 245-57
237:722
§ 245-58. Request for variance.
If compliance with any requirements of this section of this chapter would
result in an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or
landowner, the Borough of Monaca, upon request by the applicant for a
floodplain permit or special floodplain permit, may grant relief from the
strict application of said requirements in the form of a variance. In the event
that an applicant desires to seek a variance, such request for a variance
shall be included with the required application for such floodplain permit
or special floodplain permit with specific data and information of the exact
nature of the variance or variances from such requirements and the reasons
therefor.
for which a landowner or developer desires to place or cause
development or substantial improvement, construction, use or activity.
As an aid in making this necessary elevation determination, other
sources of data, where available, shall be used, such as:
(1) United States Army Corps of Engineers Floodplain Information
Reports;
(2) United States Geological Survey, Flood-Prone Quadrangles;
(3) United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation
Service, County Soil Surveys (alluvial soils) or P.L. 566, Floodplain
Information;
(4) Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Flood
Control Investigations;
(5) Known high-water marks from past floods; and/or
(6) Other sources, including but not limited to hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses relative to the proposed site.
B. In the submission of an application for a floodplain permit or an
application for a special floodplain permit as required by this section of
this chapter, the data included therewith shall be of sufficient detail and
with sufficient explanation of the method of determination of the onehundred-
year-flood elevation as to the proposed site where the
development, substantial improvement, construction, use or activity for
which the floodplain permit or special floodplain permit is sought
pursuant hereto.
C. Any and all hydrologic and hydraulic analyses relative to an activity or
development regulated by this chapter shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect the
current accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations,
etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Borough Council and any person or entity to which the
same are referred for review.
§ 245-57 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-58
237:723
A. Such request for a variance shall be accompanied by a certification of a
registered professional engineer or architect that, if such variance or
variances from the requirements of this section of this chapter would be
granted, any development, activity or use conducted thereby would not
be contrary or adverse to Subsection B of this section.
B. No variance will be granted that shall:
(1) Cause an increase in the one-hundred-year-flood elevation or other
flood heights.
(2) Reduce the ability of any building or structure to resist the effects
of an occurrence of a one-hundred-year flood.
(3) Increase risks to or create a potentially harmful or hazardous
situation for the safety of life or property.
(4) Cause or result in the possibility of an increase in premium rates
for flood insurance as to any other person's or entity's lands,
buildings, structures or other improvements.
(5) Create a nuisance, cause fraud or victimize the public.
(6) No variance shall be granted for any use or activity prohibited by
§ 245-56 of this chapter or, except for a modification of the one-andone-
half-foot freeboard requirement specified in § 245-55 of this
chapter, for any of the other requirements of § 245-55.
(7) Cause a conflict with or create a violation of any other applicable
law or regulation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the United
States of America or any ordinance or regulation of the Borough of
Monaca.
C. A variance will only be granted if there is good and sufficient cause and
the failure to do so would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant
and, if granted, shall involve only the least modification necessary to
provide relief. If a variance is granted, the Borough may attach any
conditions that it deems reasonable to provide safeguards necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare of life and property and to
achieve the objectives of this chapter.
D. If a variance is granted:
(1) The applicant shall be notified by the Borough, in writing, that such
variance may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance
as to the applicants subject site as to which the variance was
granted.
(2) The Borough shall keep and maintain complete records of any
variance granted and shall report same to the Federal Insurance
Administration or such other agency or bureau of the United States
of America or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as may be
§ 245-58 MONACA CODE § 245-58
237:724
§ 245-59. Administration.
necessary, annually or in such other time frame as such reports
may be required or necessary.
A. In the performance of administrative duties thereunder, the Zoning
Officer is hereby authorized to consult with and rely upon advice and
recommendation of the Borough Engineer.
B. The administration and enforcement of this Article VI shall be done so
as to require any development, substantial improvement, construction,
uses or activities to be in compliance with any and all Federal
Emergency Management Agency regulations or requirements currently
in effect during the event of administration and enforcement. Any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or other source shall be obtained,
reviewed and reasonably utilized as criteria requiring any development,
substantial improvement, construction, uses or activities in any
floodplain or flood-prone area, including but not limited to areas
classified as Zone A, shall be accomplished in accordance to this Article
VI and the criteria of the applicable federal regulations, including but
not limited to 44 CFR SS60.3(c)(2), (3), (5) and (6) and (d)(3).
C. The Borough of Monaca shall maintain a file and records of the lowest
floor level (including basement) of any new or substantially improved
structure for which a floodplain permit or special floodplain permit is
issued thereunder.
§ 245-58 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-59
237:725

ARTICLE IX
Criteria for Conditional Uses, and Uses by Special Exception
[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
§ 245-60. General standards and criteria.
The following are hereby established as the standards and criteria
governing the allowance of conditional uses and special exceptions
hereinbefore authorized and such variances as the Zoning Hearing Board
may permit from the literal enforcement of this chapter.
A. No use or structure shall be allowed which shall violate the spirit and
intent of the community development goals and objectives of this
chapter.
B. The use or structure shall not involve any element or cause any
conditions that may be dangerous, injurious or noxious to any other
property or persons and shall comply with the performance standards
hereinafter set forth.
C. The use or structure shall be sited, oriented and landscaped to produce
an aesthetically compatible or architecturally harmonious relationship
of buildings or grounds to adjacent buildings and properties.
D. The use or structure shall produce a total visual impression and
environment which is consistent with the environment of the
neighborhood.
E. The use or structure shall have no adverse substantial impact on
neighboring uses nor cause a reduction of the property values thereof.
F. The use or structure shall be substantially conforming to the
surrounding uses of property.
G. The use or structure shall avoid and/or satisfy every reasonable
consideration made for the safety and convenience of the traveling
public, including without limitation safe ingress and egress and the
avoidance of hazard and congestion to travel and transportation. To
effectuate this standard, the Borough Council, in granting allowance of
any use or structure thereunder, may impose upon the applicant and/or
developer the cost and expense of off-site improvements, including
without limitation traffic signals, streetlighting, road widening, other
street and highway improvements and stormwater drainage.
H. The use or structure shall avoid and/or satisfy every reasonable
consideration made for the health and safety of the general public,
including without limitation safe water supply, sanitary sewage
collection and treatment facilities and storm drainage facilities.
§ 245-60 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:727
§ 245-61. Standards for specific uses.
In addition to the general standards and criteria for all uses by special
exception and conditional uses listed in § 245-60 above, an application for
any of the following uses that are listed in any zoning district as a use
by special exception or conditional use shall comply with the applicable
standards and criteria specified below for that use.
A. Adult business, subject to:
(1) Adult businesses may be established only in the G-I General
Industrial District.
(2) Persons or owners who intend to open an adult business must
obtain from Monaca Borough a license to operate such an
enterprise and must pay an investigation fee of $500 to Monaca
Borough. In addition, such persons or owners must supply to the
Borough detailed information as to the ownership and financing as
required on the licensing application form. This form may be
obtained at the office of the Borough Manager.
(3) No adult business shall be located within 500 feet of a property
boundary line of an existing school, hospital, day-care center,
nursing home, group care facility, personal care boarding home,
public park, church, an establishment which is licensed to and does
sell alcoholic beverages or another adult business.
(4) No adult business shall be located within 500 feet of a property
boundary line of a preexisting residence.
(5) An adult business shall be initially licensed, where it has met all
chapter requirements, through December 31 of the year in which
the license is issued. For each year thereafter that the adult
business intends to continue as an adult business, it shall seek
renewal of this license from the office of the Manager of Monaca
Borough. The application for renewal is due in the Manager's office
no later than November 1 of the year preceding the year for which
the license renewal is sought. The lack of a license or the failure to
seek license renewal on a timely basis shall be a proper basis for
the Borough to deny or revoke an occupancy permit to an adult
business.
(6) Any adult business found to be in violation of the Monaca Borough
Zoning Chapter, as amended, shall be subject to the enforcement
penalties provided for in the Monaca Borough Zoning Chapter and/
or the Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as amended).260
(7) Any adult business which exhibits on the premises film,
videocassette or other method of image production which depicts
260. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:728
nudity or sexual conduct, as defined herein, shall comply with the
following:
(a) At least one employee shall be on duty at all times that any
patron is on the premises.
(b) Where viewing rooms are located on the premises, an
unobstructed view of access to all such rooms shall be
available to the employee on duty.
(c) No viewing room shall be occupied by more than one person at
any time.
(d) No connections or openings to adjoining viewing rooms shall
be permitted.
(8) A minimum of one footcandle of illumination measured at floor level
shall be provided in every area where patrons are permitted
access.
(9) Where live performances are given, separate stage and viewing
areas shall be provided with separate access to each and no
connecting access between the areas.
(10) Alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted on the premises of an
adult business.
(11)Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article V.
(12) An annual occupancy permit issued by the Zoning Officer shall be
secured prior to the operation of any adult business.
B. Apartment in combination with business, subject to:
(1) Dwelling units shall be located on the second floor or, if located on
the first floor, shall be in a separate unit from the business or
professional office or retail store.
(2) Dwelling units shall have a minimum habitable floor area of 500
square feet.
(3) Dwelling units in basements or accessory garages shall not be
permitted.
(4) Each dwelling unit shall have a separate entrance that does not
require passing through any area devoted to office or retail use.
(5) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article V.
C. Bed-and-breakfast, subject to:
(1) The operator of the bed-and-breakfast shall be a full-time resident
of the dwelling in which the bed-and-breakfast is located.
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:729
(2) No meals, other than breakfast, shall be served on the premises.
Food may be prepared on the premises for consumption off the
premises by overnight guests. Food shall not be served to any
customers who are not overnight guests.
(3) The maximum length of stay for any guest shall be 14 days in any
calendar year.
(4) One identification sign shall be permitted. Such sign may either be
attached to the wall of the building or may be freestanding in the
front yard, provided the surface area of the sign shall not exceed
six square feet. The height of the freestanding sign shall not exceed
four feet and the freestanding sign shall be located at least five feet
from any property line.
(5) The identification sign shall contain no information other than one
or more of the following items:
(a) The street address.
(b) The name of the establishment.
(c) The name of the proprietor.
(d) A small logo or other decorative symbol.
(6) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article V.
(7) Off-street parking shall be screened from any adjacent lot that
contains a single-family dwelling by a six-foot-high compact
evergreen hedge.
D. Boat launch ramps, subject to:
(1) Safe access shall be provided from a public street.
(2) Adequate area shall be provided for vehicles and trailers to turn
around to back onto the ramp.
(3) The ramp shall be improved for safe all-weather use.
(4) No parking of boats, trailers or vehicles shall be permitted within a
radius of 100 feet of the boat ramp.
(5) Safety regulations governing the use of the boat ramp shall be
posted at the entrance to the boat ramp.
(6) The ramp and its immediate area shall be illuminated after dusk.
E. Communications tower, subject to:
(1) The applicant shall demonstrate that it is licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) to operate a communications
tower.
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:730
(2) Any applicant proposing a new freestanding communications tower
shall demonstrate that a good faith effort has been made to obtain
permission to mount the antenna on an existing building or other
structure or an existing communications tower. A good faith effort
shall require that all owners within a one-quarter-mile radius of the
proposed site be contacted and that one or more of the following
reasons for not selecting an alternative existing building or
communications tower or other structure apply:
(a) The proposed equipment would exceed the structural capacity
of the existing building, communications tower or other
structure and reinforcement of the existing building, tower or
other structure cannot be accomplished at a reasonable cost.
(b) The proposed equipment would cause RF (radio frequency)
interference with other existing or proposed equipment for
that building, tower or other structure and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
(c) Existing buildings, communications towers or other structures
do not have adequate space to accommodate the proposed
equipment.
(d) Addition of the proposed equipment would result in NIER (nonionizing
electromagnetic radiation) levels that exceed any
adopted local, state or federal emission standards.
(3) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed communications
tower and the electromagnetic fields associated with the antennas
proposed to be mounted thereon comply with safety standards now
or hereafter established by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC).
(4) The applicant for the communications tower shall demonstrate
compliance with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) and any applicable airport zoning regulations.
(5) In the PAW and S-C Districts, the maximum height of a
communications tower shall be 100 feet. In the RBP and G-I
Districts, the maximum height of a communications tower shall be
250 feet.
(6) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed height of the
communications tower is the minimum height necessary to function
effectively.
(7) Tower height shall be measured from the ground level to the top
point of the tower or top point of the highest communications
antenna, whichever is higher.
(8) Any freestanding tower that is higher than 50 feet and is within 100
feet of a public street or a dwelling unit shall be surrounded by
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:731
evergreen screening or preserved woods meeting the requirements
of the landscaping requirements of the Borough's Subdivision
Ordinance.261
(9) The setback from all property lines (excluding lease lines) required
for the communications tower shall be 100% of the height of the
tower.
(10) Communications towers shall be set back from all overhead
electrical transmission or other aboveground lines a distance equal
to the height of the tower.
(11) The communications tower shall be designed and constructed to all
applicable standards of the American National Standards Institute,
ANSI/EIA-222-Manual, as amended.
(12) A soils report complying with the standards of Appendix I,
Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222-E-Manual, as amended,
shall be submitted to the Borough to document and verify design
specifications of the foundation of the communications tower and
anchors for the guy wires, if used. The soils report shall be signed
and sealed by an engineer registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(13) The communications tower and all appurtenances, including guy
wires, if any, and the equipment cabinet or equipment building
shall be enclosed by a minimum eight-foot-high chain link security
fence with locking gate.
(14) The applicant shall submit evidence that the communications tower
and its method of installation has been designed by a registered
engineer and is certified by that registered engineer to be
structurally sound and able to withstand wind and other loads in
accordance with the Uniform Construction Code (UCC)262 and
accepted engineering practices.
(15) Equipment cabinets and equipment buildings shall comply with the
height and yard requirements of the zoning district for accessory
structures. Setbacks for these structures shall be measured from
the lease lines.
(16) Access shall be provided to the communications tower and
equipment cabinet or equipment building by means of a public
street or right-of-way to a public street. The right-of-way shall be a
minimum of 20 feet in width and shall be improved with a dust-free,
all-weather surface for its entire length.
(17) Adequate area shall be provided on the site to accommodate a
vehicle used for periodic visits by maintenance workers.
261. Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
262. Editor's Note: See Ch. 107, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:732
(18) The owner of the communications tower shall be responsible for
maintaining the parcel on which the tower is located, as well as the
means of access to the tower, including clearing and cutting of
vegetation, snow removal and maintenance of the access driveway
surface.
(19) The owner of any communications tower that exceeds 50 feet in
height shall submit to the Borough proof of an annual inspection
conducted by a structural engineer at the owner's expense and an
updated tower maintenance program based on the results of the
inspection. Any structural faults shall be corrected immediately
and reinspected and certified to the Borough by a structural
engineer at the owner's expense.
(20) The owner of the communications tower shall notify the Borough
immediately upon cessation or abandonment of the operation. The
owner of the communications tower shall enter into an agreement
with the Borough guaranteeing that the tower shall be dismantled
and removed within six months of the cessation of operations, if
there is no intention to continue operations evidenced by the lack
of an application to the Borough to install antennas on the existing
tower. If the owner of the communications tower fails to remove the
tower, then the landowner shall be responsible for its immediate
removal. Failure to remove an abandoned communications tower
shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of § 245-84 of this
chapter.
(21) All tower structures shall be fitted with anticlimbing devices as
approved by the manufacturer for the type of installation proposed.
(22) All antennas and tower structures shall be subject to all applicable
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and airport zoning
regulations.
(23)No antenna or tower structure shall be illuminated, except as may
be required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
(24)No sign or other structure shall be mounted on the tower structure,
except as may be required or approved by the FCC, FAA or other
governmental agency.
(25) The exterior finish of the tower shall be compatible with the
immediate surroundings. The tower, the equipment cabinet or
equipment building and the immediate surroundings shall be
properly maintained.
F. Comparable uses not specifically listed, subject to:
(1) Uses of the same general character as any of the uses authorized as
permitted uses by right, uses by special exception or conditional
uses in the zoning district in which the property is located shall be
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:733
allowed, if the Zoning Hearing Board determines that the impact
of the proposed use on the environment and adjacent streets and
properties is equal to or less than any comparable use specifically
listed in the zoning district. In making such determination, the
Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the following characteristics
of the proposed use:
(a) The number of employees;
(b) The floor area of the building or gross area of the lot devoted to
the proposed use;
(c) The type of products, materials and equipment and/or
processes involved in the proposed use;
(d) The magnitude of walk-in trade;
(e) Hours of operation;
(f) The traffic and environmental impacts and the ability of the
proposed use to comply with the performance standards of
§ 245-62 of this chapter; and
(g) For those uses included in the most recent edition of the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual published by the
Office of Management and Budget, whether the proposed use
shares the same SIC Code or Major Group number as one or
more uses that are specifically listed in the zoning district.
(2) The proposed use shall comply with all applicable area and bulk
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
(3) The proposed use shall comply with any applicable express
standards and criteria specified in this article for the most nearly
comparable use by special exception or conditional use listed in the
zoning district in which the comparable use is proposed.
(4) The proposed use shall comply with the off-street parking
requirements of Article V for the most nearly comparable use by
special exception or conditional use listed in the zoning district in
which the comparable use is proposed.
(5) The proposed use shall be consistent with the purpose statement
for the zoning district in which it is proposed and shall be
consistent with the community development objectives of this
chapter.
G. Conditional uses in the RBP District. All conditional uses authorized in
the RBP District shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Uses shall take advantage of the waterfront setting by relating the
development to the waterfront. Any structure in excess of 40 feet in
height or any use that does not relate to the waterfront shall be
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:734
located well back from the shoreline to minimize adverse visual
impacts.
(2) Building sites that abut the riverfront shall be preserved for either
residential structures that are more than 40 feet in height or waterdependent
uses (i.e., those that rely on direct access to the water in
order to function). Typical water-dependent uses include boat
launch ramps, marinas, barge transfer operations and ship or
barge repair.
(3) Non-water-dependent uses (i.e., warehouse, distribution, office,
commercial, etc.) shall be at inland building sites. Commercial uses
shall remain incidental to other uses within the district.
(4) One building may contain more than one use, provided that the
total building coverage of the combined use does not exceed the
maximum building coverage specified for the district.
(5) Material or equipment stored outside shall be screened from view
in accordance with the requirements of § 245-39.
(6) All portions of the property not utilized by buildings or paved
surfaces shall be landscaped utilizing combinations such as
landscaped fencing, shrubbery, lawn area, ground cover, rock
formations, contours, existing foliage and the planting of conifers
and/or deciduous trees native to the area in order to either
maintain or reestablish the tone of the vegetation in the area and
lessen the visual impact of the structures and paved areas.
(7) All side and rear property lines that separate residential uses from
nonresidential uses within the RBP District shall be screened by a
landscaped area that is at least 15 feet in depth as measured from
the property line comprised of the following plant materials for
every 100 lineal feet of property line: two evergreen trees, two
ornamental trees, two canopy trees and 12 shrubs.
(8) Exterior appearance. All buildings shall be compatibly designed,
whether constructed all at one time or in stages over a period of
time. All building walls facing any street, the Ohio River or an "R"
Residential District boundary shall be suitably finished for
aesthetic purposes which shall not include unpainted or painted
cinder block or concrete block walls.
(9) Finished grades of parking areas should be not less than 1% nor
more than 5%. Landscaping shall be introduced to parking areas to
eliminate unbroken expanses of hard surfaces.
H. Conversion apartments.
(1) The maximum number of dwelling units permitted in any singlefamily
dwelling after conversion shall be limited to two dwelling
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:735
units in the R-2 District and shall be limited to four dwelling units
in the R-3 District.
(2) Each dwelling unit, after conversion, shall contain within the unit a
complete kitchen, toilet and bathing facility. Shared facilities shall
not be permitted.
(3) The area of the lot upon which the conversion is located shall
contain at least 3,500 square feet for each dwelling unit after
conversion.
(4) Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum habitable floor area
according to the following table:
(a) One bedroom: 500 square feet.
(b) Two bedrooms: 650 square feet.
(c) Three bedrooms: 800 square feet.
(d) Each additional bedroom, den or recreation room: 150
additional square feet.
(5) No efficiency dwelling units shall be permitted.
(6) All units shall comply with all applicable requirements of the
Uniform Construction Code (UCC)263 for the proposed occupancy.
(7) The appearance of a single-family dwelling unit shall be maintained
for the converted structure.
(8) Conversion of detached garages or other accessory structures to
dwelling units shall not be permitted.
(9) Necessary changes in the number or placement of windows to
provide adequate light and air may be allowed, but shall be
minimized; any changes proposed shall be of a manner consistent
with the architectural character of the dwelling.
(10)Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article V.
(11) Except for parking in driveways, no parking spaces shall be located
in the front yard. Parking areas shall be designed so that each
vehicle has access to the street without the necessity of moving
another vehicle.
(12) All newly constructed parking spaces shall be set back a minimum
of five feet from all property lines.
(13) Except for driveway and walkway accesses, buffering shall be
placed around off-street parking areas which contain three or more
263. Editor's Note: See Ch. 107, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:736
spaces. Plant material or fences shall be used. Material used in
screen plantings shall be multistemmed evergreen species and
shall be at least three feet in height when planted. The plant
material shall produce a visual screen of at least four feet in height
within two years. Fences shall be four feet to five feet in height and
shall provide a visual screen.
(14) Garage and refuse pickup and other utility areas shall be provided
and shall be located so as not to detract from the aesthetic
character of the neighborhood and shall be enclosed and shielded
from view by fencing, walls or shrubbery. Planted material or
fences shall meet the standards for buffering of parking areas
specified above.
(15) Certification of adequate sewer and water services shall be
provided by the applicant.
(16) Basement or cellar dwelling units shall be permitted only if all
exterior walls of the dwelling unit are at least four feet above the
average finished grade level of the adjoining ground.
(17) The requirements for building coverage and the minimum front,
side and rear yards for the dwelling shall be met.
(18) Fire and safety provisions shall be certified to be adequate with
respect to the Borough Fire Code (see Chapter 127) and Housing
Code (see Chapter 92).
I. Conversion of surplus school space, subject to:
(1) In addition to the authorized uses in the zoning district in which the
property is located, any surplus school space located in an R-1, R-2
or R-3 Zoning District may be converted to one or more of the
following uses:
(a) Day-care center.
(b) Personal care boarding home, subject to § 245-61N.
(c) Nursing home, subject to § 245-61S.
(d) Garden apartments, subject to § 245-61M.
(e) Business or professional offices.
(2) No existing school building shall be enlarged or expanded;
however, alterations or improvements to the existing building to
enclose stairwells or otherwise comply with the requirements of
the Uniform Construction Code (UCC)264 shall be permitted.
(3) No significant external structural changes shall be permitted, other
than replacement of windows, doors and roofs to make the
264. Editor's Note: See Ch. 107, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:737
structure more energy efficient or to modify the architectural style
to increase the residential appearance of the building.
(4) All alterations or improvements to the existing building shall
comply with the yard and other applicable area and bulk
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
(5) Maximum dwelling unit density for garden apartments shall be 12
units per acre.
(6) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article V. Parking areas located along any property
line that adjoins a lot containing a single-family dwelling shall be
screened by a minimum six-foot-high compact evergreen hedge or
fence.
(7) The Borough may require a traffic study be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer with experience in traffic engineering. The
traffic study shall be submitted with the application for approval of
the use by special exception, if the proposed use generates more
than 300 average vehicle trips on a weekday according to the latest
edition of the Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE). The traffic study shall address the
following:
(a) Proposed changes in parking and traffic circulation on the site
and into and out of the site;
(b) Proposed trip generation, parking and traffic circulation
compared with those features of the school when it was
operational;
(c) Comparative impact on the adjacent streets and surrounding
neighborhood of the proposed use and the former school use;
and
(d) Proposals to mitigate any negative impacts on adjacent streets
and the surrounding neighborhood.
(8) Any exterior lighting proposed for the building or parking area
shall be of low intensity and shall be shielded so that the source of
the lighting is not visible from the street or adjoining properties.
The maximum intensity measured on the ground or surface of the
parking area shall be two footcandles. Flood lighting or similar
lighting shall not be permitted. Spillover lighting shall not exceed
0.5 footcandle at the property line.
(9) One nonilluminated ground sign shall be permitted at the entrance
to the site. The maximum surface area of the sign shall be 24
square feet. The maximum height of the top of the sign shall be six
feet. The sign shall not obstruct visibility for traffic entering or
leaving the site or any adjacent property. No portion of the sign
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:738
shall be closer than 10 feet to any property line or public street
right-of-way.
J. Duplexes in the R-2 District, subject to:
(1) The minimum lot area required to construct a duplex shall be 3,500
square feet per dwelling unit. Duplexes created by conversion of an
existing single-family dwelling shall be subject to § 245-61H.
(2) All other area and bulk regulations of the R-2 District shall apply.
(3) Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum habitable floor area
according to the following table:
(a) One bedroom: 500 square feet.
(b) Two bedroom: 650 square feet.
(c) Three bedrooms: 800 square feet.
(d) Each additional bedroom, den or recreation room: 150
additional square feet.
(4) Efficiency dwelling units shall not be permitted.
(5) Certification of adequate water and sewer services shall be
provided by the applicant.
(6) Each dwelling unit shall contain within the unit a complete kitchen
and toilet and bathing facility. Shared facilities shall not be
permitted.
(7) All units shall comply with all applicable requirements of the
Uniform Construction Code (UCC)265 for the proposed occupancy.
(8) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article V.
K. Family day care home, subject to:
(1) All of the applicable criteria for a home occupation specified in
§ 245-61O shall be met.
(2) Evidence shall be submitted that all applicable requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare have been met and
continuing compliance shall be maintained.
(3) An adequate and safe off-street area shall be provided for dropping
off and picking up children which is large enough to accommodate
three cars at one time.
(4) An outdoor play area shall be provided and shall be secured by a
fence with self-latching gate. The outdoor play area shall have a
265. Editor's Note: See Ch. 107, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:739
minimum area of 100 square feet per child and shall be located to
the rear or side of the dwelling.
(5) The outdoor play area shall be screened from adjoining residential
properties by a minimum four-foot-high compact, dense evergreen
hedge or opaque fence.
(6) A maximum of two nonresident employees shall be permitted.
(7) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article V.
L. Funeral home, subject to:
(1) The minimum lot area shall be 7,500 square feet.
(2) All off-street parking areas that adjoin property in an R-1, R-2 or
R-3 Zoning District shall be screened by a six-foot-high dense,
compact evergreen hedge.
(3) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article V.
(4) Traffic circulation on the lot shall be designed to minimize
congestion and provide for the lining up of vehicles on the property
without obstructing the free flow of traffic on adjoining streets.
(5) The funeral home shall be operated by a funeral director licensed
by the State Board of Funeral Directors signed by the
Commissioner of Professional and Occupational Affairs and
registered with the Bureau of Vital Statistics.
(6) The funeral home may include a crematorium as an accessory use,
provided the applicable regulations of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and Federal Air Quality Standards are met.
M. Garden apartments, mid-rise apartments and townhouses in the R-3
District, subject to:
(1) The minimum lot area required for townhouses shall be 3,000
square feet per dwelling unit.
(2) The minimum lot required for garden apartments and mid-rise
apartments shall be 2,500 square feet per dwelling unit.
(3) All other area and bulk regulations of the R-3 District shall be met.
(4) Where two or more buildings are proposed on one lot, the minimum
distance between buildings shall be 20 feet.
(5) All parking areas adjacent to a lot containing a single-family
dwelling shall be screened by a minimum six-foot-high compact,
evergreen hedge, solid masonry wall or solid fence.
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:740
(6) All portions of the property not covered by buildings, driveways,
parking, swimming pools, shelters, gazebos or other paved areas
shall be suitably landscaped with grass, ground cover and
decorative shrubs or trees.
(7) The design and orientation of the buildings on the property shall
take into account compatibility with and the visual impact on
adjacent single-family dwellings.
(8) On lots containing more than 50 dwelling units, indoor or outdoor
recreational facilities appropriate to the needs of the prospective
residents shall be provided subject to approval by Borough Council.
(9) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article V.
N. Group care facility, personal care boarding home or transitional
dwelling, subject to:
(1) In the R-2 and R-3 Districts, the minimum area and bulk regulations
for a personal care boarding home shall be the same as those
required for single-family dwellings in each district. In the C-C
Core Commercial District, the area and bulk regulations applicable
to all uses in the C-C District shall apply to a personal care
boarding home.
(2) In the R-2 and R-3 Districts, the maximum number of residents
housed in a personal care boarding home shall be 10.
(3) In the MUT Mixed Use Transitional District, the minimum area and
bulk regulations for a group care facility or transitional dwelling
shall be the same as those required for a single-family dwelling in
the MUT District.
(4) In the R-2 and R-3 Districts, no personal care boarding home shall
be located within 500 feet of another existing or proposed personal
care boarding home.
(5) Adequate provisions shall be made for access by emergency
medical and fire-fighting vehicles.
(6) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article V.
(7) Twenty-four-hour supervision shall be provided by staff qualified by
the sponsoring agency.
(8) Adequate open space opportunities for recreation shall be provided
on the lot for the residents consistent with their needs and the area
shall be secured by a fence with self-latching gate.
(9) If occupants are under supervision by a Court of Law, the
supervisory staff shall provide notice to the Borough Police
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:741
Department in the event that any occupant is absent from the
premises without permission for a period longer than one hour.
(10) The administrator of the facility shall file an emergency
management plan, including planned response to fire, security and
medical emergencies with the Police Department, the Emergency
Medical Service and the responding fire companies.
(11) Where applicable, licensing or certification by the sponsoring
agency shall be prerequisite to obtaining a certificate of occupancy
and a copy of the annual report with evidence of continuing
certification shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer in January of
each year.
O. Home occupation, subject to:
(1) A home occupation shall be conducted completely indoors and may
be within a principal or accessory building.
(2) The total amount of floor area of all buildings used for a home
occupation shall not be greater than 25% of the total floor area of
the principal dwelling unit.
(3) No changes shall be made to alter the residential character of the
exterior of the building.
(4) No signs, other than those authorized by § 245-23, shall be
permitted on the lot.
(5) When kept on site, all commercial vehicles used in the conduct of
the home occupation shall be kept within a completely enclosed
building, as defined herein.
(6) No off-street parking provided for a home occupation shall be
located within the front yard setback. All parking shall be a
minimum of 10 feet from all property lines. Parking areas with
three or more spaces shall be screened by a compact evergreen
hedge or solid fence at least four feet in height.
(7) Exterior storage of equipment, materials, products or waste is
prohibited.
(8) Home occupations shall not produce noise, vibration, glare, fumes,
odors, dust or electrical interference with neighbors' radio and
television receivers.
(9) The use shall not significantly intensify vehicular or pedestrian
traffic beyond that which is normal for the residences in the
neighborhood.
(10) There shall be no use of materials or equipment except that of
similar power and type normally used in a residential dwelling for
domestic or household purposes.
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:742
(11) The use shall not cause an increase in the use of water, sewage,
electricity, garbage, public safety or any other municipal service
beyond that which is normal for the residences in the
neighborhood.
(12) There shall be no mass production of products that involves
processing of raw materials on the premises of the home
occupation. Assembly of products from finished materials may be
accomplished on the premises.
(13) A limited number of samples of articles produced on the premises
may be displayed for the purposes of accepting orders. Articles
produced on the premises shall be displayed in quantity only off the
premises at a retail outlet, consignment shop or product or craft
show.
(14) There shall be no display on the premises of merchandise available
for sale that has been produced off the premises; however,
merchandise may be stored on the premises for delivery off the
premises, such as Amway, Tupperware or similar products stored
for distribution to customers or salespersons at their residence or
place of business. In addition, small amounts of products may be
sold as an accessory use to the principal use, such as the sale of
beauty products accessory to a beauty shop and similar situations.
(15) A zoning permit issued by the Zoning Officer of Monaca Borough
shall be required for all new accessory home occupations and for
changes and expansions of accessory home occupations.
(16) Business or professional offices, when conducted as a home
occupation, shall have no more than two nonresident employees.
Business and professional office home occupations shall provide
one off-street parking space for each nonresident employee, plus
one additional space for each 200 square feet of office space, up to
a maximum of six spaces.
(17) Personal services, when conducted as a home occupation, shall
only be permitted in a single-family dwelling. Barbers and
beauticians shall be limited to two customer chairs. Personal
service home occupations shall provide one off-street parking
space for each nonresident employee, plus one space for each 200
square feet of floor space, up to a maximum of four spaces.
(18) Instructional services include, but are not limited to, musical
instruction and the tutoring of students. General instructional
services may take place in any dwelling unit while musical
instruction shall be limited to single-family dwellings. Instructional
services are limited to four students at a time, and no nonresident
employees shall be permitted. Instructional services shall provide
one off-street parking space for each two students being instructed
at any one time, up to a maximum of four spaces.
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:743
(19)Home craft businesses include, but are not limited to, artists,
sculptors, dressmakers and furniture makers. Home craft
businesses are only permitted in single-family dwellings and may
employ one nonresident. All items sold from a home craft business
shall be completely manufactured on site. Home craft businesses
shall provide one off-street parking space for each 300 square feet
of floor area, up to a maximum of four spaces.
(20) Contracting businesses, when conducted as a home occupation,
shall not involve on-site assembling, manufacturing, processing or
retail sales. Contracting businesses shall be permitted to park on
site one truck or van (under 3/4 of a ton), provided it is kept within
a completely enclosed building, as defined herein.
(21) Repair shops include, but are not limited to, the repair of small
appliances, computers and electronic equipment. Repair shops
shall not include the repair of automobiles, trucks and motorcycles.
No nonresident employees shall be permitted at a repair service
home occupation. Repair shops shall provide one off-street parking
space for each 300 square feet of floor area used for the repair shop
home occupation up to a maximum of four spaces.
(22) The following are examples of permitted home occupations,
provided all of the foregoing criteria are met:
(a) Artist, photographer or handicrafts studio;
(b) Beauty or barber shop containing no more than two chairs;
(c) Catering off the premises;
(d) Computer programmer, data processor, writer;
(e) Consultant, clergy, counselor, bookkeeping, graphics or
drafting services;
(f) Dressmaker, tailor;
(g) Business or professional offices that involve routine visitation
by customers or clients;
(h) Housekeeping or custodial services;
(i) Interior designer;
(j) Jewelry and/or watch repair, not including wholesale or retail
sales;
(k) Locksmith;
(l) Mail order business;
(m) Manufacturer's representative;
(n) Repair shop, as defined herein;
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:744
(o) Telemarketing;
(p) Travel agent;
(q) Tutoring or any other instruction to no more than four students
at any one time;
(r) Word processing, typing, secretarial services.
(23) The following uses shall not be considered home occupations and
shall be restricted to the zoning districts in which they are
specifically authorized as permitted uses, uses by special exception
or conditional uses, including, but not limited to:
(a) Beauty shops or barber shops containing more than two chairs;
(b) Contracting business;
(c) Contractor's yard;
(d) Funeral homes;
(e) Group care facility, personal care boarding home or
transitional dwelling;
(f) Kennels;
(g) Landscaping contractor;
(h) Medical clinics, hospitals or nursing homes;
(i) Private clubs;
(j) Tutoring or any other instruction to more than four students at
a time;
(k) Restaurants or tea rooms;
(l) Retail or wholesale sales, flea markets;
(m) Sale of guns, firearms and ammunition;
(n) Tanning or massage salon;
(o) Tourist or boarding home;
(p) Vehicle or equipment rental, repair or sales;
(q) Vehicle repair shops;
(r) Veterinary clinics.
(24) The acceptability of any proposed home occupation not specifically
listed above shall be determined by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the standards of this § 245-61O and the applicable
criteria for comparable uses not specifically listed in § 245-61F.
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:745
P. Infill housing, subject to:
(1) Dwelling units authorized on lots proposed for infill housing may
include any of the following dwelling types in any zoning district
where infill housing is authorized: single-family dwelling, duplex or
townhouse building containing no more than four dwelling units.
(2) In the R-2 District, the minimum lot area required for a singlefamily
dwelling shall be 5,000 square feet. The minimum lot area
required for a duplex shall be 3,500 square feet for each dwelling
unit (that is 7,000 square feet for the duplex building). The
minimum lot area required for townhouses shall be 3,000 square
feet per dwelling unit (that is 9,000 square feet for a three-unit
building or 12,000 square feet for a four-unit building).
(3) In the R-3 District, the minimum lot area required for a singlefamily
dwelling shall be 4,000 square feet. The minimum lot area
required for a duplex shall be 3,500 square feet for each dwelling
unit (that is 7,000 square feet for the duplex building). The
minimum lot area required for townhouses shall be 3,000 square
feet per dwelling unit (that is 9,000 square feet for a three-unit
building or 12,000 square feet for a four-unit building).
(4) The minimum front, side and rear yard requirements of the zoning
district shall apply to dwellings constructed as infill housing.
(5) The design of the dwelling unit shall be compatible with the height,
architectural style and building materials of existing dwelling units
in the same block on the same side of the street.
(6) If possible, attached units shall be designed with varied orientation
of front entryways and garage doors.
Q. Mini-warehouse or self-storage facility, subject to:
(1) Maximum building length shall be 250 feet. Maximum building
height shall be 25 feet.
(2) The minimum distance between separate buildings shall be 20 feet.
(3) Trash, radioactive or highly toxic substances, garbage, refuse,
explosives or flammable materials, hazardous substances, animal
carcasses or skins or similar items shall not be stored.
(4) The interior traffic aisles, required off-street parking areas, loading
areas and accessways shall be kept clear of stored items.
(5) Major body work on vehicles shall not be permitted. The use shall
not include a commercial vehicle repair shop unless that use is
permitted in the district and the use meets those requirements.
(6) Adequate lighting shall be provided for security, but it shall be
directed away or shielded from any adjacent residential uses.
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:746
(7) All interior driveways shall be paved with an asphalt or similar
surface sufficient for the loads the driveways are expected to bear.
(8) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article V.
(9) A minimum six-foot-high compact evergreen hedge shall be
provided along all property lines that adjoin property in an S-C,
R-1, R-2 or R-3 District.
(10) The perimeter of the site shall be fenced with a minimum eightfoot-
high fence with self-latching gate. The fence shall be
supplemented with screening material that creates a visual barrier
that is at least 80% opaque. Landscaping, if required by Subsection
Q(9), above, shall be located outside the perimeter fence.
(11) Any areas of the use that are within 200 feet of the existing right-ofway
of an expressway, arterial street or collector street shall be
separated from that street by a buffer area with the screening
required by the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of
the Borough of Monaca.266
(12)No storage shall take place outside of an enclosed building except
for recreational vehicles, as defined herein, that may be stored in
an area that is completely enclosed by an eight-foot-high fence with
self-locking gate.
(13) Storage units shall not be equipped with water or sanitary sewer
service.
(14) No business activity shall be conducted inside any storage unit.
(15) Operations shall be regulated so that nuisances such as visual
blight, glare, noise, blowing debris and dust shall not be created.
(16) Exterior finishes of the storage units shall be compatible with the
character of development on adjoining properties.
(17) The design of the storage buildings shall be sealed by a
Pennsylvania-registered architect.
(18)No sign shall be placed on the buildings or on their rooftops. The
business identification sign shall comply with the requirements of
§ 245-23 for the zoning district in which the use is located.
(19)No hazardous materials or substances shall be permitted to be
stored in the storage buildings other than those permitted by the
Borough Fire Code. Both the landlord and the tenants of the
storage buildings shall be responsible for the prevention of the
storage of hazardous materials or substances in the storage
266. Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:747
buildings that would be beyond the allowance of the Borough Fire
Code.267
(20) A minimum of one fire hydrant shall be provided on the site subject
to the approval of the number and location of hydrants by the
Borough Fire Marshal. The facility shall comply with all local fire
codes.
R. Mobile home park, subject to:
(1) The minimum site required for a mobile home park shall be three
acres.
(2) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 4,500 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width for a mobile home lot shall be 45 feet.
(4) Front, rear and side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet.
(5) All mobile home parks shall have public water and sewerage
systems.
(6) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article V.
(7) Each park shall provide 8% of its gross site area for equipped
recreational space. Streets, necessary driveways and off-street
parking, perimeter buffers and the narrow turf of landscaped buffer
areas normally surrounding each mobile home shall not be
computed as part of the required recreational space.
(8) Buffering. Mobile homes, structures and storage areas in each park
shall be located at least 25 feet from all exterior property and rightof-
way lines. All perimeter buffer areas shall be planted and
maintained with either grass or ground cover together with a
screen of live shrubs or scattered planting of live trees, shrubs or
other plants and which are of a type which may be expected to form
a year-round screen at least six-feet high in three years.
(9) Enclosures or alterations other than unenclosed porches or patios
shall not be permitted.
(10) Pavement widths shall be as follows:
(a) Streets with on-street parking, both sides: 36 feet minimum
right-of-way and pavement.
(b) Streets with on-street parking on one side: 28 feet minimum
right-of-way and pavement.
(c) One-way streets with on-street parking and serving less than
20 mobile homes: 20 feet minimum right-of-way and pavement.
267. Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Fire Prevention.
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:748
(11) Mobile homes shall be constructed in accordance with safety and
construction standards of the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development.
S. Nursing Home, subject to:
(1) The minimum lot area required shall be 10,000 square feet.
(2) Nursing homes shall have a bed capacity of at least 20 beds, but no
more than 200 beds.
(3) The property shall be served by public water and public storm and
sanitary sewers.
(4) The nursing home shall be licensed by the commonwealth.
(5) Water pressure and volume shall be adequate for fire protection.
(6) Ingress, egress and internal traffic circulation shall be designed to
ensure access by emergency vehicles.
(7) Disposal of medical waste shall be in accordance with all applicable
permits and handling requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
(8) Parking areas adjoining a lot that contains a single-family dwelling
shall be screened by a minimum six-foot-high compact evergreen
hedge, solid masonry wall or solid fence.
(9) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of Article V.
T. Off-site parking, subject to:
(1) The applicant shall demonstrate that all, or part, of the parking
required for a proposed use or the expansion of an existing use
cannot be met on the site of the use it is intended to serve because
of the size of the lot, the location of existing structures or other
physical limitations on the site.
(2) Off-site parking shall be located within 600 feet of the use it is
intended to serve.
(3) If metered on-street parking spaces are located within 600 feet of
the existing or proposed use, these on-street spaces may be used to
satisfy up to 20% of the total number of off-site parking spaces
required.
(4) Evidence shall be provided that the owner of the site where the use
is located has ownership and control of the site proposed for off-site
parking or has executed a long-term lease or other acceptable legal
agreement to guarantee the maintenance and continued use of the
off-site parking. Any covenant executed to guarantee the
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:749
maintenance of off-site parking shall be recorded in the office of the
Beaver County Recorder of Deeds.
(5) In the event that off-site parking is proposed in a public parking lot,
an agreement with the parking authority shall be presented that
indicates the number of spaces, the terms of the lease and a
guarantee of annual renewal. Failure to maintain the agreement or
provide alternate off-site spaces shall be a violation of this chapter
and shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of § 245-84 of
this chapter.
(6) If there is any on-site parking available for the use it shall be
reserved for customers and visitors. Employee parking shall be
located in the off-site parking area and shall not be permitted on
site.
(7) The applicant shall demonstrate that safe pedestrian access exists
between the off-site parking area and the use it is intended to
serve.
(8) All property lines that adjoin property in an R-1, R-2 or R-3 District
shall be screened by a minimum four-foot-high compact evergreen
hedge, masonry wall or solid fence.
(9) If the site on which the principal use is located is sold, the site
utilized for off-site parking accessory to that principal use shall be
conveyed to the new owner. If the off-site parking is not owned by
the owner of the principal use, any lease or other legal agreement
for the off-site parking shall be assigned to the new owner of the
principal use.
U. Outdoor sales in the C-C District, subject to:
(1) The outdoor sales area shall not occupy any existing parking spaces
that are needed to meet the minimum number of parking spaces
required for the principal use.
(2) The outdoor sales shall be accessory to the principal use on the
property and/or shall be limited to the sale of any product that is
authorized in the C-C District.
(3) Any products that are stored outside an enclosed building
overnight shall be adequately secured and shall be screened from
view from the public street and from any adjoining lot that contains
a single-family dwelling by a minimum six-foot-high compact
evergreen hedge, masonry wall or solid fence.
(4) The maximum height of any packaged products stored outside shall
not exceed four feet.
V. Planned river-oriented development, subject to:
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:750
(1) The minimum site required to construct a planned river-oriented
development that contains townhouses and/or garden apartments
shall be 15,000 square feet. The minimum site required to
construct a hotel or motel or mid-rise apartments and/or high-rise
apartments shall be 40,000 square feet.
(2) If properties cannot be assembled to meet the minimum site
required because of physical features or the location of existing
nonresidential uses, Borough Council may waive the minimum site
requirement, provided the reduced site is feasible for a reasonable
development that meets all of the other criteria of this § 245-61V.
(3) Construction of the following new buildings shall be authorized in a
planned river-oriented development:
(a) Garden apartments.
(b) High-rise apartments.
(c) Hotel or motel.
(d) Mid-rise apartments.
(e) Townhouses.
(4) If two or more lots are assembled to meet the minimum lot area
required, the lots shall be consolidated into a single parcel for the
purpose of the proposed development in accordance with the
requirements of the Borough Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.268
(5) The construction of a hotel or motel or a mid-rise apartment or
high-rise apartment building shall be authorized only if the location
of the proposed structure does not impede views of the river for the
majority of the properties landward from the site of the proposed
development.
(6) Construction on properties that abut the river shall be limited to
three stories in height.
(7) Borough Council may authorize an increase in dwelling unit density
in a planned river-oriented development on a site that abuts the
river, if the dwelling units are designed to incorporate boat docks
and/or all-weather boat storage.
(8) Borough Council may authorize increased height and/or increased
dwelling unit density for any garden apartment, mid-rise apartment
or high-rise apartment building that incorporates green building
design features or that provides under-building parking.
268. Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:751
(9) Borough Council may authorize increased building height and/or
increased dwelling unit density for any planned river-oriented
development that proposes common open space on the site and/or
a pedestrian connection from the development to the Public Access
Waterfront (PAW) District or directly to the river bank.
(10) Borough Council may authorize increased building height and/or
increased dwelling unit density or a reduction in required setbacks,
if off-street parking that meets or exceeds the requirements for the
proposed uses is provided on the site of the planned river-oriented
development.
(11) Hotels or motels and mid-rise apartment or high-rise apartment
buildings may be constructed to the edge of the sidewalk. Garden
apartment buildings and townhouses shall be set back from the
edge of the sidewalk at least five feet.
(12) Hotels or motels and mid-rise apartment and high-rise apartment
buildings shall be set back from any property line adjoining a lot
containing a single-family dwelling or duplex at least 25 feet. This
setback may be reduced to 10 feet if an alley or street separates the
uses.
(13) Garden apartments and townhouses shall be set back from any
property line adjoining a lot containing a single-family dwelling or
duplex at least 15 feet. This setback shall not apply if an alley or
street separates the uses.
(14) Parking spaces located along any property line that adjoins a lot
containing a single-family dwelling or duplex shall be screened by a
minimum six-foot-high compact evergreen hedge, masonry wall or
solid fence.
(15) Areas of the lot not covered by buildings or paving shall be
landscaped with grass, ground cover, perennials, shrubs and/or
trees in accordance with a landscaping plan approved by Borough
Council.
W. Reduction of off-street parking requirements, subject to:
(1) Any property that is located within 600 feet of a metered public
parking lot or metered on-street parking space is eligible for a
parking exemption for any use, other than dwelling units,
authorized in the C-C District. The 600 feet shall be measured in a
straight line along the public street right-of-way between the
nearest corner of the intersection of the lot line with the right-ofway
line and the nearest corner of the public parking lot or metered
off-street parking space. For properties located within 600 feet of a
metered public parking lot or on-street metered parking, up to
100% of the required parking may be exempted upon
recommendation by the Planning Commission and authorization by
Borough Council.
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:752
(2) In all other cases, the applicant shall prove that fewer parking
spaces are needed. The applicant shall provide existing and
projected employment, customer, resident or other relevant data.
Such data may include a study of parking at similar developments
during peak periods of use.
(3) Shared parking. Under this subsection, an applicant may seek to
prove that parking permanently shared with another use or another
lot with shared internal access will reduce the total amount of
parking needed because the uses have different peak times of
parking need or overlapping customers.
(4) Reservation of future parking areas. If a reduction is permitted
under this subsection, Borough Council may require, as a condition
of the approval, that the lot include the reservation, permanently or
for a specified number of years, of areas for use if needed in the
future for additional parking.
(a) Such reservation shall be provided in a legal form acceptable
to the Borough Solicitor.
(b) In such case, the applicant shall be required to submit site
plans to the Zoning Officer showing where and how the
additional parking could be accomplished.
(c) Within one year of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for
the use, such additional parking shall be required to be
provided by the owner of the lot after the Zoning Officer may
determine, and notify such owner, that such parking has
become needed to meet actual use. Such determination shall
be based upon the Zoning Officer's on-site review on at least
three different days.
X. Repair shop, subject to:
(1) Items brought for repair shall be of a size and weight that can be
carried in by hand.
(2) All repairs shall be performed within a completely enclosed
building, as defined herein.
(3) If any items are temporarily stored outside, they shall be limited to
those items awaiting repair or pickup.
(4) If there is any outside storage, the outdoor storage area shall be
secured to prevent public access and shall be screened from the
public street or along any property line adjoining property in an
R-1, R-2 or R-3 District by a minimum six-foot-high compact
evergreen hedge, masonry wall or solid fence.
(5) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of Article V.
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:753
Y. Riverfront sit-down restaurant, subject to:
(1) A sit-down restaurant, as defined herein, shall be located only in
the area of the Planned River-Oriented Development (PROD)
District that is bounded by the Ohio River and Atlantic Avenue
between Fifth Street and the easterly boundary of the Second
Ward.
(2) The minimum lot area required shall be 20,000 square feet.
(3) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article V of this chapter, unless off-site parking
located within 600 feet of the nearest lot line is approved pursuant
to the requirements of § 245-61T of this chapter.
(4) The use shall not be eligible to apply for a reduction of off-street
parking requirements in accordance with § 245-61W.
(5) If an outdoor cafe is proposed, the requirements of § 245-48 shall
be met.
(6) The design of the building shall be oriented so that patrons may
enjoy river views.
(7) Any property line adjoining a lot containing an existing singlefamily
dwelling or duplex shall be screened by a minimum six-foothigh
compact evergreen hedge, masonry wall or solid fence.
Z. River-oriented recreational uses in the PAW District, subject to:
(1) River-oriented recreational uses specifically authorized by § 245-16
in the Public Access Waterfront (PAW) District shall be subject to
this § 245-61Z.
(2) Boat launch ramps shall be further subject to the criteria specified
in § 245-61D.
(3) All uses shall be subject to the floodplain management regulations
contained in Article VIII of this chapter.
(4) Buildings are generally discouraged to preserve habitat and
protect the natural environment; however, buildings, if proposed,
shall be limited to public restroom facilities and service/storage
buildings in support of public parks and dockage areas.
(5) All buildings shall be unobtrusive and designed to blend
harmoniously with the natural environment of the Borough's
riverfront.
(6) Buildings located in the Public Access Waterfront (PAW) District
shall be designed to take advantage of the waterfront setting by
relating the development to the waterfront. Uses that do not relate
to the waterfront shall be located well back from the shoreline to
minimize adverse impacts.
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:754
(7) All buildings in the Public Access Waterfront (PAW) District shall be
compatibly designed, whether constructed all at one time or in
stages over a period of time. All building walls facing any street,
R-1, R-2 or R-3 District boundary, residential use, pedestrian
walkway or the riverfront shall be suitably finished using materials
that preserve the aesthetics, but which shall not include unpainted
or painted cinder block or concrete block walls.
(8) Roadways and walkways. Design and layout of walkways shall be
sensitive to the natural qualities of the riverfront and shall
emphasize pedestrian movements as the primary means of
circulation along the water's edge. Grade separation shall be
utilized wherever possible as a means of separating pedestrian
movements, vehicular movements and private use activities. Paving
materials shall be consistent throughout this district in order to
achieve a degree of integration with adjacent development.
(9) Dockage areas. Noncommercial marinas (i.e., those without retail
space, restaurant space, boat sales, boat service, boat storage,
showroom facilities, etc.) are permitted. Design of the dockage
areas shall provide public access to the riverfront while preserving
the privacy of dockers. No outdoor storage of materials, supplies
and equipment in unenclosed areas shall be permitted, nor shall
boat owners be permitted to use parking areas for repair or
maintenance purposes. Provisions shall be made for vehicular
unloading areas in proximity to the dockage area. One transient
dock space shall be provided for every 20 seasonal dock spaces.
(10) Service areas. Service access for dumpsters and trash removal
facilities shall be screened from view by means of a fence and
landscaping. There shall be at least one trash and garbage pickup
location within the building or in an outside pickup location, which
shall be a steel-like, totally enclosed container located in a manner
to be obscured from view from parking areas, streets, the Ohio
River and adjacent residential uses or R-1, R-2 or R-3 Districts by a
fence, wall, planting or combination of the three. If located within
the building, the doorway may serve both the loading and trash/
garbage functions and, if located outside the building, it may be
located adjacent to or within the general loading area, provided
that the container in no way interferes with or restricts loading and
unloading functions.
(11) Public water and public sewers shall serve the proposed use. Public
restrooms shall be made available on the site, unless public
restrooms are available on public property within 300 feet of the
proposed use.
(12) Outdoor speakers shall not be permitted if there are single-family
dwellings within 500 feet of the property boundaries in any
direction, unless a noise attenuation plan is submitted, approved
and carried out.
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:755
(13) Location of buildings and facilities, traffic circulation and parking
areas shall be designed to provide adequate access for emergency
medical vehicles and fire-fighting equipment.
(14) Any outdoor facility located within 200 feet of an existing dwelling
shall cease operations at 11:00 p.m.
(15) Outdoor facilities shall be secured to prevent public access when
the facility is not in use.
AA. Service station in the C-C District, subject to:
(1) No street entrance or exit for vehicles and no portion or equipment
of such service station shall be located:
(a) Within 200 feet of a street entrance or exit of any school, park
or playground conducted for and attended by children.
(b) Within 100 feet of any hospital, church or public library.
(c) Within 75 feet of a lot in any R-1, R-2 or R-3 District as
established in this chapter.
(2) No equipment above the surface of the ground for the service of
motor vehicles shall be closer than 30 feet to any property line. A
minimum space of 25 feet shall exist between any two islands and
between any island and the service station building.
(3) The width of any entrance driveway leading from the public street
to such service station shall not exceed 30 feet at its intersection
with the curbline or edge of pavement.
(4) No two driveways leading from a public street to such service
station shall be within 15 feet of each other at their intersection
with the curb or street line.
(5) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article V.
(6) Parking and vehicle access shall be so arranged that there will be
no need for the motorists to back over sidewalks or into streets.
(7) No junked motor vehicle or part thereof, no new or used cars
offered for sale, no unregistered motor vehicle or not more than
four motor vehicles incapable of normal operation on the highway
shall be permitted outside a completely enclosed building, as
defined herein, except that no more than six motor vehicles may be
located outside a building for a period not to exceed five days for
each vehicle, provided that the owners are awaiting the repair of
the motor vehicle.
(8) The handling and disposal of motor oil, battery acid and any other
substance regulated by federal statute and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) shall be in
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:756
accordance with permits and requirements of that agency or its
successor agency. Any suspension, revocation or violation of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP)
permits shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to
the enforcement provisions of § 245-84 of this chapter.
BB. Single-family dwelling in the S-C District, subject to:
(1) Public sewer facilities shall be available and shall be utilized.
(2) The minimum width at the building line shall be 100 feet. The
minimum lot area shall be at least 20,000 square feet.
(3) The front yard minimum lot depth shall be 25 feet.
(4) The side yard total shall be 30 feet and the minimum width shall be
12 feet on one side.
(5) The rear yard minimum depth shall be 40 feet.
(6) Structures shall not exceed more than 2 1/2 stories in height or
have a maximum depth of more than 35 feet.
(7) Maximum structure lot coverage shall not exceed 30% of the lot
upon which it is situated.
(8) The dwelling must be located on level terrain. There shall be an
area of level terrain equal to or greater than 80 feet deep by 80 feet
wide for dwelling site location.
(9) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article V.
CC. Single-family dwelling or duplex in the Planned River-Oriented
Development (PROD) District Reconstructed after January 1, 2010,
subject to:
(1) If a single-family dwelling or duplex existing on a lot in the PROD
District on January 1, 2010, is partially or totally damaged or
destroyed, the dwelling may be reconstructed on the location of the
foundation of the previously existing structure.
(2) If any enlargement of the dwelling is proposed beyond the location
of the foundation of the previously existing structure, the proposed
enlargement shall comply with the area and bulk regulations of the
PROD District for a single-family dwelling or duplex existing on
January 1, 2010.
(3) If the lot on which the dwelling is located is a nonconforming lot of
record, the provisions of § 245-30 shall apply.
DD. Street floor commercial uses in a planned river-oriented development,
subject to:
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:757
(1) One or more of the following uses may be established on the street
floor of a garden apartment, mid-rise apartment or high-rise
apartment that is approved as part of a planned river-oriented
development:
(a) Business or professional offices.
(b) Day-care center.
(c) Day spa.
(d) Delicatessen.
(e) Health club.
(2) The foregoing uses may have an entrance directly to the outside or
may have an entrance from the lobby of the residential building.
(3) Each of the foregoing uses shall be permitted to have a wall sign or
overhanging sign mounted on the building facade, or a window sign
of the type authorized by § 245-23, provided the surface area of the
sign shall not exceed 12 square feet.
(4) None of the foregoing uses shall be established on any floor of the
residential building above the floor that has direct access to the
sidewalk.
(5) Off-street parking shall be provided for the uses in accordance with
the requirements of Article V, unless the site is eligible for a
parking reduction in accordance with § 245-61W.
(6) Parking spaces located along any property line that adjoins a lot
containing a single-family dwelling or duplex shall be screened by a
minimum six-foot-high compact evergreen hedge, masonry wall or
solid fence.
(7) Areas of the lot not covered by buildings or paving shall be
landscaped with grass, ground cover, perennials, shrubs and/or
trees in accordance with a landscaping plan approved by Borough
Council.
EE. Temporary use or structure, subject to:
(1) Temporary uses such as festivals or fairs or other similar activities
sponsored by a local nonprofit, community or charitable
organization shall be exempt from obtaining approval from the
Zoning Hearing Board, provided the Zoning Officer determines
compliance with the standards of this § 245-61EE as a condition of
issuing a certificate of occupancy.
(2) Sidewalk sales, carload sales and other special promotions
conducted on the site of an existing retail establishment with the
permission of the landowner for a period not exceeding 72 hours
shall not be subject to the provisions of this § 245-61EE. Any such
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:758
activity exceeding 72 hours in duration shall be subject to approval
under this § 245-61EE.
(3) Seasonal outdoor cafes shall be exempt from these regulations
provided all requirements of § 245-48 are met.
(4) A transient merchant license, if required by Borough ordinance,
shall be obtained.
(5) The proposed temporary use or structure shall be limited to those
uses or structures authorized in the zoning district where it is
proposed.
(6) Approval for temporary uses or structures shall be granted for a
specific time period not to exceed six months. If the Zoning Hearing
Board determines that there will be a continued need for the
temporary use or structure on an annual basis, the Board may
authorize annual renewal of the permit for the temporary use or
structure by the Zoning Officer, provided all conditions of the
original approval are maintained.
(7) All temporary uses or structures shall be removed within 10 days of
the expiration of the specific period for which the structure or use
is approved.
(8) All temporary uses or structures that are proposed to be accessible
to the public shall provide parking in accordance with the
requirements of Article V for the proposed use.
(9) Vehicular access for all temporary uses or structures that are
proposed to be accessible to the public shall be designed to
minimize congestion on the site and not impede the free flow of
traffic for any other permanent use or structure on the site.
(10) All temporary uses or structures proposed to be used as principal
uses or structures shall comply with all applicable area and bulk
regulations for principal structures in the zoning district in which
they are located.
(11) All temporary uses or structures that are proposed to be used as
accessory uses or structures shall comply with the requirements of
the zoning district for accessory structures.
(12) Temporary uses or structures that are proposed as principal uses
or structures and that are accessible to the public shall provide
sanitary facilities, unless such facilities already exist on the site.
FF. Vehicle accessories sales and installation, subject to:
(1) All installation shall be performed within a completely enclosed
building, as defined herein.
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:759
(2) The area used for display of merchandise offered for sale and the
area used for parking of customer and employee vehicles shall be
continuously paved and maintained in either concrete over a base
of crushed stone compacted to not less than six inches in depth or
other surfacing of equivalent or superior character as approved by
the Borough Engineer.
(3) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of Article V.
(4) All areas used for the outdoor display of equipment shall be located
at least five feet from any property line or street right-of-way and
shall be screened from any adjacent property in an R-1, R-2 or R-3
District by a minimum six-foot-high compact evergreen hedge,
masonry wall or solid fence.
GG. Vehicle rental, sales and service, subject to:
(1) New and used vehicle sales and service establishments shall be
limited to those establishments that are factory-authorized
dealerships or that have obtained a license from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to operate a used car dealership.
(2) The minimum lot area required for vehicle rental, sales and service
shall be 20,000 square feet.
(3) The property shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to
an arterial or collector street, as defined by this chapter.
(4) The area used for display of merchandise offered for sale and the
area used for parking of customer and employee vehicles shall be
continuously paved and maintained in either concrete over a base
of crushed stone compacted to not less than six inches in depth or
other surfacing of equivalent or superior character as approved by
the Borough Engineer.
(5) The handling and disposal of motor oil, battery acid and any other
substances regulated by federal statute and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) shall be in
accordance with all permits and requirements of that agency or its
successor agency. Any suspension, revocation or violation of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP)
permits shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to
the enforcement provisions of § 245-84 of this chapter.
(6) All lots used for the outdoor display of vehicles shall have a
completely enclosed building, as defined herein, on the same lot
which lot has not less than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area
where all repair, servicing, sales and customer car washing shall be
performed.
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:760
(7) No vehicle or other merchandise displayed outdoors shall be less
than five feet from any property line. No vehicle shall be parked on
adjacent property or in any public street right-of-way.
(8) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article V.
HH. Vehicle repair shop, subject to:
(1) Such use shall not be located within 100 feet of any property line
adjoining property located in an R-1, R-2 or R-3 District.
(2) All property lines adjoining property located in an R-1, R-2 or R-3
District shall be screened by a minimum six-foot-high compact
evergreen hedge, masonry wall or solid fence.
(3) Storage of parts, dismantled vehicles and vehicles awaiting repair
shall be kept in a completely enclosed building, as defined herein or
in an outdoor area that is screened from view from the public street
by a minimum six-foot-high compact evergreen hedge or fence.
(4) There shall be no more than four vehicles displayed for sale on the
premises at any one time.
(5) All repair work shall be performed within a completely enclosed
building, as defined herein, that has adequate ventilation and fire
protection provisions.
(6) All towed vehicles shall be stored on the premises and no vehicle
shall be stored or dismantled on any public street.
(7) The premises shall be kept clean and shall be maintained so as to
not constitute a nuisance or menace to public health and safety.
(8) Storage, handling and disposal of hazardous materials, as defined
by federal or state statute, shall comply with the current
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PADEP) and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA).
(9) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article V.
II. Oil and/or gas exploration, drilling and extraction operations; oil and/or
natural gas well site(s); compressor station(s); natural gas processing
plant(s); or any similar facilities performing the equivalent functions.
[Added 10-9-2012 by Ord. No. 929]
(1) Applicability.
(a) This Subsection II applies to all oil or gas well sites,
compressor stations, and natural gas processing plants that
will be permitted or constructed after the effective date of this
subsection. No oil or gas well or exploration of same of any
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:761
type or nature shall be dug or drilled, nor shall any work in
preparation therefor be commenced within the boundaries of
Monaca Borough unless and until the owner or operator of
such operations make conditional use application in conformity
with this Subsection II.
(b) Oil or gas sites, compressor stations, and natural gas
processing plants that were permitted or constructed prior to
the adoption of this Subsection II, shall not be required to meet
the requirements of this Subsection II, provided that any
modification to an existing or permitted oil or gas well site that
occurs after the effective date of this Subsection II and
materially alters the size, type, location, number of wells and
other accessory equipment or structures, or any physical
modifications to an existing natural gas compressor station or
natural gas processing plant shall require compliance with and
a permit under this Subsection II.
(c) Certain federal and/or state laws or regulations preempt oil
and gas ordinance requirements that conflict with same.
Monaca Borough acknowledges that it is preempted from
regulating the operational methods of the oil and gas industry
and may only regulate land uses in accordance with
Pennsylvania law.
(d) All activities conducted in association with, and as a part or oil
or gas well sites, shall be in accordance with the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Oil and Gas Act (Act 1984
223), as amended, and any other applicable federal, state,
county or local laws.
(2) Zoning classification.
(a) An oil or gas well site, or a compressor station, or a natural gas
processing facility, or any similar facilities performing the
equivalent functions shall be permitted as a conditional use
within the RBP Riverfront Business Park District.
(b) The applicant shall have the duty and the burden to prove
compliance with the specific conditions set forth herein and by
way of this Subsection II. The applicant shall bear the burden
of persuasion to demonstrate that the proposed conditional use
will not have detrimental effects on the health, safety and
welfare of Borough residents relative to any additional
conditions.
(c) The proposed conditional use will be harmonious with and in
accordance with the general objectives or with any specific
objective of the Borough's Comprehensive Plan; will be
designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so as to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or
intended character of the general vicinity and will not change
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:762
the essential character of the same area; will not be hazardous
or disturbing to existing neighboring uses; will be served
adequately by essential facilities and services such as
highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage
structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer, and schools; or
the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of
the proposed use shall be able to adequately provide any such
services; will not create excessive additional requirements at
public expense for public facilities and services and will not be
detrimental to the economic welfare of the community; will not
involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and
conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons,
property, or the general welfare by reason of excessive
production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors; will
have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be
designed so as not to create interference with traffic on
surrounding public thoroughfares; will not result in the
destruction, loss or damage of a natural, scenic, or historic
feature of significant importance.
(d) A zoning permit shall not be required for oil and gas drilling
subsurface facilities which are authorized as a permitted use
by right in all zoning districts. Permits for crossing or
disturbance of any state or Borough street shall be required.
(e) Conditional use approval shall be required for each well site;
however, if multiple wellheads are proposed to be located at
the well site, separate approval is not required for each
wellhead if the original conditional use application indicates
that multiple wellheads are proposed.
(3) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this Subsection
II only:
APPLICANT — Any person, owner, operator, partnership, company,
corporation and its subcontractors and agents who have an interest
in real estate for the purpose of exploring or drilling for, producing,
or transporting oil or gas.
BOROUGH — Borough of Monaca.
BOROUGH STAFF — Borough of Monaca Councilpersons, or other
persons employed by the Borough to act on behalf of the Borough.
BUILDING — An occupied structure with walls and roof within
which persons live or customarily work. The term shall not include
a barn, shed or other storage building.
COLLECTOR STREET — A public street or road which, in addition
to providing access to abutting lots, intercepts other collector
streets or state roads and provides a route for carrying volumes of
local traffic to community facilities and arterial streets.
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:763
COMPRESSOR — A device used alone or in a series to raise the
pressure of natural gas and/or by-products to create a pressure
differential to move or compress a liquid, vapor or gas.
COMPRESSOR STATION — A facility designed and constructed to
compress natural gas and /or oil that originates from a single well
site or a collection of such well sites, operating as a midstream
facility for delivery of gas and for oil to a transmission pipeline,
distribution pipeline, processing plant or underground storage
field, including one or more natural gas and/or oil compressors,
associated buildings, pipes, valves, tanks and other equipment.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Environmental Protection of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DERRICK — Any portable framework, tower mast and/or structure
which is required or used in connection with drilling or reworking
a well for the production of oil or gas.
DRILLING EQUIPMENT — The derrick, all parts and
appurtenances to such structure and every piece of apparatus,
machinery, or equipment used, erected or maintained in connection
with oil and gas drilling, as defined herein.
DRILLING PAD — The area of surface operations surrounding the
surface location of a well or wells. Such area shall not include an
access road to the drilling pad.
EFFECTIVE DATE — The date upon which this Subsection II is
approved by the Council of the Borough of Monaca.
HYDRAULIC FRACTURING (FRACKING) — The process of
injecting water, customized ftracking fluid, steam, or gas into an oil
or gas well under pressure to break apart rock layers in order to
release gas and to improve recovery of gas.
LOCAL STREET — A public street or road designed to provide
access to abutting lots and to discourage through traffic.
NATURAL GAS COMPRESSOR STATION — A facility designed and
constructed to compress natural gas that originates from a gas
well or collection of such wells operating as a midstream facility
for delivery of gas to a transmission pipeline, distribution pipeline,
natural gas processing plant or underground storage field,
including one or more natural gas compressors, associated
buildings, pipes, valves, tanks and other equipment.
NATURAL GAS PROCESSING FACILITY —
A facility that receives natural gas and associated
hydrocarbons from a gathering line system serving one or
more well sites that compresses, condenses, pressurizes or
otherwise treats natural gas and which removes water and
water vapor and/or separates materials such as ethane,
propane, butane and other constituent or similar naturally
(a)
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:764
OIL AND GAS — Crude oil, natural gas, methane gas, coal bed
methane gas, propane, butane and/or any other constituents or
similar substances that are produced by drilling an oil or gas well
of any depth into, through and below the surface of the earth.
OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT or DEVELOPMENT — The well site
preparation, construction, drilling, redrilling, hydraulic fracturing,
and/or site restoration associated with an oil or gas well of any
depth; water and other fluid storage, impoundment and
transportation used for such activities; and the installation and use
of all associated equipment, including tanks, meters, and other
equipment and structures whether permanent or temporary; and
the site preparation, construction, installation, maintenance and
repair of oil and gas pipelines and associated equipment and other
equipment and activities associated with the exploration for,
production and transportation of oil and gas. This definition
includes gathering, transmission and distribution pipelines or
compressor stations or natural gas processing plants or facilities
performing the equivalent functions.
OIL AND GAS DRILLING — The removal of oil and gas resources
from the ground by means of drilling, as defined herein, in
accordance with a valid permit issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP) under the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Oil and Gas Act (58 P.S. § 601.101 to
§ 602.605), as now or hereafter amended.
OIL AND GAS DRILLING DEEP WELL — Oil and gas drilling, as
defined herein, drilled to depths shallower than the base of the Elk
Sandstone or its stratigraphic equivalent for the sole purpose of
exploring the Marcellus Shale.
OIL AND GAS DRILLING SHALLOW WELL — Oil and gas drilling,
as defined herein, drilled to depths shallower than the base of
the Elk Sandstone or its stratigraphic equivalent and any well site
that proposes drilling of a single well for not more than seven
consecutive days total in any calendar year.
occurring substances from natural gas to allow such natural
gas to be of such quality as is required or appropriate for
transmission or distribution to commercial markets, including
but not limited to: cooling facilities, storage tanks and related
equipment and facilities.
A facility designed and constructed to remove materials such
as ethane, propane, butane, and other constituents or similar
substances from natural gas to allow such natural gas to be of
such quality as is required or appropriate for transmission or
distribution to commercial markets but not including facilities
or equipment that is designed and constructed primarily to
remove water, water vapor, oil or naturally occurring liquids
from the natural gas.
(b)
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:765
OIL AND GAS DRILLING SUBSURFACE FACILITIES — Activities
performed under the surface of the ground that are part of the
operation of oil and gas drilling, as defined herein, located on
properties within the unit for a particular well site, but that are not
included in the well site, including but not limited to: horizontal
drilling and hydraulic fracturing zones, underground gathering and
transmission pipelines established in accordance with the Public
Utility Commission (PUC) guidelines, water distribution lines and
similar underground facilities incidental to oil and gas drilling.
OIL OR GAS WELL OR WELLHEAD — A pierced or bored hole
drilled or being drilled in the ground for the purpose of, or to be
used for, producing, extracting or injecting gas, oil, petroleum or
another liquid related to oil or gas production or storage including
the structure that is placed over the opening upon completion of
drilling and that is maintained during production.
OIL OR GAS WELL SITE OR SITE — The location where facilities,
structures, materials and equipment, whether temporary or
permanent, necessary for or incidental to the development,
preparation, construction, drilling, production or operation of an oil
or gas well. This definition also includes exploratory wells.
OPERATOR — Any person, partnership, company, corporation or
legal entity and its subcontractors and agents who have an interest
in the real estate for the purpose of exploring or drilling for,
producing or transporting oil or gas.
OWNER — A person who owns, manages, leases, controls or
possesses an oil or gas well site.
PROTECTED STRUCTURE — Any occupied residence, business,
school, church, or public building located within 1,000 feet of an
oil or gas well, as defined herein, that may be adversely affected
by noise generated from the drilling or hydraulic fracturing at the
well site, as defined herein, excluding any structure owned by an
oil or gas lessor who has signed a lease with the operator granting
surface rights to drill the subject well or whose owner or occupants
have signed a waiver relieving the operator from complying with
the noise abatement provisions of this Subsection II.
STORAGE WELL — A well used for and in connection with the
underground storage of natural gas, including injection into or
withdrawal from an underground storage reservoir for monitoring
or observation of reservoir pressure.
WATER IMPOUNDMENT — An open, earthen receptacle in the
ground intended to store fresh water or wastewater to supply one
or more oil and gas drilling well sites.
WELL SITE — All of the area occupied by the drilling equipment,
as defined herein, and all surface facilities, structures, water and
other fluid storage impoundments and storage tanks and
associated equipment including tanks, meters and other permanent
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:766
or temporary structures and equipment incidental to oil and gas
drilling, as defined herein, including facilities and equipment
necessary for site exploration, preparation, site construction,
drilling, hydraulic fracturing, site restoration, production and
operation of the well upon completion of drilling.
WORK-OVER OPERATIONS — The work performed in a well after
its completion in an effort to secure production where there has
been none, restore production that has ceased, or increase
production.
(4) Conditional use permit requirement.
(a) No oil or gas well site, compressor station, or natural gas
processing facility or an addition thereto shall be constructed
or located within Monaca Borough unless a conditional use
approval has been issued by the Borough to the owner or
operator approving the construction or preparation of the site
for oil or gas development or construction of natural gas
compressor stations or natural gas processing compressor
stations or natural gas processing facilities.
(b) The permit application, or amended permit application, shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $1,000 which may,
from time to time, be amended by resolution. The applicant
shall promptly pay any additional fees or costs incurred by the
Borough that exceed this fee as allowable under the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
(c) Any modification to an existing and permitted oil or gas well
site that materially alters the size, location, number of wells or
accessory equipment or structures, or any modification to an
existing natural gas compressor station or natural gas
processing plant shall require a modification of the permit
under this Subsection II. Like-kind replacements shall not
require a permit modification.
(5) Pre-application conferences.
(a) Purpose.
[1] Before submitting a conditional use application, the
applicant is strongly encouraged to meet with the Borough
staff, including the Borough Manager, to determine the
requirements of and the procedural steps and timing of the
application. The intent of this process is for the applicant
to obtain necessary information and guidance from the
Borough staff, including the Borough Manager, before
entering into any commitments or incurring substantial
expenses with regard to the site and plan preparation. In
addition, a preliminary determination will be made
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:767
regarding the need for land development plan review by
the Planning Commission of Beaver County.
(b) Process.
[1] A pre-application conference is voluntary on the part of the
applicant and shall not be deemed the beginning of the
time period for review as prescribed by law. The preapplication
conferences are intended for the benefit of the
applicant in order to address the required permit
submittals and are advisory only, and shall not bind the
Borough to approve any application for a permit or to act
within any time limit relative to the date of such
conference.
(6) Conditional use permit application.
(a) The applicant shall provide to the Borough at the time of
application:
[1] A narrative describing an overview of the project including
the number of acres to be involved, the number of wells to
be drilled, location, number and description of equipment
and structures to be involved.
[2] A narrative describing an overview of the project as it
relates to compressor stations or natural gas processing
facilities, if applicable.
[3] The address of the oil or gas well site, compressor station
or natural gas processing facility as determined by the
Borough or Beaver County for information of emergency
responders. A 9-1-1 address or GPS coordinates should be
assigned to the location.
[4] The contact information of the individual or individuals
responsible for the operation and activities at the oil or gas
well site shall be provided to the Borough and all
emergency responders. Such information shall include a
phone number where such individual or individuals can be
contacted 24 hours per day, 365 days a year. Annually, or
upon any change of relevant circumstances, the applicant
shall update such information and provide it to the
Borough and all emergency responders.
[5] A location map of the oil or gas well site showing the
approximate location of derricks, drilling rigs, wellheads,
water impoundments equipment and structures and all
permanent improvements to the site and any postconstruction
surface disturbance in relation to natural and
other surroundings. Included in this map shall be an area
within the development site for the location and parking of
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:768
vehicles and equipment used in the transportation of
personnel and/or development and use of the site. Such
location shall be configured to allow that the normal flow
of traffic on local streets shall be undisturbed.
[6] A location map of the compressor stations or natural gas
processing facilities including any equipment and
structures and all permanent improvements to the site.
[7] A narrative and map describing the manner and routes for
the transportation and delivery of equipment, machinery,
water, chemicals and other materials used in the siting,
exploration, drilling, construction, development,
maintenance and operation of the oil or gas well site.
[8] A certification or evidence satisfactory to the Borough
that, prior to the commencement of any activity at the oil
or gas well site, the applicant shall have accepted and
complied with any applicable bonding and permitting
requirements; and shall have entered into a Borough
roadway maintenance and repair agreement with the
Borough, in a form acceptable to the Borough Solicitor,
regarding the maintenance and repair of the Borough
streets that are to be used by vehicles for site exploration,
construction, drilling activities and site operations. A road
bond, if necessary, and in an amount determined by the
Borough Engineer shall be posted by the applicant prior to
commencement of any oil or gas development activities.
Compliance with posted weight limits must be maintained.
[a] The operator shall show the proposed Borough routes
of all vehicles to be utilized for hauling and the
estimated weights of those vehicles. The operator
shall show evidence of compliance with designated
weight limits on Borough roads, unless a bond and a
maintenance agreement has been entered into to
assure road damage repair. The operator shall design
the hauling routes for the oil and gas development
operation to minimize the use of and impact upon
Borough roads wherever feasible.
[b] The operator shall show evidence satisfactory to the
Borough Engineer that intersections along proposed
hauling routes provide a sufficient turning radius for
vehicles to be utilized for hauling, such that all turns
can be safely made without damage to vehicles,
sidewalks or curbs.
[c] The Borough Engineer shall review the proposed
routes provided by the operator, and reasonably
determine whether preventive measures, such as
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:769
shoring of bridges or putting protective mats over
utility lines, should be taken to prevent damage to
Borough roads, bridges or utilities. If such preventive
measures are recommended, the operator shall install
such protective measures as directed by the Borough
Engineer prior to beginning operations.
[9] A description of, and commitment to maintain, safeguards
that shall be taken by the applicant to ensure that Borough
streets utilized by the applicant shall remain free of dirt,
mud and debris resulting from site development activities;
and the applicant's assurance that such streets will be
promptly swept or cleaned if dirt, mud and debris occur as
a result of the applicant's usage.
[10] Verification that a copy of the operation's preparedness,
prevention and contingency plan has been provided to the
Borough and all emergency responders.
[11] The preparedness, prevention and contingency plan must
provide for local fire protection as follows: During the
well's drilling activities, the Fire Department will be
directed by the well company's designated person on the
scene on how to handle the emergency situation. If drilling
activities are not active and when no designated person is
on site, evacuate and isolate the area 350 feet around the
affected site and contact the Department of Environmental
Protection Emergency Response Number which is
currently 1-800-541-2050 and which may be subject to
change. If there is a life or death situation while drilling
activities are inactive and someone is in the immediate
danger zone, the officers of the Fire Department shall use
their best judgment to make sure there are no dangers
such as fire, electrocution, high-pressure release, etc. Best
judgment is to be used while maintaining a perimeter and
waiting for well company personnel to arrive or advise.
Emergency responders are to be held harmless and
indemnified by the applicant when acting in accordance
with the Emergency Response Plan. The applicant is
responsible to reimburse all costs associated with
emergency responders.
[12] A statement that the applicant, upon changes occurring to
the operation's preparedness, prevention and contingency
plan, will provide to the Borough and all appropriate
emergency responders the dated revised copy of the
preparedness, prevention and contingency plan while
drilling activities are taking place at the oil or gas well site.
[13] Assurance that, at least 30 days prior to drilling and
annually thereafter, if requested by the Borough, the
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:770
applicant shall provide an appropriate site orientation and
training course of the preparedness, prevention and
contingency plan for all appropriate emergency
responders. The cost and expense of the orientation and
training shall be sole responsibility of the applicant. The
applicant shall not be required to hold more than one
site orientation and training course annually under this
section.
[14] A copy of the documents submitted to the Department, or
other applicable regulatory agencies or if none, a narrative
describing the environmental impacts of the proposed
development on the site and surrounding land and
measures proposed to protect or mitigate such impacts.
[15] A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, in
conformance with the requirements of the Beaver County
Conservation District, must be submitted along with
obtaining a grading and excavation permit from the
Borough as well as the execution of a stormwater best
management practices agreement between the applicant
and the Borough in accordance with Borough ordinances
then prevailing.
[16] Recorded easements must be supplied for any gathering,
transmission and distribution pipelines serving the site or
proposed to serve the site.
[17] Proposed rehabilitation/reclamation plan for the site
containing the following:
[a] An engineering drawing showing ownership, existing
and future topography, streams, existing roads,
buildings, boundaries and metes and bounds
description of the tract.
[b] A drawing showing the location and/or proposed
relocation of land, trees, buildings, structures, public
roads, streams, drainage facilities and utility lines on
the tract or adjacent tracts as may require protection,
repairs, clearance, demolition, restoration, either
during or following completion of the operations
proposed.
[c] A plan for reuse of the land after completion of the
operations which shall permit the carrying out of the
purpose of this Subsection II and appropriately
provide for any rehabilitation, restoration,
reclamation, reforestation, or other correction work
deemed necessary.
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:771
(b) Within 30 business days after receipt of a permit application
and the required fee, the Borough will determine whether the
application is complete and adequate and advise the applicant
accordingly.
(c) If the application is complete, the Borough shall schedule a
conditional use hearing in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code and shall, following hearing,
render a decision on the application in accordance with this
Subsection II.
(d) If the application is incomplete and/or inadequate the Borough
will notify the applicant of the missing or inadequate material
and, upon receiving said material, shall schedule a conditional
use hearing in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code and shall, following the hearing,
render a decision on the application in accordance with this
Subsection II.
(e) All state and federal requirements associated with oil and gas
well development must be followed at all times, and, upon
request, permits associated with those requirements shall be
supplied to the Borough. Conditional use approval shall be
indefinitely conditioned upon the applicant maintaining valid
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and federal operating permits.
The applicant shall immediately notify the Borough of the
suspension, modification or revocation of any such permits.
(7) Design and installation.
(a) Access.
[1] No oil or gas well site shall have access solely through a
private road. Whenever possible, access roads to the oil or
gas well site should be from a local or collector street.
There shall be adequate area on the development site for
staging trucks waiting to make deliveries or service to the
site that does not disrupt the normal flow of traffic on the
public street.
[2] Accepted professional standards pertaining to minimum
traffic sight distances for all access points shall be
followed.
[3] The access road to the well site shall be required to be
improved before entering Borough or state roads in such a
manner that no water, sediment or debris will be carried
onto any public streets or roadways.
[4] Any newly established private easements/roadways
constructed on the parcel containing the well shall be
located at least 25 feet from any property line unless
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:772
consent is obtained from the adjoining property owner.
Existing easements/roadways shall be exempt from the
requirement to obtain consent from the adjoining property
owner; provided, however, that the Borough may permit a
permanent easement/roadway to be located closer than 25
feet from any property line upon showing by the applicant
that the location of such easement/roadway cannot be
constructed as required due to topographical or
environmental constraints.
[5] Compliance with the Commonwealth's ESCGP-1
permitting process shall satisfy the requirements of this
section.
[6] A highway occupancy permit (HOP) may be required for
entrance onto any Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
highway and if so required the applicant shall secure
same.
(b) Structure height.
[1] Permanent structures associated with an oil and gas well
site, both principal and accessory, shall comply with the
height regulations for the RBP Riverfront Business Park
District, in which the oil or gas well site is located.
[2] Permanent structures associated with compressor stations
or natural gas processing facilities shall comply with the
RBP Riverfront Business Park District in which the
compressor station or natural gas processing facilities are
located.
[3] There shall be an exemption to the height restrictions
contained in this section for the temporary placement of
drilling rigs, drying tanks, and other accessory uses
necessary for the actual drilling or redrilling of an oil or
gas well.
[a] The duration of such exemption shall not exceed the
actual time period of active drilling or redrilling of an
oil or gas well.
[b] The time period of such drilling and exemption shall
not exceed six months, unless extended in writing as
necessary and reasonable upon request of the
applicant.
[c] The operator shall give the Borough prior written
notice of the beginning date for its exercise of the
exemption.
(c) Setbacks.
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:773
[1] Drilling equipment shall be located a minimum setback
distance of 200 feet from any building not related to the
development.
[2] The drilling pad for the oil or gas well site shall comply
with all setback and buffer requirements of the RBP
Riverfront Business Park District in which the oil or gas
well site is located.
[3] Compressor stations and natural gas processing facilities
shall comply with all setback and buffer requirements of
the RBP Riverfront Business Park District in which the oil
or gas well site is located.
[4] Exemption from the standards established in this
subsection may be granted by the Borough upon a showing
by the applicant that it is not feasible to meet the setback
requirements from surface tract property lines and that
adequate safeguards have or will be provided to justify the
exemption.
[5] Drilling pads, compressor stations and natural gas
processing facilities shall be set back 500 feet from
buildings or sites registered or eligible for registration on
the National Register of Historic Places or the
Pennsylvania Register of Historic Places.
[6] Drilling pads, natural gas compressor stations and natural
gas processing plants shall be set back 200 feet from any
existing water wells.
[7] Drilling pads, compressor stations and natural gas
processing facilities shall be set back 200 feet from all
property boundaries, property lines, properties designated
as landfills, properties containing hazardous substances,
public streets or private streets not servicing the site.
[8] Sufficient setbacks shall be met to ensure the preservation
of water resources. Further, no well site may be prepared
or well drilled within 100 feet measured horizontally from
any stream, spring or body of water as identified on the
most current 7 1/2 minute topographic quadrangle map of
the United States Geological Survey or within 100 feet of
any wetlands greater than one acre in size. The
Department of Environmental Protection may waive such
distance restrictions upon submission of a plan which shall
identify the additional measures, facilities or practices to
be employed during well site construction, drilling and
operations. Such waiver, if granted by the Department of
Environmental Protection, shall impose such permit
conditions as are necessary to protect the waters of the
commonwealth and shall be accepted by Monaca Borough.
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:774
[9] If there is a reasonable likelihood of disturbance to
endangered species or crucial habitations, sufficient
setbacks shall be met to ensure the preservation of
threatened or endangered species or crucial habitations
such that there shall be no habitat disturbance. As
determined by the Department of Conservation and
Natural Resources.
(d) Fencing, signage and screening.
[1] Security fencing shall not be required at oil or gas well
sites during the initial drilling, or redrilling operations, as
long as manned twenty-four-hour on-site supervision and
security are being provided.
[2] Upon completion of drilling or redrilling, security fencing
consisting of a permanent chain-link fence shall be
promptly installed at the oil or gas well site to secure
wellheads, storage tanks, separation facilities, water or
liquid impoundment areas, and other mechanical and
production equipment and structures on the oil or gas well
site.
[3] Security fencing shall be constructed in accordance with
existing Zoning Ordinance provisions. Fencing is not
required as long as twenty-four-hour on-site supervision
and security are being provided.
[4] Emergency responders shall be given means to access oil
or gas well sites in case of an emergency.
[5] Warning signs shall be placed on the fencing surrounding
the oil or gas well site providing notice of the potential
dangers and the contact information in case of an
emergency.
[6] In construction of oil or gas well sites, the natural
surroundings should be considered and measures taken to
preserve existing trees and other native vegetation, to
promote and utilize natural screening.
[7] Water impoundments containing wastewater shall be
fenced and covered with protective bird netting to ensure
the safety of animal and bird species.
(e) Lighting.
[1] Lighting at the oil or gas well site, or other facilities
associated with oil and gas drilling development, either
temporary or permanent, shall be directed downward and
inward toward the activity, to the extent practicable, so as
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:775
to minimize the glare on public roads and nearby buildings
within 200 feet of the oil or gas well development.
[2] Lighting at a compressor station or a natural gas
processing facilities shall, when practicable, be limited to
security lighting.
(f) Noise.
[1] The Borough recognizes and acknowledges that oil and
gas development is accompanied by inherent noise.
However, the operator shall take the following steps to
minimize, to the extent possible, noise resulting from the
development.
[2] Prior to the conditional use application submittal, the
operator shall establish a continuous seventy-two-hour
ambient noise level at the nearest protected structure or
100 feet from the nearest protected structure (as
measured to the closest exterior point of the building)
property line, whichever is closer to the protected
structure. The sound level meter used in conducting any
evaluation shall meet the American National Standard
Institute's standard for sound meters or an instrument and
the associated recording and analyzing equipment, which
will provide equivalent data.
[3] The applicant shall provide the Borough documentation of
any established seventy-two-hour evaluation, relied upon
to establish an ambient noise level to the Borough's Zoning
Officer within three business days of such a request from
the Zoning Officer and at the conditional use hearing.
[4] If it is determined that any residents, regardless of their
status of residing or working in a protected structure, may
be adversely affected by the noise at the site, the Borough
may require that noise abatement measures be
implemented, including, but not limited to, the erection of
sound walls around the site.
[5] If a complaint is received by the Borough from any person,
whether a resident or otherwise using the protected
structure as defined herein for any lawful purpose,
regarding noise generated during drilling or hydraulic
fracturing activities, the operator shall, within 24 hours of
receipt of the complaint from the Borough, continuously
monitor for a forty-eight-hour period at a point which is the
closer to the complainant's building of:
[a] The complainant's protected structure property line
nearest to the wellsite or equipment generating the
noise; or
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:776
[b] One hundred feet from the protected structure.
[6] If the operator engages in any noise testing as required by
this Subsection II, it will provide preliminary data to the
Borough no later than 10 business days following
completion of the noise testing. Once the monitoring is
complete, the operator will meet with Borough
representatives and affected residents to discuss whether
additional abatement measures are warranted.
(g) Prohibitions and precautions.
[1] No drilling shall be allowed in the floodway designated as
such in the flood insurance study (FIS) and shown on the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) maps.
[2] Oil and gas drilling in the one-hundred-year floodplain is
discouraged but may be permitted by the Borough in its
sole discretion if the following provisions are met.
[a] The applicant must provide conclusive documentation
that no other location allows access to the oil or gas
deposit other than a location within the floodplain.
[b] An adequate emergency evacuation plan shall have
been produced by the applicant and filed with the
Borough.
[c] No storage of chemicals shall be permitted within the
floodplain. An exemption from this requirement may
be granted by the Borough if the applicant can show
that such storage will not potentially cause any harm
to property, persons or the environment in the case of
a one-hundred-year flood; and further provides
security to the Borough assuring the applicant's
ability to remedy any damage or injury that may occur.
[d] Only necessary and needed structures will be
permitted within the floodplain.
[e] All structures within the flood zone shall be designed
to withstand a one-hundred-year storm event.
[f] An engineer registered in Pennsylvania and qualified
to present such documentation that structures will not
cause additional flooding on adjacent, upstream and/
or downstream properties shall provide such
documentation to the Borough.
[3] Dust; pollution.
[a] Oil and gas operations shall not create dust or pollute
the air in violation of the Clean Air Act or any other
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:777
local, state or federal regulation regarding air
cleanliness or nuisances. Owners or operators shall
take the necessary safeguards to ensure appropriate
dust control measures are in place. Exhaust from any
internal combustion engine or compressor used in
connection with the drilling of any well or for use
on any production equipment or used in development
shall not be discharged into the open air unless
equipped with an exhaust muffler or an exhaust box.
The exhaust muffler or exhaust box shall be
constructed of noncombustible materials designed
and installed to suppress noise and disruptive
vibrations. Moreover, all such equipment with an
exhaust muffler or exhaust box shall be maintained in
good operating condition according to manufacturer's
specifications.
[b] The emissions of dust, smoke, refuse matter, odor, gas,
fumes or similar substances or conditions which can
endanger the health, safety or general welfare or
which can cause any soiling or staining of persons or
property at any point beyond the property line of the
use creating the emission is prohibited. Dust control
measures shall be used to stabilize soil from wind
erosion and to reduce dust generated from drilling or
site activities, including:
[i] Stabilize exposed soils using vegetation,
mulching, spray-on adhesives, calcium chloride,
sprinkling, and stone and gravel layering.
[ii] Stabilize unpaved haul roads, parking and staging
areas within the site.
[iii] Minimize the impact of dust by anticipating the
direction of prevailing winds.
[iv] Direct construction and commercial vehicle traffic
to stabilized roadways within the site.
[v] Pave, vegetate, or chemically stabilize access
points where unpaved traffic surfaces adjoin
paved public streets.
[vi] Provide covers for haul trucks transporting
materials that contribute to dust.
[vii] Provide for wet suppression or chemical
stabilization of exposed soils.
[viii] Provide for rapid cleanup of sediments deposited
on paved roads.
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:778
[ix] Furnish vehicle wash-down areas.
[x] Reduce speed to 15 miles per hour or less and
reduce trips on unpaved roads on site.
[xi] Implement dust control measures for material
stockpiles.
[xii] Stabilize abandoned construction/staging areas
on site using vegetation or chemical stabilization
methods.
[xiii] Minimize extent of site areas which is disturbed.
[c] A dust control plan shall be submitted with the site
plan, demonstrating compliance with this subsection.
[4] Portable equipment not necessary for the continuing
drilling, or other use at the site shall not be stored on the
property except in completely enclosed buildings.
[5] Workers, agents, contractors and employees connected
with an oil or gas operation shall be prohibited from living
on the site for more than two consecutive weeks at a time
during active drilling operations. Once active drilling has
ceased, no person shall be permitted to reside on the site.
[6] Water impoundments shall only be permitted on sites
approved for deep well drilling and only on the same site
serviced by said impoundment. Sediment and hydraulic
fracturing wastewater may be disposed of only in
approved landfill sites and shall not be disposed of on the
same site as the oil and gas development unless treated
and approved for disposal by the department and/or the
EPA. All water impoundments must be completely
enclosed with fencing in accordance with Borough
standards. Proposed water impoundments must be
included in the conditional use application for review and
approval by the Borough.
[7] Owners or operators shall take all necessary precautions
to minimize odors during the drilling or hydraulic
fracturing process. If odors resulting from the drilling or
hydraulic fracturing process or odors emanating from the
well sites result in complaints being lodged by Borough
residents, the owner or operator shall meet with the
Borough and any affected residents to implement, where
warranted, and required by the Borough, effective odor
control measures.
[8] Owners or operators shall take all necessary precautions
to ensure the safety of persons in areas established for
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-61
237:779
road crossing and/or adjacent to roadways, (i.e., persons
waiting for public or school transportation, crosswalks,
etc.). Where necessary and permitted, during periods of
anticipated heavy or frequent truck traffic associated with
the development, owners or operators will provide
flagmen to ensure the safety of children at or near school
or school bus stops and include adequate signs and/or
other warning measures for truck traffic and vehicular
traffic. In the alternative, owners or operators, with the
Borough's consent and agreement, will reimburse the
Borough to provide such required safety measures. The
operator will coordinate its efforts with the school district
so as to minimize heavy traffic during the hours when
school buses are picking up or dropping off children.
[9] Owners or operators shall not clear brush or trees by way
of burning and shall chip, grind or remove all tree stumps
and limbs from properties it clears for development
purposes unless done so in conformity with Borough
ordinances.
[10] Any work-over operations, as defined herein, shall be
subject to all applicable criteria of this Subsection II.
Work-over operations shall not commence until the
operator provides written notice to the Borough Zoning
Officer at least 60 days in advance. The Borough Zoning
Officer may authorize the work-over operations, provided
all conditions attached to the original conditional use
approval for the well site and all applicable criteria of this
Subsection II are met. The Zoning Officer has the
discretion to refer the operator's request to the Council of
Monaca Borough for an amended conditional use approval.
The Council of Monaca Borough may conduct a public
hearing and may refer the request to the Planning
Commissions of Monaca Borough and Beaver County
before acting on an amendment to the original conditional
use application.
[11] Hours of construction during site grading, preparation of
installation of roads, drilling pads, water impoundments,
noise barriers and related facilities shall be 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m. There is no limit on hours of operation during
active drilling and fracking as long as compliance with the
other provisions of this Subsection II is maintained.
[12] The Borough may require the operator to conduct an
informational meeting for residents within 1,000 feet of
the well site at least 30 days prior to beginning
construction on the site. Information to be provided to the
residents should include a survey of the well site, a general
description of the proposed facilities, the equipment to be
§ 245-61 MONACA CODE § 245-61
237:780
used during site development, explanation of drilling and
"fracking" and contact information for the operator and
the site supervisor.
[13] There shall be no seismic testing unless specifically
requested by the owner or operator and approved by the
Borough.
[14] If a spill, fire or other violation of any federal, state or local
law occurs at the drill site or in the Borough by the
operator or its subcontractors, the operator will notify the
Borough immediately, in all circumstances not later than
24 hours after the incident occurred or, if the incident is
ongoing, not later than 24 hours after it began.
[15] Coal bed methane and conventional oil and gas well
drilling and completion activities, i.e., those wells drilled
to depths shallower than the base of the Elk Sandstone or
its stratigraphic equivalent, and such oil and gas wells that
are planned to involve drilling of a single well on a well site
for no more than seven consecutive days total in any
calendar year can request a waiver from the Borough from
any condition set forth herein if, in the sole discretion of
the Borough, the conditions are not necessary to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the residents.
(h) The Borough may attach to the approval of any application
hereunder additional design and installation conditions in
order to protect the public's health, safety and welfare.
(8) Penalties. Any owner, operator, or other person who violates or
permits a violation of this chapter upon being found liable therefor
in a civil enforcement proceeding before a Magisterial District
Judge, shall pay to the Borough a fine of not more than $500, plus
all court costs, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney's
fees incurred by the Borough on account of such violation. No
penalty or cost shall be imposed until the date the determination of
the violation by the Magisterial District Judge becomes final. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Borough may enforce the judgment as provided by law. Each day a
violation exists after final judgment shall constitute a separate
offense. The amount of the fine imposed shall be multiplied by the
number of such days and may be charged and collected as a
judgment by the Borough without further judicial proceedings.
Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Borough are
hereby authorized to issue a cease and desist notice and/or to seek
equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance
herewith. No bond shall be required of the Borough if the Borough
seeks injunctive relief.
§ 245-61 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-62
237:781
§ 245-62. Performance standards.
All uses and structures shall comply with the following performance
standards. In order to determine whether a proposed use or building will
conform to the safe levels of the following performance standards, the
Borough Council, the Planning Commission or the Zoning Hearing Board,
as the case may be, may obtain qualified consultants to review the proposed
use or structure and to report their recommendations concerning the same.
The cost of such consulting services shall be borne by the applicant unless
expressly assumed by the Borough Council.
A. Fire protection. Any activity involving the handling or storage of
flammable, explosive or other hazardous materials shall be subject to
the standards of the Borough's Fire Code, the National Board of Fire
Underwriters' standards and acceptable national fire-protection
standards. Necessary fire prevention and fire-fighting equipment shall
be readily available to the activities noted above.
B. Electrical disturbances. No activity shall cause electrical disturbances
adversely affecting radio or television reception in the Borough.
C. Noise. No activity shall cause such noise as to interfere with the use and
enjoyment of neighboring property. Noise pollution shall be subject to
the standards which may from time to time be established or
recommended by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP).
D. Smoke and air pollution. The maximum amount and type of smoke
emissions permissible shall be subject to the standards which may from
time to time be established or recommended by the DEP and/or the
United States Environmental Protection Agency. No incineration of any
waste material will be permitted.
E. Odors. In any zoning district except the G-I District and the RBP
District, no malodorous gas or matter shall be permitted which is
discernible on any adjoining lot or property. Uses located in the I
District and the RBP District shall be permitted to emit odorous gas or
matter subject to the standards which may from time to time be
established or recommended by the DEP. No such odorous gas and
emissions shall endanger lives or property in any zoning district.
F. Vibrations. Vibrations detectable without instruments on neighboring
property in any zoning district shall be prohibited. In addition, any
vibrations shall be subject to the standards which may from time to time
be established or recommended by the DEP.
G. Glare. Lighting devices which produce objectionable direct or reflected
glare on adjoining properties or thoroughfares shall not be permitted.
H. Erosion. No erosion by wind or water shall be permitted which will
carry objectionable substances onto adjoining properties.
§ 245-62 MONACA CODE § 245-62
237:782
I. Water pollution. Water pollution shall be subject to the standards which
may from time to time be established or recommended by the DEP.
§ 245-62 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-62
237:783

ARTICLE X
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
§ 245-63. Definitions.
See Article I of this this chapter.
§ 245-64. Applicability.
A nonconforming use may continue, be bought or sold, altered, restored or
extended subject to the provisions of this article even though such use does
not conform to the regulations established for that zoning district in which it
is located. However, one nonconforming use cannot be changed to another
type of nonconforming use.
§ 245-65. Restoration of unsafe structures.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition of any portion of a building or structure declared unsafe by a
proper authority.
§ 245-66. Alterations to nonconforming structures.
§ 245-67. Restoration.
Any nonconforming structure or any structure housing a nonconforming
use that is damaged by fire, flood, explosion or other casualty may be
reconstructed and used as before the damage occurred if such
reconstruction is undertaken within 12 months of such casualty, and if the
restored structure has no greater lot coverage and contains a cubic content
no greater than before such casualty.
§ 245-68. Extensions.
A. A nonconforming structure may be enlarged or structurally altered,
provided the enlargement or alteration does not increase the existing
nonconformity such as encroaching further into a required yard setback
than the existing nonconforming structure does, and further provided
that no new nonconformities are created. All other alterations or
enlargements shall require review by the Zoning Hearing Board and,
after public hearing, the Zoning Hearing Board may determine undue
hardship and may authorize a variance for the reasonable alteration or
enlargement of such structure.
B. Nonconforming signs shall not be enlarged, added to or replaced by
another nonconforming sign, use or structure, except that the
interchange of advertising panels shall be permitted.
§ 245-63 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-68
237:785
§ 245-69. Change of nonconforming use.
§ 245-70. Construction approved prior to legal enactment of
standards.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction or
designated use of a building or structure for which a permit has been issued
and the construction of which shall have been diligently prosecuted within
two months of the date of such permit, and the ground-story framework
of which shall have been completed within four months of the date of the
permit, and which entire building shall be completed according to such
plans as filed within one year from the date of legal enactment of this
chapter.
§ 245-71. Abandonment.
The nonconforming use of a building or land which has been abandoned
shall not thereafter be returned to such nonconforming use. A
nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned when one of the
following conditions exists:
A. A nonconforming use may be extended as a special exception upon
approval through application of the Zoning Hearing Board, subject to
the following:
(1) The extension becomes an attached part of the main structure and
does not utilize additional or adjoining land area other than the
original parcel.
(2) The extension does not encroach upon the maximum building
height or yard setback requirements of the district in which the
nonconforming use is presently located.
(3) The extension is for the purpose of expanding the nonconforming
use in existence at the time of the legal acceptance of this chapter.
B. Extension of a lawful use to any portion of a nonconforming building or
structure which existed prior to the enactment of this chapter shall not
be deemed an extension of such nonconforming use.
A. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any use other than a
conforming use, except when authorized as a use by special exception
by the Zoning Hearing Board if the Board determines that the new
nonconforming use will more closely correspond to the uses authorized
in the district as permitted uses, uses by special exception or
conditional uses and that the new nonconforming use will be in keeping
with the character of the neighborhood in which it is located and will
have an equal or lesser impact on the neighborhood than the existing
nonconforming use.
B. When a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, the use
thereafter shall not be changed to a nonconforming use.
§ 245-68 MONACA CODE § 245-71
237:786
§ 245-72. Unlawful use not authorized.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as authorization for or approval
of the continuance of the illegal use of a structure or premises in violation
of zoning controls in existence at the time of the effective date of legal
enactment of this chapter.
§ 245-73. District changes.
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer
an area from one district to another district of a different classification, the
foregoing provisions shall apply to any nonconforming use existing therein.
§ 245-74. Registration.
The Zoning Officer shall be responsible for preparing a list of all
nonconforming uses existing at the time of the legal enactment of this
chapter, and such list shall be maintained for public use and information.
A. When the intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent.
B. When the characteristic equipment and furnishing of the
nonconforming use have been removed from the premises and have not
been replaced by similar equipment within 90 days, unless other facts
show intention to resume the nonconforming use.
C. When a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of six
months.
D. When it has been replaced by a conforming use.
E. When it has been changed to a use permitted as a special exception by
the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 245-71 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-74
237:787

ARTICLE XI
Conditional Uses Procedure
[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
§ 245-75. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be to provide for certain uses in specified
zoning districts which require a detailed and close examination by the
Borough Council. Such uses will have a significant impact on a particular
zoning district or the entire community; therefore, the uses necessitate
additional safeguards and control.
§ 245-76. Administration.
A. The applicant desiring conditional use approval shall file an application
on forms provided by the Borough.
B. Along with the application, the applicant shall file all maps, plans and
text necessary to explain the proposed development and its compliance
with the standards and criteria set forth in this chapter. Seventeen
copies of said maps, plans and text shall be filed. The copies shall be
distributed as follows: Planning Commission (five copies), Borough
Council and Mayor (eight copies), Borough Engineer (one copy), Zoning
Officer (one copy), Secretary (one copy) and Borough Solicitor (one
copy).
C. A complete application shall be filed by the applicant with either the
Borough Secretary or the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall
review the application to ensure that it is complete. If an application is
incomplete, the Zoning Officer shall inform the applicant of the specific
deficiencies of the application. Until a complete application is
submitted by the applicant, the Borough shall not formally review the
application.
D. A fee for the application for conditional use may be prescribed by the
Borough Council. Such a fee may be revised from time to time through
resolution by Borough Council. If a fee is prescribed, it shall be
submitted by the applicant to the Borough in conjunction with the
application for conditional use.
E. If approval for an application for conditional use is granted, the Zoning
Officer shall issue a certificate of conditional use on a standardized
form.
F. If approval for an application for conditional use is granted but
additional stipulations have been attached which must be adhered to
before a certificate of conditional use can be issued, such additional
stipulations shall be expressed in writing. The Zoning Officer, with
assistance from the Borough Solicitor or the Borough Engineer, if
necessary, shall prepare the written copy of additional stipulations. A
written copy of the additional stipulations shall be forwarded to the
§ 245-75 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-76
237:789
§ 245-77. Procedures.
applicant. From the date of receipt, the applicant shall have 14 days to
accept or reject the additional stipulations. The applicant shall forward
his decision, in writing, to the Borough Secretary or the Zoning Officer.
If the applicant fails to act within the fourteen-day time limit, it shall be
deemed that the applicant rejects the conditions stipulated.
G. If an application for conditional use is not approved, the applicant shall
be informed, in writing, of the denial and the specific reasons for the
denial. The Zoning Officer, with assistance from the Borough Solicitor
or the Borough Engineer, if necessary, shall prepare the written denial
which is to be signed by the President of the Borough Council or the
Borough Secretary acting as agent for the Borough Council.
A. Decisions regarding conditional uses shall be rendered by the Borough
Council. When considering conditional uses, the Borough Council shall
apply the standards and criteria detailed in Article IX to ensure that
such a use is consistent with the purpose of this chapter, the
Comprehensive Plan and other Borough development documents. Along
with the standards and criteria expressed in this chapter, the Borough
Council may attach additional reasonable conditions and safeguards it
deems necessary to implement the purpose of this chapter.
B. In considering an application for approval of a conditional use, Borough
Council shall proceed as follows:
(1) A public hearing, pursuant to public notice, as defined herein, shall
be conducted by Borough Council.
(2) The hearing shall be conducted by Borough Council or Borough
Council may appoint any member or an independent attorney as a
hearing officer.
(3) The first hearing shall be commenced within 60 days from the date
of the applicant's request, unless the applicant has agreed, in
writing, to an extension of time. Each subsequent hearing before
the Zoning Hearing Board or Hearing Officer shall be held within
45 days of the prior hearing, unless otherwise agreed to by the
applicant, in writing, or on the record. An applicant shall complete
the presentation of his case-in-chief within 100 days of the first
hearing. Upon request of the applicant, the Zoning Hearing Board
or Hearing Officer shall assure that the applicant receives at least
seven hours of hearings within the 100 days, including the first
hearing. Persons opposed to the application shall complete the
presentation of their opposition to the application within 100 days
of the first hearing held after the completion of the applicant's
case-in-chief. The applicant may, upon request, be granted
additional hearings to complete his case-in-chief provided the
persons opposed to the application are granted an equal number of
additional hearings. Persons opposed to the application may, upon
§ 245-76 MONACA CODE § 245-77
237:790
the written consent or consent on the record by the applicant
and the Borough, be granted additional hearings to complete their
opposition to the application provided the applicant is granted an
equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal.
(4) The decision, or, where no decision is called for, the findings, shall
be made by Borough Council. However, the applicant, in addition to
the Borough, prior to the decision, may waive decision or findings
by Borough Council and accept the decision or findings of the
hearing officer as final.
(5) In granting a conditional use, Borough Council may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of this chapter.
(6) Borough Council shall render a written decision, or, when no
decision is called for, make written findings on the conditional use
application within 45 days after the last hearing before Borough
Council.
(7) Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon,
together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code269 or
any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the
provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed
appropriate in light of the facts found.
(8) Where Borough Council fails to render a decision within the period
required by this subsection or fails to commence, conduct or
complete the required hearing in accordance with the provisions of
this subsection, the decision shall be deemed to have been
rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed,
in writing, or on the record, to an extension of time.
(9) When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant
because of failure of Borough Council to meet or render a decision,
as herein provided, Borough Council shall give public notice, as
defined herein, of the decision within 10 days from the last day it
could have met to render a decision. If Borough Council fails to
provide such notice, the applicant may do so.
(10) A copy of the final decision, or, where no decision is called for, of
the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed
to him no later than the day following the date of the decision.
(11) Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party
opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
269. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 245-77 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-77
237:791
C. When considering the recommendation of the Borough Planning
Commission in regard to the conditional use, the Borough Council shall
proceed as follows:
(1) The Zoning Officer shall transmit a complete copy of the
application to the Planning Commission in a timely manner.
(2) Attempt to conduct the public hearing after the Planning
Commission has had sufficient time to review the application and
formulate a recommendation.
(3) If, because of time constraints the Borough Council must conduct
the public hearing before the Planning Commission has had
sufficient time to review the application and formulate a
recommendation, the Borough Council shall not render a decision
until the Planning Commission has had 45 days to review the
application and formulate a recommendation.
D. Procedures of the Planning Commission.
(1) The Planning Commission shall review the application for
conditional use within the time constraints of this section.
(2) When considering a conditional use, the Planning Commission shall
apply the standards and criteria governing conditional uses
detailed in Article IX to ensure that such a use is consistent with
the purpose of this chapter, the Comprehensive Plan and other
Borough development documents. Along with the standards and
criteria expressed in this chapter, the Planning Commission may
recommend additional reasonable safeguards it deems necessary
to implement the purpose of this chapter.
(3) The Planning Commission may, if it deems necessary, conduct its
own public hearing. If such a hearing is held, it shall be conducted
as follows:
(a) The hearing shall be held pursuant to public notice and shall be
conducted by the Planning Commission.
(b) The hearing shall be scheduled and conducted within the time
constraints placed on the Planning Commission by this section.
(c) The applicant shall be given written notice of the hearing date,
time and location. The applicant may be represented by legal
counsel and/or present witness testimony.
(d) The Planning Commission may render a formal decision. If
such a decision is rendered, the Planning Commission shall
incorporate its decision with its recommendations to the
Borough Council and shall inform the applicant of the decision
within five days from the date the official decision is rendered.
§ 245-77 MONACA CODE § 245-77
237:792
§ 245-78. Change in ordinance.
(e) The applicant shall not pay a fee to defray the cost of such a
hearing.
A. When an application for a conditional use has been filed with the
Borough Council and the subject matter of such an application would
ultimately constitute either a land development or subdivision,270 no
change or amendment of this chapter shall affect the decision on such
application adversely to the applicant, and the applicant shall be
entitled to a decision in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
as it stood at the time the application was duly filed.
B. Provided, further, should an application be approved by the Borough
Council, the applicant shall be entitled to proceed with the submission
of either land development or subdivision plans within a period of six
months, or longer if approved by the Borough Council, following the
date of such approval. Such plans shall be submitted in accordance with
the provisions of all Borough ordinances and plans governing land
development as they stood at the time the application was duly filed
before the Borough Council. If either a land development or subdivision
plan is so filed within said period, such plans shall be subject to the time
limitations and regulations stipulated by said ordinances. The time
limitations shall commence as of the date of filing such land
development or subdivision plan.
270. Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 245-77 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-78
237:793

ARTICLE XII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 245-79. Administrative officer; powers and duties.
This chapter shall be administered by the Zoning Officer. The Borough
Council shall appoint a Zoning Officer who shall not hold any elective office
of the Borough.
A. The Zoning Officer shall administer this chapter in accordance with its
literal terms and shall not have the power to permit any construction or
any use or change of use which does not conform to this chapter.
B. The Zoning Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To interpret the literal meaning of this chapter and to interpret the
Official Zoning Map with regard to any application filed or any
question posed regarding the meaning or intent of this chapter. No
other individual or entity, except the Borough Solicitor or Borough
Engineer in consultation with the Zoning Officer, shall render a
literal interpretation of this chapter.
(2) To receive applications for zoning, sign and occupancy permits; to
receive applications for conditional uses, special exceptions and
variances and forward them to either the Borough Council, the
Planning Commission or the Zoning Hearing Board, as appropriate;
and to receive applications for development within a floodplain.
(3) To administer the Subdivision and Development of Land
Ordinance,271 as amended, of the Borough. Additional duties and
powers of the Zoning Officer are listed in said chapter.
(4) To issue permits for zoning, sign and occupancy when such
applications are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(5) To prepare certificates of zoning and certificates of nonconformity
when requested by the owner of record.
(6) To prepare certificates of conditional use when an application for
conditional use has been approved by the Borough Council.
(7) To prepare and institute enforcement notices as prescribed in
§ 245-84 and stop-work orders as prescribed in § 245-85.
(8) To prepare and render a preliminary opinion as prescribed in
§ 245-80.
(9) To identify and register any nonconformities if ordered by the
Borough Council.
271. Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 245-79 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-79
237:795
§ 245-80. Preliminary opinion.
(10) To make all required inspections necessary to ensure compliance
with this chapter or, subject to the approval of the Borough Council,
engage such expert opinion as he may deem necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter.
(11) To annually submit to the Borough Council and the Planning
Commission a complete report of development which occurred in
the previous year within the Borough. A report of all construction,
subdivisions, conditional uses, Zoning Hearing Board proceedings,
occupancy permits, sign permits and floodplain development
permits, in addition to other relevant information prescribed by the
Borough Council, shall be prepared by the Zoning Officer.
(12) To revoke by order a zoning, sign or occupancy permit issued under
a mistake of fact or contrary to the provisions of this chapter as
prescribed in § 245-82.
(13) To maintain the Official Zoning Map and any overlay areas for all of
the land within the Borough.
(14) To present facts, records or information upon the request of the
Borough Council, the Planning Commission or the Zoning Hearing
Board to assist them in making decisions.
(15) To attend meetings with the Borough Council in a manner
prescribed by the Borough Council.
(16) To attend meetings with the Planning Commission or any other
agency or individual as prescribed by the Borough Council.
(17) To maintain an orderly system of records and documents pertaining
to all zoning, subdivision and development issues within the
Borough. Applications and permits issued for said zoning,
subdivision and development shall be open to the public for
inspection.
A. In order not to unreasonably delay the time when a landowner may
secure assurance that the ordinance and/or map under which he has
proposed to build is free from challenge, and recognizing that the
procedure for preliminary approval of his development may be too
cumbersome, the landowner may advance the date from which time for
any challenge to the ordinance and/or map will run under § 245-96B.
(1) If the landowner decides to seek a preliminary opinion, he shall
submit to the Zoning Officer plans and other materials describing
his proposed use or development for a preliminary opinion as to
their compliance with the applicable ordinance and map. Such
plans and other materials shall not be required to meet the
standards prescribed for preliminary, tentative or final approval or
for the issuance of a building permit so long as they provide
§ 245-79 MONACA CODE § 245-80
237:796
§ 245-81. Permits required. [Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
reasonable notice of the proposed use or development and a
sufficient basis for a preliminary opinion as to its compliance.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall render a written decision within 30 days
from the submission of an application for preliminary opinion.
(3) If the Zoning Officer's preliminary opinion is that the use or
development complies with the ordinance or map, notice thereof
shall be published once each week for two successive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice shall
include a general description of the proposed use or development
and its location identified by both street address and tax parcel
number, and the place and times where the plans and other
materials may be examined by the public.
(4) When favorable preliminary approval has been given by the Zoning
Officer, the time specified for commencing a proceeding with the
Zoning Hearing Board shall run from the time when the second
notice thereof has been published (see § 245-96B).
(5) If the Zoning Officer does not render a favorable preliminary
opinion, he shall notify the applicant, in writing, of his decision and
the basis for reaching such decision.
B. A fee for the application for preliminary opinion may be prescribed by
the Borough Council. Such a fee may be revised from time to time
through resolution by the Borough Council. If a fee is prescribed, it
shall be submitted by the applicant to the Borough in conjunction with
the application for preliminary opinion.
A. The Borough or the Borough acting through the Zoning Officer may
refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to further
improve or develop any real property which has been developed or
which has resulted from a subdivision of real property in violation of
this chapter or the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,272 as
amended, of Monaca Borough.
(1) This authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any
of the following applications:
(a) The owner of record at the time of such violation;
(b) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee
had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation;
(c) The current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to
272. Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 245-80 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-81
237:797
whether such current owner had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation; and/or
(d) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who
acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation
without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual
or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(2) As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting
of an approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee
for the development of any such real property, the Borough or the
Borough acting through the Zoning Officer may require compliance
with the conditions that would have been applicable to the property
at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real property.
B. Zoning permit. A zoning permit shall be required prior to the erection,
addition or alteration of any building or portion thereof to ensure that
such buildings conform to all requirements of this chapter. No person
shall begin the construction, reconstruction, addition to or excavation
of any building or structure without first obtaining a zoning permit from
the Borough of Monaca.
(1) Specifically, zoning permits are required for the following types of
activities:
(a) The construction of a new building or structure;
(b) The excavation of a foundation for a building or structure;
(c) The reconstruction of an existing building or structure;
(d) Additional construction of existing buildings or structures
which increases the exterior dimensions of an existing building
or structure;
(e) Constructing an additional floor of any existing building or
structure;
(f) Constructing or placing on the property any accessory building
such as a shed or garage;
(g) Moving or relocating any interior walls or doors;
(h) Enclosing a porch, regardless of whether the porch becomes
completely enclosed;
(i) Constructing a deck, patio or porch;
(j) Constructing an exterior ramp which is in excess of 20 square
feet;
(k) Changing the pitch of a roof; or
§ 245-81 MONACA CODE § 245-81
237:798
(l) Moving a mobile home, manufactured home or modular home
onto any land within the Borough.
(2) No zoning permit shall be required for the following types of
activities:
(a) Routine exterior maintenance such as replacing existing
windows or doors, painting, replacing siding such as aluminum
or vinyl which does not increase the exterior dimensions of the
building and/or replacing shingles or roof wood;
(b) Routine interior maintenance such as painting, replacing
carpet or existing floor boards, and/or changing doors;
(c) Constructing a sidewalk; or
(d) Constructing steps or a stoop not in excess of 24 square feet.
(3) No building or portion thereof shall be erected, added to or altered
until an application for a zoning permit for said erection, addition
or alteration has been issued. Applications may be filed by the
owner or his authorized agent and shall be on forms provided by
the Borough. At a minimum, all applications shall include a scale
drawing specifying dimensions of the lot and the building to be
constructed, the use and location of any existing buildings and the
use and location of any proposed buildings, any existing easements
or rights-of-way that traverse the lot, the location of any on-lot well
or septic system, the location of any driveway or parking areas, the
names of surrounding property owners, the location of adjacent
roads (public or private) or highways, the location of any streams or
lakes or other bodies of water, the location of the one-hundred-year
floodplain or a note indicating the absence of the one-hundred-year
floodplain, copies of required state and/or federal permits and
other information deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer to
correctly arrive at a decision with regard to the requirements of
this chapter.
(a) With respect to very minor additions or modifications to an
existing building, the Zoning Officer shall have the authority to
waive some of the above-specified requirements where such
omission will not affect the decision of the Zoning Officer
concerning the legality of issuing a permit.
(b) When an addition or alteration will be constructed above
existing floor space, a floor plan of such space as well as
architectural profiles shall be submitted in addition to the
above-specified plot plan.
(4) A zoning permit shall only be issued if the Zoning Officer
determines that the proposed building or structure complies with
all applicable provisions of this chapter.
§ 245-81 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-81
237:799
(5) The Zoning Officer shall act within 30 days of receipt of an
application for a zoning permit. Applications that are incomplete or
that are not submitted with the required fee will be either returned
to the applicant or the Zoning Officer shall inform the applicant of
such deficiency. An application shall not be considered to be
officially submitted unless and until all of the required information
and the fee have been submitted. The above-mentioned thirty-day
review period shall begin on the day that the application is deemed
to be complete. The failure of the Zoning Officer to act within 30
days of receipt of an application, once the application is complete
and the required fee is submitted, will result in deemed approval
unless the applicant has requested, in writing, an extension to the
thirty-day review period.
(6) A fee for the application for a zoning permit may be prescribed by
the Borough Council. Such a fee may be revised from time to time
through resolution by the Borough Council. If a fee is prescribed, it
shall be submitted by the applicant to the Borough in conjunction
with the application for a zoning permit. Additionally, a fee for the
zoning permit may be prescribed by the Borough Council. Such a
fee may be revised from time to time through resolution by the
Borough Council. If a fee is prescribed, it shall be submitted by the
applicant at the time of application for a permit. If for any reason
the application for a zoning permit is denied, the fee for the zoning
permit (but not the application fee) will be returned to the
applicant.
(7) A zoning permit that has been issued by the Zoning Officer shall be
valid for one year from the date the permit was approved.
(a) If the construction that is allowed by the permit is not
completed within the above-specified one-year period, the
permit issued will become null and void. At the expiration of
this one-year period, the applicant shall submit another
application for a zoning permit in conformance with the
administrative guidelines in § 245-81 of this chapter.
(b) A change in this chapter text and/or map shall not affect a
building or structure that has exceeded the above-said oneyear
time limitation of the zoning permit for three years,
measured from the initial date of the zoning permit, if the
owner or the authorized agent of the building or structure
obtains another zoning permit as prescribed above.
(c) Buildings and/or structures that are not completed within
three years from the date the original zoning permit was issued
will be subject to any changes in this chapter text and/or map.
Additional construction, regardless if approved on the original
permit, shall conform to the revised zoning text and/or map. If
such a rule shall place an unnecessary hardship on the owner,
§ 245-81 MONACA CODE § 245-81
237:800
the owner may request a variance from the Zoning Hearing
Board.
(d) If the construction described above was preceded by and only
permitted following the required approval of a subdivision or
land development, the three-year limitation for changes to this
chapter text and/or map affecting said construction shall be
measured from the date preliminary approval was granted for
the subdivision or land development. If no preliminary
approval was granted, the date shall be measured from the
date final approval was granted for the subdivision or land
development.
(8) An application for a zoning permit which is denied by the Zoning
Officer shall be returned to the applicant along with a written
response stating the specific sections of this chapter that the
application failed to meet.
(9) Appeals of the determination of the Zoning Officer shall be heard
by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with Article XIII of this
chapter.
(10) When a zoning permit has been issued, it shall be the duty of the
Zoning Officer, or his duly appointed representative, to make the
following minimum number of inspections. Each inspection shall be
recorded in written fashion and shall indicate the time and date of
the inspection and the findings of the Zoning Officer with respect to
the conformance of the construction with the permit issued.
(a) Before construction begins, the Zoning Officer shall inspect the
site to ensure that the construction will comply with the permit
issued. The Zoning Officer may employ any method necessary,
such as requiring the staking-out of the exterior dimensions of
the building or stricture and/or the building lot, to determine if
the actual construction will comply with the permit issued.
(b) At the completion of construction, the Zoning Officer shall
inspect the site to ensure that the completed construction is in
full compliance with the permit issued.
(c) The Zoning Officer, if he thinks it necessary, may conduct
additional inspections to ensure that the construction
conforms to the permit issued.
(d) If the Zoning Officer discovers during any inspection that the
actual construction does not conform to the permit issued, a
written notice of the violation shall be issued by the Zoning
Officer. At a minimum, the Zoning Officer shall issue an
enforcement notice as prescribed in § 245-84. The Zoning
Officer may also issue a stop-work order as prescribed in
§ 245-85.
§ 245-81 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-81
237:801
C. Occupancy permit. An occupancy permit shall be required of all
building and/or land as specified in this subsection to ensure that the
proposed occupants of said building and/or land and the building itself
and/or land itself conform to all of the requirements of this chapter.
(1) An occupancy permit shall be required for the following:
(a) Occupancy of a newly constructed or erected building,
including single-family residential dwellings and mobile
homes.
(b) Occupancy and/or use of unimproved or vacant land.
(c) Change in the use of unimproved or vacant land except to
another use of the same type.
(d) Any change in use of nonconforming use to a conforming use.
(e) Any approved home occupation.
(f) Any conversion of a single-family detached residential
dwelling, or any part thereof, to a multifamily residential
dwelling or any conversion of a multifamily residential
dwelling to a single-family detached residential dwelling shall
obtain an occupancy permit.
(2) Administration.
(a) A certificate of occupancy, either for the entire or part of a new
building or for the structural alteration of an existing building,
shall be applied for in conjunction with the application for a
zoning permit and shall be issued within 15 days after the
erection or alteration of such building or part thereof is
completed and after due inspection by the Zoning Officer
shows the same to be in conformance with the provisions of
this chapter.
(b) A certificate of occupancy for the use or occupancy of vacant
land or for a change of use in an existing building shall be
applied for and issued before any such land or building shall be
occupied, used or changed in use, and such certificate of
occupancy shall be issued within 15 days after the application
has been made, provided that such proposed use is in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter and the Zoning
Officer has inspected said land or building.
(c) Applications may be filed by the owner or his authorized agent
and shall be on forms provided by the Borough. The Zoning
Officer shall act within the time limits prescribed above.
Applications that are incomplete will be returned to the
applicant. The failure of the Zoning Officer to act within the
time limits prescribed above, if the application submitted was
complete, will result in deemed approval.
§ 245-81 MONACA CODE § 245-81
237:802
§ 245-82. Revocation of permits.
Any construction, occupancy, use or other activity which is authorized
by any permit in this chapter may be revoked by the Zoning Officer as
prescribed by the procedures outlined in this section.
(d) A fee for the application for an occupancy permit may be
prescribed by the Borough Council. Such a fee may be revised
from time to time through resolution by the Borough Council. If
a fee is prescribed, it shall be submitted by the applicant to the
Borough in conjunction with the application for an occupancy
permit. Additionally, a fee for the occupancy permit may be
prescribed by the Borough Council. Such a fee may be revised
from time to time through resolution by the Borough Council. If
a fee is prescribed, it shall be submitted by the applicant at the
time of application for a permit. If for any reason the
application for an occupancy permit is denied, the fee for the
occupancy permit (but not the application fee) will be returned
to the applicant.
(e) Occupancy permits shall remain valid so long as none of the
conditions listed in Subsection C(1) requires the application of
a new occupancy permit.
(f) An application for an occupancy permit which is denied by the
Zoning Officer shall be returned to the applicant along with a
letter stating the specific sections of this chapter that the
application failed to meet. Until the conditions of the Zoning
Officer are adhered to, the applicant may not occupy the
building or part thereof or instruct any other individual,
partnership or corporation to occupy the building.
(g) Appeals of the determination of the Zoning Officer shall be
heard by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with Article
XIII.
A. The Zoning Officer shall be the only individual authorized to revoke any
permit issued under the authority of this chapter. If necessary, the
Zoning Officer may consult with the Borough Solicitor, Borough
Engineer or other individuals to determine if a permit should be
revoked.
B. Any permit issued by the Zoning Officer may be revoked if the
construction, occupancy, use or other activity which is authorized by
said permit deviates or does not conform to the specifications and
regulations under which said permit was issued. Additionally, if the
applicant either falsifies, conceals or misrepresents information to
obtain any permit, the Zoning Officer may revoke said permit.
C. If the Zoning Officer decides to revoke a permit, the following
procedure shall be used:
§ 245-81 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-82
237:803
§ 245-83. Other administrative certificates.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall meet or communicate by letter or
telephone with the alleged violator to allow the alleged violator an
opportunity to answer questions regarding the alleged violation.
(2) If the Zoning Officer, after considering the response of the alleged
violator, decides that the permit should be revoked, he shall notify
the alleged violator in writing.
(3) If the violation is a construction (building, sign or other physical
development) violation, the Zoning Officer shall issue a stop-work
order as prescribed in § 245-85.
(4) If the violation is an occupancy or use violation, the Zoning Officer
shall issue an enforcement notice as prescribed in § 245-84.
D. Permits that are revoked by the Zoning Officer which are brought into
conformance with the original specifications and regulations of the
permit issued or meet the required specifications of this chapter will be
reissued without additional fee if either such conformance occurs
within 30 days from when the permit was revoked or if the revocation of
the permit is appealed by the applicant to the Zoning Hearing Board
within the prescribed time limitations and the Zoning Hearing Board
decides in favor of the applicant, the permit shall be reissued within five
days from the date of the decision of the Board; if the Board finds in
favor of the Borough, such conformance occurs within 30 days from the
date of the decision of the Board.
E. Permits which are revoked and not acted upon by the applicant as
prescribed above shall be required to submit a new application and
applicable fee for said application.
F. Permits that are issued in error by the Zoning Officer, if the errant
issuance of said permit is completely the fault of the Zoning Officer or
other Borough agents, may be revoked within the thirty-day appeal
period as outlined in § 245-96A. If such an errantly issued permit is not
revoked within the thirty-day appeal period, the decision to revoke the
permit shall be determined by the Borough Council after consultation
with the Borough Solicitor and the Zoning Officer. When arriving at
such a determination, the Borough Council shall consider existing
Pennsylvania case law which is precedent setting for such occurrences.
A. Certificate of zoning. Such a certificate shall be prepared by the Zoning
Officer on standardized forms when requested by the official owner of
record.
(1) This certificate shall officially state the zoning district classification
of a lot or parcel as determined by the Zoning Officer.
§ 245-82 MONACA CODE § 245-83
237:804
§ 245-84. Enforcement notices.
If it appears to the Zoning Officer that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the Zoning Officer shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice. In addition, if the violation is a building
violation which is in progress, a stop-work order as prescribed in § 245-85
may be issued.
(2) This certificate does not guarantee future compliance with zoning
regulations or zoning districts as amendments to this chapter may
invalidate such certificates.
(3) There shall be no charge for preparation of one copy of the
certificate of zoning for the owner of record. The Borough Council
may through resolution adopt a fee for the preparation of multiple
official copies of the certificate.
B. Certificate of conditional use. This certificate shall be prepared by the
Zoning Officer on standardized forms if a conditional use application is
approved by the Borough Council.
(1) This certificate shall be prepared and delivered to the applicant
within 15 days from the date of approval by the Borough Council.
(2) The certificate does not guarantee future compliance with zoning
regulations or zoning districts as amendments of this chapter may
invalidate such certificates.
(3) There shall be no charge for preparation of one copy of the
certificate of conditional use for the applicant. The Borough
Council may through resolution adopt a fee for the preparation of
multiple official copies of the certificate.
C. Certificate of nonconformity. This certificate shall be prepared by the
Zoning Officer on standardized forms if requested by an owner of
record. If so ordered by the Borough Council, the Zoning Officer shall
register all nonconforming uses, lots, buildings and/or structures which
exist within the Borough.
(1) This certificate shall state the specific conditions of the use, lot,
building and/or structure which do not conform to the regulations
of this chapter.
(2) There shall be no charge for preparation of one copy of the
certificate of nonconformity for the owner of record. The Borough
Council may through resolution adopt a fee for the preparation of
multiple official copies of the certificate.
A. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel or lot on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has
filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding the
parcel or lot and to any other person requested, in writing, by the
§ 245-83 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-84
237:805
§ 245-85. Stop-work orders.
If it appears to the Zoning Officer that a building violation of this chapter is
occurring, the Zoning Officer shall initiate stop-work order proceedings. In
this instance, the stop-work order takes the place of the enforcement notice
proceedings outlined in § 245-84.
owner of record. Enforcement notices shall be sent via certified United
States mail.
B. The enforcement notice shall state the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Borough intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation referenced by tax parcel
number, street address, or both.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with procedures set forth in Article XIII.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
C. The Zoning Officer may institute civil enforcement proceedings as a
means of enforcement when acting within the scope of his employment.
Before instituting civil enforcement proceedings, the Zoning Officer
shall consult the Borough Solicitor and Borough Council.
A. A stop-work order is appropriate when a building, sign and/or other
structure is presently being constructed without the necessary permits
authorized under this chapter or a building, sign and/or other structure
is being constructed not in conformance with the specifications under
which a permit was issued.
B. The stop-work order shall be sent to the owner of record of the parcel or
lot on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed a
written request to receive enforcement notices regarding the parcel or
lot and to any other person requested, in writing, by the owner of
record. Stop-work orders shall be sent via certified United States mail.
C. The stop-work order shall state:
§ 245-84 MONACA CODE § 245-85
237:806
§ 245-86. Multiple applications and permits required.
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Borough intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation referenced by tax parcel
number, street address, or both.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) The date when construction of the building, sign and/or structure
must cease and the date before which the proper permits must be
obtained or adhered to.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with procedures set forth in Article XIII.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
D. In addition to the written stop-work order, the Zoning Officer may post
the parcel or building, sign or structure on which the violation is
occurring with a stop-work order. Before posting a stop-work order, the
Zoning Officer shall consult the Borough Solicitor.
E. The Zoning Officer may institute civil enforcement proceedings as a
means of enforcement when acting within the scope of his employment.
Before instituting civil enforcement proceedings, the Zoning Officer
shall consult the Borough Solicitor and Borough Council.
F. Upon proper correction of the violation and receipt of written notice
from the Zoning Officer, construction may proceed.
A. When a development is proposed by a landowner which must be
processed as either a conditional use or a special exception, it is
advantageous to the applicant to include all components of the
development in one application for a conditional use or a special
exception. If all components of a development are not included in the
original application (i.e., signs, lighting, etc.) and the applicant
proposes additional components of a development which are not
included in the original plan but are still governed by conditional use or
special exception provisions of the chapter, the applicant shall proceed
with another conditional use or special exception, as appropriate.
B. When approval is given to an applicant by the Borough Council through
a conditional use or by the Zoning Hearing Board through a special
exception, zoning, occupancy, sign and other required permits must still
§ 245-85 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-86
237:807
be obtained by the applicant before commencing any construction,
development or use of land governed by said permits.
C. In certain instances, both a conditional use or special exception and a
subdivision/land development approval are required for proposed
development plans. In such cases, both a conditional use or a special
exception and a subdivision/land development must be approved by the
appropriate government review agencies for the applicant to proceed
with the proposed development plans.
D. Approval by any Borough branch of government for any development
plan, whether it be the approval of a conditional use, special exception
and/or a subdivision/land development plan, does not guarantee that
the applicant will be permitted to legally proceed with the proposed
development plans when other state and federal agencies are involved
in the approval of the development process. It is the responsibility of
the applicant to determine what other governmental agencies are
required to be involved in the review and permitting of the proposed
development plans.
§ 245-86 MONACA CODE § 245-86
237:808
ARTICLE XIII
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 245-87. Purpose.
The Zoning Hearing Board (hereinafter referred to as "Board") is the
authorized body that hears and decides specified subject matters that are
designated in this chapter.
§ 245-88. Creation; appointment; administration.
A. A Zoning Hearing Board is hereby created.
B. The members of the Board shall be residents of the Borough and shall
be appointed by the Borough Council through a majority vote.
C. The Board shall consist of three members.
D. The term of office of Board members shall be three years and shall be so
fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire each year.
E. The Board shall promptly notify the Borough Council of any vacancies
which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the
unexpired portion of the term.
F. Board members shall not hold any other Borough office, be a member of
the Borough Planning Commission or be the Zoning Officer.
G. Board members may receive compensation for the performance of their
duties but in no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation
authorized to be paid to the members of the Borough Council. If
compensation is instituted, the Borough Council shall do so by
resolution.
H. If a member of the Board changes residence which results in such
member not being a resident within the political subdivision boundaries
of the Borough, such member shall immediately vacate such
membership to the Board.
I. The Borough Council may appoint by resolution at least one but no
more than three residents of the Borough to serve as alternative
members of the Board.
(1) The term of office of an alternate member shall be three years.
(2) When seated pursuant to the provisions of § 245-90B, an alternate
member shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and
discussions of the Board to the same and full extent as provided by
law for Board members. The alternate member shall have the right
to cast a vote as a voting member during the proceedings and shall
have all the powers and duties set forth in this chapter and as
otherwise provided by law.
§ 245-87 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-88
237:809
§ 245-89. Removal of members.
Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or
nonfeasance in office, or for other just cause, by a majority vote of the
Borough Council which appointed the member, taken after the member has
received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing
shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in
writing.
§ 245-90. Organization of Board.
(3) An alternate member shall not hold any other Borough office, be a
member of the Borough Planning Commission or be the Zoning
Officer.
(4) Alternate members may receive compensation for the performance
of their duties but in no case shall it exceed the rate of
compensation authorized to be paid to the members of the Borough
Council. If compensation is instituted, the Borough Council shall do
so by resolution.
(5) An alternate member may participate in any proceeding or
discussion of the Board but shall not be entitled to vote as a
member of the Board nor be compensated pursuant to Subsection
I(4) unless designated as a voting alternate member pursuant to
§ 245-90B.
A. The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall
serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the
conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall not
be less than a majority of all the members of the Board, but the Board
may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any
hearing on its behalf, and the parties may waive further action by the
Board as provided in § 245-93.
B. If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not
reached, the Chairman of the Board shall designate as many alternate
members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be needed to provide
for a quorum. Any alternate member of the Board shall continue to
serve on the Board in all proceedings involving the matter or case for
which the alternate was initially appointed until the Board has made a
final determination of the matter or case. Designation of an alternate
pursuant to this section shall be made on a case-by-case basis in
rotation according to declining seniority among all alternates.
C. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Borough and laws of the
commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its business,
which records shall be the property of the Borough, and shall submit a
report of its activities to the Borough Council at the request of the
Borough Council.
§ 245-88 MONACA CODE § 245-91
237:810
§ 245-91. Expenditures for services.
The Borough Council shall make provisions in its budget and appropriate
funds for the operation of the Board. Within the limits of funds appropriated
by the Borough Council, the Board may employ or contract for secretaries,
clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical and clerical services.
§ 245-92. Application procedures.
§ 245-93. Hearing procedures.
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with
the following requirements:
A. Applications for hearings in front of the Board shall be made by the
applicant on forms provided by the Borough and submitted to the
Zoning Officer or Borough Secretary. Along with the application, the
applicant shall file all maps, plans and text which may be relevant to the
request. Six copies of the application, maps, plans and text shall be
submitted.
B. Such a fee that is prescribed by the Borough Council shall be submitted
by the applicant with a complete application. Such a fee may be
amended from time to time by the Borough Council through resolution.
C. The Zoning Officer shall transmit one complete application to each
Board member and the Board Solicitor in a timely manner.
D. Upon the receipt of the application, the Board Solicitor shall schedule
the hearing and provide public and written notice in accordance with
this chapter.
A. Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the Zoning Officer and to any person who has made timely
request for the same. The public notice and the written notice to the
applicant shall be prepared and delivered by the Board Solicitor.
Written notice shall be given through the use of certified United States
mail. In addition to the written notice provided herein, written notice of
said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land
at least one week prior to the hearing.
B. The Borough Council may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearings before the Board. Fees for said hearings may include
compensation for the Secretary and the members of the Board, notice
and advertising costs and necessary administrative overhead connected
with the hearing. The costs, however, shall not include legal expenses of
the Board, expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical
consultants or expert witness costs.
C. The first hearing shall be commenced within 60 days from the date of
the applicant's request, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to
an extension of time. Each subsequent hearing before the Zoning
§ 245-91 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-93
237:811
Hearing Board or Hearing Officer shall be held within 45 days of the
prior hearing, unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant, in writing,
or on the record. An applicant shall complete the presentation of his
case-in-chief within 100 days of the first hearing. Upon the request
of the applicant, the Zoning Hearing Board or Hearing Officer shall
assure that the applicant receives at least seven hours of hearings
within the 100 days, including the first hearing. Persons opposed to
the application shall complete the presentation of their opposition to
the application within 100 days of the first hearing held after the
completion of the applicant's case-in-chief. The applicant may, upon
request, be granted an equal number of additional hearings. Persons
opposed to the application may, upon the written consent or consent
on the record by the applicant and the Borough, be granted an equal
number of additional hearings to complete their opposition to the
application provided the applicant is granted an equal number of
additional hearings for rebuttal. [Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
D. The hearings shall be conducted by the Zoning Hearing Board or the
Zoning Hearing Board may appoint any member or an independent
attorney as a Hearing Officer. The decision, or, where no decision is
called for, the findings, shall be made by the Zoning Hearing Board;
however, the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition
to the Borough, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision
or findings by the Zoning Hearing Board and accept the decision or
findings of the Hearing Officer as final. [Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord.
No. 918]
E. The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person affected by
the application who has made timely appearance of record before the
Board and any other person, including civic and community
organizations permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have
the power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances, in writing, on forms provided by the Board for that
purpose.
F. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing officer
presiding shall have the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas
to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested
by the parties.
G. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
H. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
I. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a
§ 245-93 MONACA CODE § 245-93
237:812
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing officer or shall be paid
by the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal
is made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid
by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
J. The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any
issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda or other materials, except advice from their Solicitor,
unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so
noticed and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after
commencement of hearings with any party or his representatives unless
all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
K. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before
the Board or the hearing officer.
(1) Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon
together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any
provision of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act
247, as amended),273 or of any Borough ordinance, rule or
regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and
the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light
of the facts found.
(2) If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, and there has been
no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Board shall
make his report and recommendations available to the parties
within 45 days and the parties shall be entitled to make written
representations thereon to the Board prior to final decision or entry
of findings, and the Board's decision shall be entered no later than
30 days after the report of the hearing officer.
(3) Where the Zoning Hearing Board fails to render a decision within
the required forty-five-day period or fails to commence or complete
the required hearing as provided in § 245-93C, the decision shall be
deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant, unless the
applicant has agreed, in writing or on the record, to an extension of
time. [Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
(4) When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant
because of the failure of the Board to meet or render a decision as
273. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 245-93 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-93
237:813
hereinabove provided, the Board shall give public notice of said
decision within 10 days from the last day it could have met to
render a decision in the same manner as provided in Subsection A.
If the Board shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do
so.
(5) Nothing in Subsection K of this section shall prejudice the right of
any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court
of competent jurisdiction.
(6) A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to
him not later than the day following its date. To all other persons
who have filed their names and addresses with the Board not later
than the last day of the hearing, the Board shall provide, by mail or
otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement
of the place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.
L. Mediation option. [Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
(1) Parties to proceedings authorized in this article may utilize
mediation as an aid in completing such proceedings. In
proceedings before the Zoning Hearing Board, in no case shall the
Zoning Hearing Board initiate mediation or participate as a
mediating party. Mediation shall supplement, not replace, those
procedures in this § 245-93 once they have been formally initiated.
Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted as expanding or
limiting municipal police powers or as modifying any principles of
substantive law.
(2) Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary. The
appropriateness of mediation shall be determined by the
particulars of each case and the willingness of the parties to
negotiate. The Borough, in offering the mediation option, shall
assure that in each case the mediating parties, assisted by the
mediator as appropriate, develop terms and conditions for:
(a) Funding mediation.
(b) Selecting a mediator who, at a minimum, shall have a working
knowledge of municipal zoning and subdivision procedures and
demonstrated skills in mediation.
(c) Completing mediation, including time limits for such
completion.
(d) Suspending time limits otherwise authorized in this chapter or
in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as
amended),274 provided there is written consent by the
274. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 1010 et seq.
§ 245-93 MONACA CODE § 245-93
237:814
§ 245-94. Jurisdiction.
The Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final
adjudication in the following matters:
mediating parties, and by an applicant or Borough decisionmaking
body, if either is not a party to the mediation.
(e) Identifying all parties and affording them the opportunity to
participate.
(f) Subject to legal restraints, determining whether some or all of
the mediation sessions shall be open or closed to the public.
(g) Assuring that mediated solutions are in writing and signed by
the parties, and become subject to review and approval by the
appropriate decisionmaking body pursuant to the authorized
procedures set forth in this chapter.
(3) No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding
the final written mediated agreement, shall be admissible as
evidence in any subsequent judicial or administrative proceedings.
A. Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except
those brought before the Borough Council by a landowner as a curative
amendment (see § 245-95C).
B. Challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance raising procedural
questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption,
which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken within 30 days after
the effective date of said ordinance.
C. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including but not
limited to the granting or denial of any permit or failure to act on the
application therefor; the issuance of any cease and desist order; or the
registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or
lot.
D. Appeals from a determination by the Borough Engineer or the Zoning
Officer with reference to the administration of any floodplain or flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance.
E. Appeals from the Zoning Officer's preliminary opinion determination
under § 245-80 of this chapter.
F. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Borough
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or provision
thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and
stormwater management insofar as the same relate to development not
involving subdivision and land development applications.
§ 245-93 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-94
237:815
§ 245-95. Variances, special exceptions and substantive challenges.
G. Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter, flood hazard
ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance (see
§ 245-95A).
H. Applications for special exception under this chapter, floodplain or flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance (see
§ 245-95B).
A. Variances. The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that this chapter or other applicable ordinances inflict
unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The Board may by rule
prescribe the form of the application and may require preliminary
application to the Zoning Officer. In granting any variances, the Board
may attach, in addition to the express standards and criteria as detailed
in Article IX, such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem
necessary to implement the purpose of this chapter. The Board may
grant a variance, provided that all of the following findings are made
where relevant in a given case:
(1) There are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or shape, or
exceptional topography, or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property and that the unnecessary hardship is due to
such conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally
created by the provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or
district in which the property is located.
(2) Because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no
possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity
with the provisions of this chapter and that the authorization of a
variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property.
(3) Such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the applicant.
(4) The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of
the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public
welfare.
(5) The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance
that will afford relief and will represent the least modification
possible of the regulation in issue.
B. Special exceptions. Where special exceptions are to be considered as
specified by the Borough Council in this chapter, the Board shall grant
or deny special exceptions pursuant to express standards and criteria
as detailed in Article IX. In granting a special exception, the Board may
attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
§ 245-94 MONACA CODE § 245-95
237:816
expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter.
C. Substantive challenges.
(1) A landowner who on substantive grounds desires to challenge the
validity of this chapter, Zoning Map or any provision thereof which
prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he
has an interest; or persons aggrieved by a use or development
permitted on the land of another by this chapter, Zoning Map or
provision thereof who desires to challenge its validity on
substantive grounds shall submit their challenge to the Board as
governed by the following:
(a) The challenging party shall make a written request to the
Board that it hold a hearing on its challenge. The request shall
contain the reasons for the challenge.
(b) Based upon the testimony presented at the hearing or
hearings, the Board shall determine whether the challenged
ordinance or map is defective, as alleged by the landowner. If a
challenge heard by the Board is found to have merit, the
decision of the Board shall include recommended amendments
to the challenged ordinance which will cure the defects found.
In reaching its decision, the Board shall consider the
amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the
landowner and shall also consider:
[1] The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities,
water supplies, schools and other public service facilities.
[2] If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the
proposal upon regional housing needs and the
effectiveness of the proposal in providing housing units of
a type actually available to and affordable by classes of
persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by the challenged
provisions of the ordinance or map.
[3] The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed
by the site's soils, slopes, wetlands, woodlands,
floodplains, aquifers, natural resources and other natural
features.
[4] The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
wetlands, woodlands, floodplains, natural resources and
natural features, the degree to which these are protected
or destroyed and the tolerance of the resources to
development and to any adverse environmental impacts.
[5] The impact of the proposal on the preservation of
agriculture and other land uses which are essential to
public health and welfare.
§ 245-95 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-95
237:817
(c) The Board shall render its decision within 45 days after the
conclusion of the last hearing.
(d) If the Board fails to act on the landowner's request within the
time limits referred to above, a denial of the request is deemed
to have occurred on the 46th day after the close of the last
hearing.
(e) The Board shall commence its hearings within 60 days after
the request is filed unless the landowner requests or consents
to an extension of time.
(f) Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the
validity of the ordinance and/or map is in question and shall
give the place where and the times when a copy of the request,
including any plans, explanatory material or proposed
amendments, may be examined by the public.
(g) The challenge shall be deemed denied when:
[1] The Board fails to commence the hearing within the time
limit set forth in Subsection C(1)(e); or
[2] The Board falls to act on the request 45 days after the
close of the last hearing on the request, unless the time is
extended by mutual consent by the landowner and the
Board.
[3] Where a validity challenge is sustained by the Board
pursuant to this section or the court acts finally on appeal
from denial of a curative amendment proposal or a validity
challenge, and the proposal or challenge so approved
requires a further application for subdivision or land
development, the developer shall have two years from the
date of such approval to file an application for preliminary
or tentative approval subject to the Monaca Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, as
amended.275 Within the two-year period, no subsequent
change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other
governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any
manner which adversely affects the rights of the applicant
sustained in the validity challenge. Upon the filing of a
preliminary or tentative plan, the provisions of Section
508(4) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code
(Act 247, as amended) shall apply. Where the validity
challenge is approved but does not require further
application under the Monaca Borough Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance, as amended, the developer
shall have one year within which to file for a building
permit. Within the one-year period, no subsequent change
275. Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 245-95 MONACA CODE § 245-95
237:818
§ 245-96. Time limitations.
§ 245-97. Appeals.
Appeals from the determination or decisions of the Board shall be filed and
handled as prescribed by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code
(Act 247, as amended).276
or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other
governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any
manner which adversely affects the rights of the applicant
as granted in the sustained validity challenge. During
these protected periods, the court shall retain or assume
jurisdiction for the purpose of awarding such
supplemental relief as may be necessary.
A. All appeals from the determinations adverse to the landowner or
applicant shall be filed by the landowner or applicant, as the case may
be, within 30 days after notice of the determination is issued, including
but not limited to, determinations by the Zoning Officer, Municipal
Engineer, Borough Council, Borough Planning Commission or any other
duly authorized organization enforcing and/or interpreting land use
regulations.
B. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Board later
than 30 days after an application for development, whether it be
preliminary or final, has been approved by an appropriate municipal
officer, agency or body if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal
or to limit the approval in any manner unless such person alleges and
proves that he has no notice, knowledge or reason to believe that such
approval has been given.
276. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 245-95 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-97
237:819

ARTICLE XIV
Amendments
§ 245-98. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be to allow for amendments, from time
to time, of either this chapter text and/or map as deemed necessary to
accommodate unforeseen change, benefit the public welfare or reflect a
different direction of Borough planning and development goals.
§ 245-99. Zoning amendments. [Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No.
918]
A. Initiation. Borough Council may introduce and/or consider amendments
to this chapter and to the Zoning District Map. In addition, Borough
Council may consider amendments to this chapter and to the Zoning
District Map that are proposed by the Planning Commission or by
petition of any landowner(s) of property in the Borough.
B. Petitions. Petitions for amendments by landowners shall be filed with
the Planning Commission at least 20 days prior to the Planning
Commission meeting at which the petition is to be heard. In the case of
a petition for reclassification of property, the petitioners, upon such
filing, shall submit a legal description of the property proposed to be
rezoned. All petitions shall include a statement justifying the request
and documenting consistence with the Borough's Comprehensive Plan.
The petition shall include the filing fee established from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council.
C. Referral. Any proposed amendment presented to Borough Council
without written findings and recommendations from the Borough
Planning Commission and the Beaver County Planning Commission
shall be referred to those agencies at least 30 days prior to Borough
Council's public hearing. Borough Council shall not hold a public
hearing on such amendments until the required reviews are received or
the expiration of 30 days from the date of referral, whichever comes
first.
D. Mailing of notices. If the proposed amendment involves a change to the
Zoning District Map, notice of the public hearing shall be mailed by the
Borough at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing by first class
mail to the addresses to which real estate tax bills are sent for all real
property located within the area being rezoned, as evidenced by tax
records within the possession of the Borough. The notice shall include
the location, date and time of the public hearing. A good faith effort and
substantial compliance shall satisfy the requirements of this subsection.
This subsection shall not apply when the rezoning constitutes a
comprehensive rezoning.
E. Posting of property. If the proposed amendment involves a change to
the Zoning District Map, notice of the public hearing shall be
§ 245-98 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-99
237:821
§ 245-100. Landowner curative amendment.
conspicuously posted by the Borough at points deemed sufficient by the
Borough along the tract to notify potentially interested citizens at least
seven days prior to the date of the public hearing.
F. Public notice and public hearing. Before voting on enactment of an
amendment, Borough Council shall hold a public hearing thereon,
pursuant to public notice, as defined herein. The public notice shall
include a brief summary of the proposed amendment and reference to
the place where copies of the same may be examined.
G. Readvertisement. If, after any public hearing is held upon a proposed
amendment, the amendment is substantially changed or revised to
include land not previously affected by the amendment, Borough
Council shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, as
defined herein, before proceeding to vote on the amendment.
H. Notice of enactment. Proposed amendments shall not be enacted unless
Borough Council gives notice of the proposed enactment, including the
time and place of the meeting at which passage will be considered and a
reference to the place in the Borough where copies of the proposed
amendment may be examined without charge or obtained for a charge
not greater than the cost thereof. Borough Council shall publish the
proposed amendment once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Borough not more than 60 days nor less than seven days prior to
passage. Publication of the proposed amendment shall include either
the full text thereof or the title and brief summary prepared by the
Borough Solicitor setting forth the provisions in reasonable detail. If the
full text is not included:
(1) A copy thereof shall be provided to the newspaper at the time the
public notice is published; and
(2) An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the
County Law Library.
I. Mediation option. Borough Council may offer the mediation option as an
aid in completing the proceedings authorized by this § 245-99. The
Borough and the mediating parties shall meet the stipulations and
follow the procedures set forth in § 245-93L of this chapter.
J. Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this
chapter shall be forwarded to the Beaver County Planning Commission.
A. A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the
validity of this chapter or the Zoning Map or any provision thereof,
which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he
has an interest, may submit a curative amendment to the Borough
Council with a written request that his challenge and proposed
amendment be heard and decided as provided below:
§ 245-99 MONACA CODE § 245-100
237:822
(1) Where the landowner desires to challenge the validity of this
chapter, his application to the Borough Council, in addition to the
requirements of the written request hereof, shall include the plans
and explanatory materials describing the use or development
proposed by the landowner in lieu of the use or development
permitted by the challenged ordinance or map. Such plans or other
materials shall not be required to meet the standards prescribed
for preliminary, tentative or final approval or for the issuance of a
permit, so long as they provide reasonable notice of the proposed
use or development and a sufficient basis for evaluating the
challenged ordinance or map in light thereof. Also, an application
fee, if prescribed by the Borough Council, shall be submitted with
the application. Nothing herein contained shall preclude the
landowner from first seeking a final approval before submitting his
challenge.
(2) The request by the landowner shall be accompanied by an
amendment or amendments to this chapter to cure the alleged
defects therein. Such amendment or amendments shall be
proposed by the landowner.
(3) The curative amendment and challenge shall be referred to the
Borough Planning Commission and the Beaver County Planning
Commission at least 30 days prior to the public hearing on the
proposed curative amendment to provide both planning agencies
an opportunity to submit their recommendations.
B. Public hearing procedures.
(1) The Borough Council shall commence its hearing within 60 days
after the request is filed, unless the landowner requests or
consents to an extension of time.
(2) Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of
this chapter or the Zoning Map is in question and shall give the
place where and the times when a copy of the request, including
any plans, explanatory material or proposed amendments, may be
examined without charge or obtained for a charge not greater than
the cost thereof. The Borough Council shall publish the proposed
curative amendment once in one newspaper of general circulation
in the Borough not more than 60 days nor less than seven days
prior to the hearing. Publication of the proposed curative
amendment shall include either the full text thereof or the title and
a brief summary, prepared by the Borough Solicitor and setting
forth all the provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is not
included:
(a) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough at the time the public notice is
published.
§ 245-100 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-100
237:823
(b) An attested copy of the proposed curative amendment shall be
filed in the County Law Library or other county office
designated by the County Commissioners.
(3) In the event that substantial changes are made to the curative
amendment, before voting upon enactment, the Borough Council
shall, at least 10 days prior to the enactment, readvertise, in one
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough, a brief summary
setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail together with a
summary of the changes.
(4) The Borough Solicitor shall represent and advise the Borough
Council at the hearing or hearings.
(5) The Borough Council may retain an independent attorney to
present the defense of the challenged chapter or map on its behalf
and to present their witnesses on its behalf.
(6) In addition to the public notice requirements described in
Subsection B(2) above, written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the Zoning Officer and to any person who has made
timely written request for the same. Written notices shall be
delivered by the Borough through certified United States mail. In
addition, written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously
posted on the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the
hearing.
(7) The Borough Council may prescribe reasonable fees through
resolution with respect to the curative amendment hearing. Fees
for said hearings may include notice and advertising costs and
necessary administrative overhead connected with the hearing.
The costs, however, shall not include legal expenses of the Borough
Council, expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical
consultants or expert witness costs.
(8) The hearing or hearings shall be conducted by the Borough
Council.
(9) The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of
record before the Borough Council, and any other person, including
civic or community organizations permitted to appear by the
Borough Council. The Borough Council shall have the power to
require that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter
appearances, in writing, on forms provided by the Borough Council
for that purpose.
(10) The President or acting President of the Borough Council presiding
shall have the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers, including witnesses and documents
requested by the parties.
§ 245-100 MONACA CODE § 245-100
237:824
(11) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
(12) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
(13) The Borough Council shall keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings. The appearance fee for the stenographer shall be
shared equally by the applicant and Borough Council. The cost of
the original transcript shall be paid by the Borough Council or shall
be paid by the person applying for the curative amendment if
requested by such a person, and, in either event, the cost of the
additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting such copy
or copies. In other cases the party requesting the original
transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
(14) The Borough Council shall not communicate, directly or indirectly,
with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue
involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports,
staff memoranda or other materials, except advice from the
Borough Solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to
contest the material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its
surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party
or his representatives unless all parties are given an opportunity to
be present.
C. Based upon the testimony presented at the hearing or hearings, the
Borough Council shall determine whether the challenged chapter or
map is defective, as alleged by the landowner. The Borough Council
shall render a written decision. When the application is contested or
denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon, together with the reasons thereof.
Conclusions based on any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a
reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion
is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found.
D. If the Borough Council has determined that a validity challenge has
merit, it may accept a landowner's curative amendment, with or
without revision, or may adopt an alternative amendment which will
cure the challenged defects. The Borough Council shall consider the
curative amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the
landowner and shall also consider:
(1) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities.
(2) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal
in providing housing units of a type actually available to and
§ 245-100 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-100
237:825
affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by
the challenged provisions of the ordinance or map.
(3) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the
site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers,
natural resources and other natural features.
(4) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and natural
features, the degree to which these are protected or destroyed, the
tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse
environmental impacts.
(5) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and
other land uses which are essential to public health and welfare.
E. The Borough Council shall render its decision within 45 days after the
conclusion of the last hearing. If the Borough Council fails to act on the
landowner's request within the forty-five-day period mentioned above, a
denial of the request is deemed to have occurred on the 46th day after
the close of the last hearing. The challenge shall also be deemed denied
when:
(1) The Borough Council fails to commence the hearing within the
allowed time limits.
(2) The Borough Council notifies the landowner that it will not adopt
the curative amendment.
(3) The Borough Council adopts another curative amendment which is
unacceptable to the landowner.
(4) The Borough Council fails to act on the request 45 days after the
close of the last hearing on the request, unless the time is extended
by mutual consent by the landowner and the Borough.
F. A copy of the final decision of the findings shall be delivered to the
applicant personally or mailed to him no later than the day following its
date. To all other persons who have filed their name and address with
the Borough Council not later than the last day of the hearing, the
Borough Council shall provide, by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the
decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full
decision or findings may be examined.
G. Within 30 days after a curative amendment, whether the landowner's
amendment or a revised amendment proposed by the Borough Council,
has been enacted, a copy of the amendment to this chapter or Map shall
be forwarded to the Beaver County Planning Commission.
H. If the Borough does not accept a landowner's curative amendment
brought in accordance with this section and a court subsequently rules
that the challenge has merit, the court's decision shall not result in a
declaration of invalidity for the entire chapter or Zoning Map, but only
§ 245-100 MONACA CODE § 245-100
237:826
§ 245-101. Municipal curative amendment.
If the Borough Council determines that this chapter, the Zoning Map278 or
portion thereof is substantially invalid, it shall take the following action:
for those provisions which specifically relate to the landowner's
curative amendment and challenge.
I. Where a curative amendment proposal is approved by the grant of a
curative amendment application by the Borough Council or the court
acts finally on appeal from a denial of a curative amendment proposal,
and the proposal so approved requires a further application for
subdivision or land development, the developer shall have two years
from the date of such approval to file an application for preliminary or
tentative approval subject to the Monaca Borough Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance,277 as amended. Within the two-year
period, no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision
or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any manner
which adversely affects the rights of the applicant as granted in the
curative amendment. Upon the filing of the preliminary or tentative
plan, the provisions of Section 508(4) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 (as amended), shall apply. Where
the proposal appended to the curative amendment application is
approved but does not require further application under the Monaca
Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, as amended,
the developer shall have one year within which to file for a building
permit. Within the one-year period, no subsequent change or
amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance or
plan shall be applied in any manner which adversely affects the rights
of the applicant as granted in the curative amendment. During these
protected periods, the court shall retain or assume jurisdiction for the
purpose of awarding such supplemental relief as may be necessary.
A. The Borough Council shall declare by formal action this chapter, the
Zoning Map or portion thereof substantially invalid and propose to
prepare a curative amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30
days following such declaration and proposal, the Borough Council
shall:
(1) By resolution, make specific findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of this chapter, Map or portion thereof which may
include:
(a) References to specific uses which are either not permitted or
not permitted in sufficient quantity.
(b) Reference to a class or use or uses which requires revision.
277. Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
278. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 245-100 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-101
237:827
(c) Reference to the entire ordinance which requires revision.
(2) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to this
chapter to correct the declared invalidity.
B. Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the
Borough shall enact a curative amendment to validate or reaffirm the
validity of its chapter pursuant to the provision required by § 245-99 in
order to cure the declared invalidity of this chapter.
C. Upon the initiation of the procedures as set forth in this section, the
Borough Council shall not be required to entertain or consider any
landowner's curative amendment filed under § 245-100, nor shall the
Zoning Hearing Board be required to give a report as requested under
§ 245-95C. Upon completion of the procedures as set forth in
Subsections A and B of this section, no right to a cure pursuant to the
provisions of § 245-100 or § 245-95C shall, from the date of declaration
and proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis of the substantive
invalidity of the unamended chapter for which there has been a curative
amendment pursuant to this section.
D. The Borough, if it has utilized the procedures as set forth in Subsections
A and B of this section, may not utilize said procedure for a thirty-sixmonth
period following the date of the enactment of a curative
amendment, or reaffirmation of the validity of this chapter pursuant to
Subsection B of this section; provided, however, that if after the date of
declaration and proposal there is a substantially new duty or obligation
imposed upon the Borough by virtue of a change in the statute or by
virtue of a Pennsylvania Appellate Court decision, the Borough may
utilize the provisions of this section to prepare a curative amendment to
its ordinance to fulfill said duty or obligation.
§ 245-101 MONACA CODE § 245-101
237:828
ARTICLE XV
Interpretation; Violations
§ 245-102. Interpretation, purpose and conflict.
The interpretation and application of the provisions of this chapter shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health, safety
and general welfare of the Borough of Monaca. This chapter is not intended
to interfere with, abrogate or annul other regulations, rules or ordinances of
the Borough; provided that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction
upon the use of building premises, upon the height of a building or requires
larger open spaces than are imposed by other such rules, regulations or
ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
§ 245-103. Remedies.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired,
converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is used in
violation of this chapter or other regulation made under authority conferred
hereby, the proper local authorities of the Borough, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent
such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance or use to restrain, correct or abate such violation,
to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land or to prevent
any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
§ 245-104. Violations and penalties.
Any person or corporation who shall violate any of this chapter or fail
to comply with any requirements thereof, or who shall build any building
in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted or approved
thereunder, shall, upon conviction thereof, for each and every violation, be
fined not more than $500, and each day such violation shall be permitted
to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The owner or owners of any
building or premises or part thereof where anything in violation of this
chapter shall be placed or shall exist and any architect, builder, contractor,
agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who
may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall each day
be guilty of a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
as herein provided. Whenever any person or corporation shall have been
officially notified by the Zoning Officer or by service of a summons in a
prosecution or in any other official manner that he is committing a violation
of this chapter, each day that he shall continue such violation after such
notification shall constitute a separate offense punishable in like fine or
penalty. Such fines or penalties shall be collected as the fines or penalties
are now collected by law.
§ 245-102 WATER AND SEWAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM § 245-104
237:829
Appendix
Chapter A252
MANHOLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
§ A252-1. Entry into sewer system.
Borough employees shall not be permitted to enter into any sanitary sewer
system manhole or combination sanitary sewer and stormwater manhole
throughout the Borough except in accordance with the following entry
procedures:
§ A252-2. Lease agreement.
The proper Borough officers are hereby authorized to enter into a lease
agreement with the Rochester Area Joint Sewer Authority, whereby
approved testing, ventilation and self-contained breathing apparatus will be
made available whenever possible for use by Borough employees when said
employees are required to make an entry into contained space.
§ A252-3. Training.
The Borough Street Commissioner is authorized and directed to arrange
for proper instructions and training in entry procedures to be given to all
Borough employees who may from time to time be required to enter into
A. Atmospheric tests must first be made for oxygen content of the air and
for the presence of combustible gases.
B. If harmful atmospheric conditions are detected, mechanically induced
dilution ventilation must be performed before any entry is made and
such must be continued during occupancy of the confined space.
C. The Borough employee entering a manhole must wear a safety line and
safety harness, with the safety line being attended by a second Borough
employee supplied with a self-contained breathing apparatus for use in
event of an emergency.
D. In the event that mechanically induced dilution ventilation before entry
and during occupancy is unable to maintain adequate protection
against harmful atmospheric contaminants, no Borough employee shall
enter or continue to work in a confined space unless he is wearing and
using a self-contained breathing apparatus in good working order, in
addition to the safety line and safety harness, and a second Borough
employee is at all times attending said safety line.
§ 245-104 MONACA CODE § A252-3
A252:830
confined spaces. Said training shall include use of the testing, ventilation
and breathing apparatus and safety procedures involving use of a safety
line and harness. The instruction and training course shall be repeated at
reasonable intervals.
§ A252-4. File of records.
The Borough Street Commissioner shall keep a file record of all atmospheric
tests in confined spaces made by Borough employees, which file shall be
available for review by personnel of the Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ A252-5. Copies of resolution.
Copies of this resolution shall be posted at all times in the Street
Department garage, at the pump house, Water Pollution Control Center,
and in the Borough truck or other equipment used for servicing manholes
throughout the Borough.
Chapter A253
PER CAPITA TAX EXEMPTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 213.
§ A253-1. Repealer.
Resolution No. 5-82 adopted on April 12, 1982, is hereby revoked in toto.
§ A253-2. Exemption criteria.
Person or persons who meet certain criteria must produce strict proof of
wages before hereby being exempt by the following guidelines:
A. Women or men 62 and 65 years old on social security, receiving $3,200
or less per year. All income received from social security, pensions,
interest, business profits, dividends and so forth must be computed in
annual income.
B. A married couple, receiving a total family income of $6,400 or less per
year from all sources.
C. Persons physically incapacitated or on disability pensions, regardless of
age, receiving $3,200 or less from all sources, after allowing $750 for
each dependent.
D. Widows or widowers with an income of $3,200 or less, after allowing
$750 for each dependent.
§ A252-3 PER CAPITA TAX EXEMPTIONS § A253-2
A253:831
§ A253-3. Exemption granted.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Monaca hereby exempts any person
or persons whose total income from all sources is less than $5,000 per
annum from the per capita tax or any portion thereof. Strict proof of wages
is demanded.
Chapter A255
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television — See Ch. 100.
§ A255-1. Authority to grant franchise.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Monaca authorizes the Borough
Council President to execute and the Borough Manager/Secretary to attest
and seal, on behalf of the Borough of Monaca, a cable television franchise
agreement with Adelphia Cable T.V., Inc., a true and correct unsigned copy
of which is attached hereto.279
§ A255-2. Agreement adopted by reference.
Following the signing, attestation and sealing of the agreement by both
parties, a duplicate original counterpart of the agreement shall be
appended to this ordinance and shall be considered to be merged herein
and part hereof as if the contents were more fully set forth at length in this
ordinance.280
E. Veterans receiving disability pensions, provided that the pensions are
the sole sources of income.
F. Persons on active duty with the armed forces, during the first six
months of the tax year.
G. Persons not 18 years of age by the middle of the tax year.
H. Persons who moved from the District before July 1 of the current tax
year.
I. Full-time college or high school students from age 18, provided that
they do not earn over $3,200.
279. Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
280. Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
§ A253-2 MONACA CODE § A255-3
A255:832
§ A255-3. When effective.
The effective date of the agreement shall be the date this ordinance is
ordained, enacted and made effective.
§ A255-4. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this
ordinance shall be deemed to be repealed hereby.
§ A255-5. Statutory authority; severability.
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Pennsylvania law and the authority
given to the franchising authority under the Cable Act of 1992 and the
regulations adopted by the FCC thereunder. If any portion of this ordinance
shall become invalid or unenforceable, such invalidity and/or
unenforceability shall not affect the validity and enforceability of the
remainder of this ordinance and the same shall be interpreted as if the
invalid or unenforceable provision were not a part hereof.
Chapter A256
FEE SCHEDULE
§ A256-1. Fees referenced in specific chapters.
The following is a listing of fees for the Borough of Monaca:
Code Chapter/Section Fee
Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I, Adoption of Code [Added
9-10-1996]
Code of the Borough of Monaca, per
Code
$150
Ch. 18, Board of Health
§ 18-2
Permit application No fee listed
Permit inspections As per fee charged by
Health Officer
[NOTE: No license shall be issued
until the appropriate fees are paid,
and each reinspection shall require
the payment of an additional
inspection fee.]
Ch. 84, Amusement Devices
§ 84-4
§ A255-3 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A256-1
A255:833
Code Chapter/Section Fee
Mechanical, electrical and electronic
amusement devices [Amended
12-14-1999 by Ord. No. 845;
2-10-2004 by Ord. No. 869; 7-9-2013
by Ord. No. 932]
Per year $350
After July 1 $175
Bowling machines, pool tables,
jukeboxes, electronic dart boards, trivia
machines or other similar amusements
as determined by the Borough
[Amended 12-14-1999 by Ord. No.
845; 2-10-2004 by Ord. No. 869;
7-9-2013 by Ord. No. 932]
Per year $35
After July 1 $17.50
§ 84-5, transfer fee $1
Ch. 96, Removal or Demolition of Buildings
§ 96-3, sealing of water or sewer line as
part of permit
$250
§ 96-5, deposit for sealing of water or
sewer lines by property owner
$250
Ch. 105, Carnivals
§ 105-3, license, per day $50
Ch. 120, Fences, Hedges and Walls
§ 120-4, application No fee listed
Ch. 131, Flood Damage Prevention
§ 131-15, application for building
Work up to:
$1,000 $5
$1,001 to $50,000 $5, plus $1 for additional
$1,000 or part thereof
$50,001 to $100,000 $54.50, plus $0.50 for each
additional $1,000 or part
thereof over $50,001
$100,001 and above $70, plus $0.25 for each
additional $1,000 or part
thereof over $100,001
Ch. 140, Fire Insurance
§ 140-19, certificates and bills No fee listed
§ A256-1 MONACA CODE § A256-1
A255:834
Code Chapter/Section Fee
Ch. 161, Peddling and Soliciting
Art. I, Transient Retail Merchants
[Amended 12-9-2008 by Ord. No.
688-B; 10-28-2014 by Ord. No. 937]
§ 161-2, license
Per day $75
Deposit fee for permit cards $50
Ch. 165, Plumbing
§ 165-4
Examination fee $15
License fee $15
Renewal fee $15
Ch. 171, Vacant and Abandoned Property §
171-4B, Registration fee schedule. [Added
10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 945]
Vacant property registration fee schedule
Number of Years Vacant Fee
Less than one $250
1 $500
2 $1,000
3 to 4 $2,000
5 to 9 $3,500
10 $5,000
An additional $500 will be applied for every year of vacancy beyond
10 years.
The fee schedule may be amended by the Monaca Borough Council,
as needed.
Ch. 177, Sewers
Art. I, General Provisions
Sewer rates for residential and
commercial users
See § 177-8
Sewer rates for industrial users See § 177-9
Sewer rates for schools See § 177-10
Sewer rates for other users See § 177-11
Art. II, Sewer Connections and Use
§ 177-23, tap-in fee [Repealed
12-10-2002 by Ord. No. 864]
Fee not listed
Art. III, Wastewater Systems
§ A256-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A256-1
A255:835
Code Chapter/Section Fee
§ 177-40, various fees Actual fees not listed
§ 177-41, wastewater contribution
permit fee
$50
Ch. 184, Solid Waste
Art. I, Storage, Collection and Disposal
§ 184-8, annual charge $91
Ch. 199, Stormwater Management
Art. VI, municipal review fee and plan
administrator review fee
No fee listed
Ch. 205, Streets and Sidewalks
Art. IV, Excavations
§ 205-26, permit/inspection fee No fee listed
§ 205-28, backfilling and restoration
inspection fee
No fee listed
Ch. 210, Subdivision and Land Development
Various fees throughout Not listed
§ 210-33B $0.30 per square foot of
the land area required for
dedication under § 210-33A
Ch. 233, Water
Art. II, Tapping
§ 233-9, tapping fee [Repealed
12-10-2002 by Ord. No. 863]
Fee not listed
§ 233-23, service charge for shutting off
or turning on water
$5
§ 233-25, 3/4-inch stop cock $6
§ 233-35, deposits $150
§ A256-2. Inspection fees. [Added 8-12-2003 by Ord. No. 866]
The fees and/or charges shall be imposed and paid in advance to the
Borough of Monaca by the person or entity requesting or required to
request, by law, regulation or ordinance, an inspection, or by any person or
entity found to be in violation of any prevailing electrical code.
A. Electrical fee schedule.
(1) Rough wire inspection.
(a) One to 25 outlets: $30.
(b) Each additional 25 outlets or fraction thereof: $20.
§ A256-1 MONACA CODE § A256-2
A255:836
(2) Finish wire inspection.
(a) One to 25 outlets: $30.
(b) Each additional 25 outlets or fraction thereof: $20.
(3) Service meter equipment.
(a) Up to 200 AMP: $55.
(b) Two hundred and one to 600 AMP: $80.
(c) Over 600 AMP (per 100 AMP): $15.
(d) Each additional meter: $10.
(4) Single family dwelling, not over 200 AMP (two-trip maximum):
$125.
(5) Single family dwelling, alterations and additions (two-trip
maximum): $95.
(6) Single family dwelling, occupancy safety and repairs (one-trip
maximum): $65.
(7) Range/dryer: $10.
(8) Electric heater/electric hot water: $10.
(9) Garbage disposal/dishwasher: $10.
(10) Residential air condition: $10.
(11) Swimming pools/hot tubs.
(a) Aboveground pools (one-trip maximum): $50.
(b) In-ground pools (two-trip maximum): $125.
(12) Temporary installations: $55.
(13) Heating and cooling transformers, generators, capacitors, electric
furnaces, welders, motors, etc.
(a) One kw, hp or kva: $10.
(b) One point one to 20 kw, hp, kva: $20.
(c) Twenty point one to 40 kw, hp, kva: $40.
(d) Forty point one to 75 kw, hp, kva: $60.
(e) Seventy-five to 100 kw, hp, kva: $75.
(f) Over 100 kva (per kva. hp, etc.): $1.
(14) Electric signs: $35.
§ A256-2 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A256-2
A255:837
(15) Violation inspection fee: $20.
(16) Minimum fee: $55.
(17) Signaling, communications and alarm systems.
(a) One to 10 devices: $45.
(b) Each additional device: $1.
B. Building fee schedule.
(1) Residential.
(a) New construction: $40, plus 0.17 per square foot of GFA IBC
Use Group R-3 (detached one- and two-family dwellings and
multiple family dwellings) townhouses.
(b) Additions: $40, plus 0.17 per square foot of GFA.
(c) Alterations and repairs: 25% of construction cost.
(d) Utility and miscellaneous use groups (sheds, decks, fences,
pools, towers, carports, private garages, etc.): 1.50% of
construction costs.
(e) Minimum fee: $40.
(2) All other use groups (nonresidential).
(a) New construction and additions: $60, plus 0.25 per square foot
of GFA.
(b) Alterations: 2.5% of construction cost.
(c) Utility and miscellaneous use groups (sheds, decks, fences,
pools, towers, concrete slabs, retaining walls, etc.): 2.5% of
construction costs.
(d) Demolition: $50.
(e) Signs: $25, plus $2 per square foot of sign area.
(f) Minimum fee: $60.
(3) “GFA” shall mean the gross floor area defined as the total square
footage of all floor within the perimeter of the outside walls,
including basements, cellars, garages, roofed patios, breezeways,
covered walkways and attics with floor to ceiling height of six feet
six inches or more.
C. Plumbing fee schedule.
(1) Residential.
(a) First five fixtures: $40.
§ A256-2 MONACA CODE § A256-2
A255:838
(b) Each additional fixture: $5.
(c) Sewer (new or replacement): $25.
(d) Water service (new or replacement): $25.
(e) Water heater (new or replacement): $10.
(f) Appliances (washer, dishwasher, disposal, etc.): $7.
(2) Commercial.
(a) First five fixtures: $60.
(b) Each additional fixture: $7.
(c) Sewer (new or replacement): $35.
(d) Water service (new or replacement): $35.
(e) Water heater (new or replacement): $10.
(f) Appliances (washer, dishwasher, disposal, etc.): $10.
(3) Minimum fee: $40.
D. Mechanical fee schedule.
(1) Based in installation costs.
(a) First $1,000 or fraction thereof: $40.
(b) Each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof: $10.
(2) Minimum fee: $40.
E. Zoning. A flat fee of $45 shall be imposed for zoning application. This
fee will cover all reviews and inspections necessary for the completion
of the permit. This will apply to all zoning applications except fence
permits. The fee for review and inspection of fence permits will be $20
per application.
F. Code enforcement. Any person(s) or entity(s) determined to be in
violation of any provision of any code or ordinance of the Borough of
Monaca shall be required to pay a flat fee of $45 per violation which
shall be merited as a cost to defray all inspections and efforts to obtain
compliance with the code and/or ordinance.
G. Plan review.
(1) Building: all use groups. Fee based on square footage of
construction.
(a) Up to and including 10,000 square feet: $0.05 per square foot.
(b) Greater than 10,000 square feet: $0.03 per square foot.
§ A256-2 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A256-2
A255:839
(2) Utility use group: $1.25 per $1,000 of estimated cost of
construction to be provided by a registered design professional,
estimating firm or contractor.
(3) One- and two-family dwelling: $150 per dwelling unit includes
building, plumbing, electric, mechanical and fire protection.
(4) Minimum fee: $75.
(5) When combined with building plan review, the fire, plumbing,
mechanical or electrical plan reviews will be performed for 20% of
the building plan review fee.
H. Fire: all use groups except one- and two-family.
(1) Sprinklers: $40, plus $0.25 per sprinkler head.
(2) Standpipe: $80 each.
(3) Wet, dry, carbon dioxide (up to 100 pounds): $100, plus $0.75 each
additional pound over 100 pounds.
(4) Commercial cooking system (hood, duct, suppression): $300 (per
system).
(5) Fire alarm system: $40, plus $0.25 per device.
(6) Fire detection system: $40, plus $0.25 per device.
(7) Minimum fee: $75.
I. Plumbing: all use groups except one- and two-family.
(1) Each fixture, device or stack (except special devices): $1.25 each.
(2) Special devices: $6.50 each. Includes grease traps, oil separators,
water and sewer service connections, backflow preventers, steam
boilers, sewer pumps, interceptors, etc.
(3) Minimum fee: $50.
J. Mechanical: all use groups except one- and two-family.
(1) Mechanical equipment: $12 each.
(2) Air distribution system (per linear feet): $0.05.
(3) Hydronic piping system (per linear feet): $0.05.
(4) Gas and oil piping system (per linear feet): $0.05.
(5) Flammable and combustible piping system (per linear feet): $0.10.
(6) Minimum fee: $50.
§ A256-2 MONACA CODE § A256-2
A255:840
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
871 3-18-2004 Guaranteed revenue
note
NCM
872 5-10-2004 Uniform construction
codes
Ch. 107
873 Number not used
(7) When combined with building plan review, the fire, plumbing,
mechanical or electrical plan reviews will be performed for 20% of
the building plan review fee.
K. Electrical: all use groups except one- and two-family.
(1) Up to 50 devices* (switches, receptacles, lighting fixtures): $6.
(2) Each 25 additional devices*: $2.
* Each motor or device less than 1 kilowatt or 1 horsepower shall
be included.
(3) Each motor or electrical device 1 to 10 kilowatts or horsepower:
$2.
(4) Each motor or electrical device greater than 10 kilowatts or
horsepower to 45 horsepower or kilowatts: $4.
(5) Each service panel, subpanel or disconnect switch 200 amps or
less: $4.
(6) Each service panel, subpanel or disconnect greater than 200 amps
to 1,000 amps: $10.
(7) Each panel or disconnect greater than 1,000 amps: $15.
(8) Each motor or electrical device greater than 45 horsepower or
kilowatt to 100 horsepower or kilowatts: $10.
(9) Each motor or electrical device greater than 100 horsepower or
kilowatts: $15.
(10) Minimum fee: $50.
§ A256-2 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A255:841
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
874 6-9-2004 Officers and
employees: Borough
Manager amendment
Ch. 35, Art. I
875 9-14-2004 Rental units:
registration of
residential units
Ch. 175, Art. I
876 9-14-2004 Property
maintenance
Superseded by Ord.
No. 944
877 10-12-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 225
878 10-12-2004 Police pension plan
amendment
See Ch. 42
879 11-9-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 225
880 12-28-2004 2005 tax rate NCM
881 2-8-2005 Emergency and
municipal services
tax
Repealed by Ord. No.
902
882 5-10-2005 Workers'
compensation pooled
trust agreement
NCM
883 4-12-2005 Emergency and
municipal services
tax amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
902
884 7-12-2005 Local economic
revitalization tax
assistance
amendment
Ch. 213, Art. V
885 8-16-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 225
886 Number not used
887 12-13-2005 2006 tax rate NCM
888 1-1-2006 Residential
revitalization
program
Ch. 57
889 1-1-2006 Emergency and
municipal services
tax amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
902
890 4-11-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 MONACA CODE § DL-1
A255:842
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
891 9-12-2006 Storage of vehicles:
motor vehicle
nuisances
Ch. 228, Art. II
892 9-12-2006 Rental units
amendment
Ch. 175
893 11-14-2006 Police pension plan
amendment
See Ch. 42
894 11-14-2006 Intergovernmental
agreements: Upper
Beaver Valley Council
of Governments
Ch. 24, Art. III
895 12-12-2006 2007 tax rate NCM
896 2-13-2007 Sewers: wastewater
systems amendment
Ch. 177, Art. III
897 Not adopted
898 Not adopted
899 Not adopted
900 3-13-2007 Fire Department:
insurance
reimbursement
Ch. 16, Art. II
901 12-11-2007 2008 tax rate NCM
901-A 8-14-2007 Stormwater
management
Ch. 199
902 12-19-2007 Local services tax Ch. 213, Art. II
902-A 8-21-2007 General obligation
bond
NCM
903 12-11-2007 Water: rates and
regulations
amendment
Ch. 233, Art. III
904 6-11-2008 Outdoor fuel-burning
appliances
Ch. 137
905 7-9-2008 Street vacation NCM
906 9-9-2008 Street vacation NCM
907 12-9-2008 2009 tax rate NCM
908 12-9-2008 Sewers: general
provisions
amendment
Ch. 177, Art. I
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A255:843
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
688-B 12-9-2008 Peddling and
soliciting: transient
retail merchants
amendment; fee
schedule amendment
Ch. 161, Art I; Ch.
A256
909 8-25-2009 Temporary
intergovernmental
agreement to apply
for Greenhouse Gas
Pilot Grant Program
NCM
910 Not adopted
911 9-8-2009 Vehicles, off-road Ch. 227
912 10-13-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
913 10-13-2009 Sewers: wastewater
systems amendment
Ch. 177, Art. III
914 12-8-2009 2010 tax rate NCM
915 4-13-2010 Guaranteed revenue
note
NCM
916 5-11-2010 Per capita tax
amendment
Ch. 213, Art. III
917 8-24-2010 Water rate increase NCM
918 9-28-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
919 11-9-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 225
920 12-28-2010 2011 tax rate NCM
921-A 1-11-2011 Police pension plan
amendment
See Ch. 42
921 6-14-2011 Sewers: general
provisions
amendment
Ch. 177, Art. I
922 6-28-2011 Curfew amendment Ch. 109
923 Not adopted
924 12-27-2011 2012 tax rate NCM
925 12-27-2011 Water: rates and
regulations
amendment
Ch. 233, Art. III
926 3-27-2012 Neighborhood
Services Officer
Ch. 35, Art. III
927 6-12-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
§ DL-1 MONACA CODE § DL-1
A255:844
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
928 9-11-2012 Smoking Ch. 178
929 10-9-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
930 12-27-2012 Water: rates and
regulations
amendment
Ch. 233, Art. III
931 12-27-2012 2013 tax rate NCM
932 7-9-2013 Amusement devices
amendment; fee
schedule amendment
Ch. 84; Ch. A256
933 7-9-2013 Acquisition of rightof-
way and easement
NCM
934 12-23-2013 2014 tax rate NCM
935 3-11-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
936 4-22-2014 General obligation
note
NCM
937 10-28-2014 Peddling and
soliciting: transient
retail merchants
Ch. 161, Art. I
938 12-9-2014 Storm sewers: MS4
prohibited discharges
Ch. 197
939 11-25-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
940 12-23-2014 2015 tax rate NCM
941 12-23-2014 Water: rates and
regulations
amendment
Ch. 233, Art. III
942 7-14-2015 Street vacation NCM
943 8-11-2015 Floodplain
management
Ch. 131
944 10-27-2015 Property
maintenance
Ch. 169
945 10-27-2014 Vacant and
abandoned property;
fee schedule
amendment
Ch. 171; Ch. A256
946 12-28-2015 Water: rates and
regulations
amendment
Ch. 233, Art. III
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A255:845
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
947 12-28-2015 Sewers: general
provisions
amendment
Ch. 177, Art. I
948 12-28-2015 2016 tax rate NCM
949 8-23-2016 General obligation
bonds
NCM
950 12-27-2016 2017 tax rate NCM
951 12-27-2016 2017 fire tax NCM
952 12-27-2016 Intergovernmental
agreements:
Pennsylvania
Municipal Health
Insurance
Cooperative
Ch. 24, Art. III
953 2-14-2017 Salaries and
compensation: Real
Estate Tax Collector
Ch. 63, Art. III
954 3-28-2017 Police pension plan
amendment
NCM
955 12-12-2017 Tax Levy NCM
956 12-12-2017 Tax Levy NCM
957 1-23-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
958 9-11-2018 Street Vacation NCM
959 10-23-2018 Quality of Life
Ticketing
Ch. 172
960 12-11-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 225
961 12-11-2018 Tax Levy NCM
962 12-11-2018 Tax Levy NCM
963 1-8-2019 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 50
§ DL-1 MONACA CODE § DL-1
A255:846
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
Number
964 8-27-2019 Non-Uniformed
Pension Plan
See Ch. 42 13
965 8-27-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks:
Excavations
Amendment
Ch. 205,
Art. IV
13
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A255:847