Charter
Chapter C
CHARTER
[EDITOR'S NOTE: The McCandless Charter was approved by voters
on November 5, 1974. Dates appearing in parentheses following
a section heading indicate those provisions were subsequently
adopted or amended on the date given.]
C:1

ARTICLE I
NAME AND BOUNDARIES
SECTION 101. NAME AND STATUS.
McCandless Township hereafter shall be a Home Rule Charter Municipality
under the name of the "Town of McCandless". It shall continue as a
municipal corporation under the provisions of this Charter. Any reference
in this Charter to the "Town of McCandless" or to the "Town" shall mean
the municipal corporation previously known as McCandless Township,
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
SECTION 102. TOWN BOUNDARIES.
The boundaries of the Town of McCandless shall be the boundaries of
McCandless Township on the effective date of this Charter, or as lawfully
changed thereafter.
SECTION 103. COUNCILMANIC DISTRICTS.
(a) Number and Boundaries. The Town of McCandless shall be divided into
seven (7) Councilmanic Districts of compact and contiguous areas, as
nearly equal in population as practical.
(b) Initial Councilmanic Districts. The Councilmanic Districts of
McCandless Township on the effective date of this Charter shall remain
in effect for the Town of McCandless thereafter, unless and until
changed pursuant to Section 103(c).
(c) Revision of Councilmanic Districts. Town Council shall review and
revise the boundaries of Councilmanic Districts by ordinance as and
when necessary or appropriate to cause them to comply with Section
103(a) and all other applicable requirements of law, but in any event at
least once very ten (10) years within a reasonable time after the
completion of the United states census for the decade. Whenever Town
Council intends to revise boundaries of Councilmanic Districts, it shall
first establish and appoint a Councilmanic District Commission to
develop a report and recommendations and then cause a public hearing
to be held on the report and recommendations of that Commission.
Each Councilmanic District Commission shall consist of three (3)
residents of the Town, not more than two (2) of whom shall be
registered members of the same political party. The members of a
Councilmanic District Commission shall receive no compensation, but
they shall be reimbursed for the reasonable expenses incurred by them
in the performance of their duties.
SECTION 101 CHARTER SECTION 103
C:3

ARTICLE II
POWERS AND DUTIES
SECTION 201. GENERAL POWERS.
The Town shall have and may exercise all powers and may perform all
functions not denied by the Constitution or laws of the United States, by
the Constitution or laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or by this
Charter. Those powers may be exercised in accordance with the provisions
of this Charter.
SECTION 202. GENERAL MUNICIPAL DUTIES.
(a) Specifications of General Municipal Duties. The Town shall have the
affirmative duty to do each of the following, in addition to the
performance of specific mandated duties provided for in this Charter
and of all other municipal duties from time to time imposed on it by law:
(i) To secure all possible municipal home rule.
(ii) To encourage and enable maximum citizen participation in the
business and affairs of the Town.
(iii) To establish and maintain appropriate procedures for
communicating effectively with Town residents on issues of public
interest and for responding promptly and effectively to inquiries
and complaints of residents.
(iv) To provide municipal services and facilities with the highest degree
of efficiency and economy.
(v) To provide for the health and well-being of its citizens and the
safety of persons and property within the Town.
(vi) To promote the creation and maintenance of public parks, open
space and recreational and leisure time facilities and programs for
residents of all ages, with due consideration for the interests of
neighboring residents.
(vii) To promote the creation and maintenance of adequate regulations
and programs for the preservation and enhancement of a safe,
healthy, peaceful and attractive environment for the Town citizens
and to define and prohibit disorderly or offensive practices within
the limits of the Town.
(viii) To provide for comprehensive, progressive and long-range
planning in all aspects of land use and community development.
(ix) To promote beneficial cooperation with the pertinent school district
and neighboring school districts and with neighboring
governmental units.
SECTION 201 CHARTER SECTION 202
C:5
SECTION 203. CONSTRUCTION.
Any specific and mandatory regulatory or procedural provision of this
Charter shall be construed as exclusive; it shall prohibit any inconsistent
regulation or procedure.
The powers of the Town under this Charter shall be broadly construed in
favor of the Town. The specific mention of particular powers or duties shall
not be interpreted as limiting in any way the general powers conferred
under Section 201 of this Charter or under the Constitution or laws of
Pennsylvania as they now exist or may be amended.
Nothing in this Charter shall limit the discretionary authority of the Town
under Article IX, Section 5 of the Constitution of Pennsylvania with respect
to inter-governmental cooperation in the exercise of any function, power or
responsibility of the Town.
(b) Nature and Exercise of General Municipal Duties. The general
municipal duties identified in Section 202(a) are intended as objectives
to be sought at all times by Town Council and the Town Manager and all
other employees and agents of the Town, directly or indirectly, by
appropriate means. They shall not be deemed to be set forth in any
order of priority. Neither the Town nor any person shall have any legal
liability for damages to any person under the provisions of Section
202(a) in excess of such liability (if any) as would otherwise exist by law
in the absence of those provisions.
SECTION 202 MCCANDLESS CODE SECTION 203
C:6
ARTICLE III
TOWN COUNCIL
SECTION 301. POWERS OF THE TOWN COUNCIL.
Except as is otherwise expressly provided by law or by this Charter, all
powers of the Town shall be vested in Town Council ("Council").
SECTION 302. COMPOSITION OF THE TOWN COUNCIL.
Council shall consist of seven (7) members, elected from the seven (7)
respective Councilmanic Districts of the Town.
SECTION 303. TERMS OF OFFICE OF MEMBERS OF COUNCIL.
The terms of office of all members of Council shall be four (4) years,
beginning on the first Monday of January in the year following their
election. A member of Council who is appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve
the unexpired term of that vacancy.
SECTION 304. ELECTION OF MEMBERS OF COUNCIL.
The members of Council representing odd numbered Councilmanic Districts
shall be elected at the municipal election in November of 1975 and at
the municipal election in November of each fourth year thereafter. The
members of Council representing even numbered Councilmanic Districts
shall be elected at the municipal election in November of 1977 and at the
municipal election in November of each fourth year thereafter.
SECTION 305. QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS OF COUNCIL.
Each member of Council must be a qualified voter of the Town and resident
of the Councilmanic District to be represented by him or her at the time of
election and continuously while serving in that capacity.
SECTION 306. VACANCIES.
(a) Creation of Vacancies. A vacancy in the office of a member of Council
shall occur under the following circumstances:
(i) Death;
(ii) Resignation;
(iii) Conviction of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude;
(iv) Termination of the qualifications required under Section 305;
(v) Absence from three (3) or more regular meetings of Council in
succession, unless excused by the President of Council or by
Council.
SECTION 301 CHARTER SECTION 306
C:7
SECTION 307. PROHIBITIONS.
No member of Council shall hold any other compensated Town office or
Town employment while serving as a member of Council.
SECTION 308. COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES OF MEMBERS OF
COUNCIL.
Each member of Council shall receive compensation at a rate specified
by ordinance from time to time, subject to the provisions of this Section
308 and the applicable restrictions under the Constitution and laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Unless and until changed by an ordinance
adopted after the effective date of this Charter, the rate payable to all
members of Council will be the highest rate established for members of
the Board of Township Commissioners of McCandless Township (within the
limitations imposed on the compensation of members of that Board under
the First Class Township Code) in an ordinance duly adopted by that Board
prior to December 31, 1974. The rate of compensation of a member of
Council shall not be increased thereafter by more than ten percent (10%)
at any one time, and it shall not be increased more than once every four (4)
years. Any such increase in the rate of compensation to be paid to a member
of Council during a specific four (4) year term must be enacted by ordinance
on or before January 1, of the year in which that member of Council is to be
elected for the particular term.
Members of Council shall receive no other compensation, directly or
indirectly, for the performance of their duties as such. They shall receive
no pension, insurance or other form of fringe benefits, except that nothing
in this Section 308 shall preclude the Town from providing accident and
health insurance and liability insurance coverage for members of Council
in the performance of their official duties. Members of Council shall be
reimbursed for the reasonable expenses incurred by them in the
performance of their duties, provided that all such expenses are fully
disclosed and are recorded in appropriate public records.
(b) Filling of Vacancies. If a vacancy shall occur on Council, Council
promptly shall fill such vacancy by appointing a qualified person of the
same political party as the person being replaced. Such vacancy shall
be filled by a majority vote of the remaining members of Council,
regardless of number. If Council shall refuse, fail, neglect or be unable
for any reason whatsoever, to fill such vacancy within forty-five (45)
days after the vacancy occurs, then the Court of Common Pleas shall be
authorized, upon a petition of Council or of any ten (10) electors of the
Town, to fill the vacancy by the appointment of a qualified person of the
same political party as the person being replaced.
SECTION 306 MCCANDLESS CODE SECTION 308
C:8
ARTICLE IV
ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURES OF TOWN COUNCIL
SECTION 401. ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS OF COUNCIL.
(a) Organization Meetings. Council shall meet and organize at an
"Organization Meeting" on the first Monday of January of each even
numbered year, commencing at 8:00 p.m. prevailing time. If the first
Monday of January is a legal holiday, the Organization Meeting shall be
held on the next following business day. At each Organization Meeting,
Council shall elect officers in accordance with Section 409 and shall
consider and act upon such other matters as the members of Council
may deem necessary or appropriate for the organization and operation
thereof, including the establishment of a schedule of Regular Meetings.
In addition, Council may consider and act upon any matter at an
Organization Meeting which would be appropriate for decision at any
Regular Meeting of Council.
(b) Regular Meetings. Council shall hold Regular Meetings, at least once
each month, at such times as may be determined by a schedule from
time to time adopted or revised in advance by resolution of Council at
the Organization Meeting or at any Regular Meeting. At any Regular
Meeting, Council may consider and act upon any matter which properly
may be brought before it in accordance with the provisions of this
Charter and all other applicable provisions of law.
(c) Special Meetings. Council also may hold Special Meetings upon the call
of the President of Council or the Vice President in his absence or the
Town Manager or at least three (3) members of Council, at such times
as may be specified in the notice of the Special Meeting to be sent in
accordance with Section 403. At a Special Meeting, Council may
consider and act upon only those items of business which shall have
been identified as a purpose of that Special Meeting in the notice.
(d) Emergency Meetings. Council also may hold and take action at an
Emergency Meeting at any time, and without complying with the notice
requirements set for in Section 403, upon the call of the President of
Council or the Vice President in his absence or the Town Manager or
any member of Council, provided (i) that such meeting is attended by at
least a majority of all members of Council and (ii) that all of the
members of Council present and voting at such meeting determine that
the holding of such meeting and the taking of emergency action under
Section 505(f) at that time will be necessary to protect or to promote
the public health and safety of the Town.
(e) Adjourned Meetings. Council may adjourn any Organization, Regular or
Special Meeting to a specified time, and reconvene and take action at
that Adjourned Meeting, by a motion duly adopted by Council. Council
may act upon any matter at an Adjourned Meeting which would have
been appropriate for decision at the meeting at which the motion of
adjournment has been approved, except that Council may not
SECTION 401 CHARTER SECTION 401
C:9
SECTION 402. TIME AND PLACE OF MEETINGS.
All official meetings of Council shall be held at the municipal building of
the Town. All official meetings of Council shall be held at times determined
in accordance with the provisions of Section 401 pertaining to the specific
types of meetings and, where required, communicated in the notice to be
sent in accordance with Section 403.
SECTION 403. NOTICE.
SECTION 404. RECORDS.
reconsider or take action at an Adjourned Meeting on any matter which
has been acted on or tabled at the meeting at which such motion of
adjournment has been approved.
(a) Notice of Special Meetings. Special Meetings of Council may be held
only after the delivery of at least seventy-two (72) hours advance
written notice to all members of Council. The notice of a Special
Meeting shall be conspicuously posted at appropriate locations in and
in front of the municipal building and (if reasonably practicable) shall
be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the community in
advance of such meeting. The notice of a Special Meeting shall identify
the subject matter(s) of the business to be considered at such meeting.
The presence of a member of Council at a Special Meeting shall
constitute a waiver of notice by that member.
(b) Notice of Other Official Meetings. Official Meetings of Council of all
types provided for in Section 401 other than a Special Meeting may be
held without the delivery or publication of specific advance notice in
accordance with the provisions of the pertinent sub-paragraphs of
Section 401. The schedule of all Regular Meetings shall be
conspicuously posted at appropriate locations and at reasonable times
and advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town as and
when that schedule is adopted or revised. The schedule of Regular
Meetings also shall be kept conspicuously posted at all times at
appropriate locations in and in front of the municipal building.
(a) Minutes of Council Meetings. Council shall make and preserve minutes
of all official meetings of Council; provided, however, that it may hold
portions of any official meeting in executive session in accordance with
Section 405 without the making of minutes or any other record, and
that it may hold any unofficial or committee meeting at any time
without the making of such minutes or other record. Such minutes shall
be prepared and distributed to all members of Council promptly after
the completion of each meeting, and they shall be open and available
for public inspection and copying, in a convenient place and form at the
municipal building, during normal business hours.
(b) Codification of Ordinances. Council shall provide for the codification,
promptly after the effective date of this Charter, and for the periodic
SECTION 401 MCCANDLESS CODE SECTION 404
C:10
SECTION 405. PUBLIC MEETINGS AND CITIZENS' RIGHT TO BE
HEARD.
Except as is otherwise specifically provided in the following two sentences,
all official meetings of Council shall be open for public attendance. Council
may hold portions of any official meeting in executive session at such times
as may be determined by the affirmative vote of all members of Council
present at a meeting at which a quorum exists, but no final action shall
be taken by Council on any matter in executive session. Council may hold
unofficial or committee meetings or portions thereof in executive session
at any time, upon the approval of a motion by Council or such committee.
Council at all times shall provide reasonable opportunities for interested
citizens and taxpayers of the Town to address Council orally or in writing on
matters of general or special concern. However, this requirement shall not
preclude Council from adopting an enforcing in good faith, under Section
406, reasonable procedures for the orderly conduct of its business.
SECTION 406. OPERATING RULES AND PROCEDURES.
Council shall adopt and enforce such reasonable rules and procedures for
the conduct of its business, consistent with the provisions of this Charter,
as Council may determine to be necessary for the orderly conduct of its
business. All such rules and procedures shall be designed, among other
things, to promote the full and equai participation of all members of Council
in the deliberations of Council and its committees and to provide reasonable
opportunities for all interested citizens and taxpayers of the Town to inform
themselves of, and be heard with respect to, all matters under consideration
by Council.
SECTION 407. QUORUM.
A majority of all members of Council shall constitute a quorum at any official
meeting. Council shall conduct no business in the absence of a quorum.
SECTION 408. VOTING REQUIREMENTS IN GENERAL.
updating at reasonable times thereafter, of the substance of all
ordinances of Council having continuing legal effect. Such codification
shall be kept open and available for public inspection and copying, in
a convenient place and form at the municipal building, during normal
business hours. Copies shall be made available to all interested persons
upon request and payment of a reasonable fee.
(a) Majority Action. The affirmative vote of a majority of the members of
Council present and entitled to vote at a meeting at which a quorum
exists shall constitute the official action of Council, except as is
otherwise provided in Section 306(b) and except in instances in which a
greater vote may be required by law or by the provisions of this Charter
or of the Administrative Code.
SECTION 404 CHARTER SECTION 408
C:11
SECTION 409. OFFICERS.
SECTION 410. ADVISORY COMMITTEES.
Council may appoint advisory committees, consisting of members of Council
and/or other residents of the Town for such purposes as may be specified
by Council. The members of such advisory committees shall serve in that
capacity without compensation, but they shall be reimbursed for the
reasonable expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties.
(b) Roll Call Votes. All final actions on ordinances and resolutions of
Council other than those adopted or rejected by the unanimous vote of
the members of Council present at the meeting shall be taken by roll
call vote in a public meeting, and the vote of each member of Council
shall be entered in the minutes of that meeting.
(a) Election. Council shall elect a President, a Vice President, a Secretary,
and such other officers (if any) as Council may deem appropriate. The
President and Vice President shall be members of Council. The
Secretary need not be a member of Council. All officers may be elected,
removed and/or replaced by resolution of Council at any time.
(b) Duties. The President of Council shall preside over meetings of Council
and shall serve as the principal elected representative of the Town for
formal purposes. The Vice President shall exercise the duties of the
President in the event of the absence or unavailability of the President.
The Secretary shall maintain the official minutes and records of
Council. All officers and other agents of Council shall have such
additional duties and powers, if any, as may from time to time be
delegated to them under this Charter or the Administrative Code or any
other ordinance, resolution or motion of Council duly adopted in
accordance with this Charter.
SECTION 408 MCCANDLESS CODE SECTION 410
C:12
ARTICLE V
ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
SECTION 501. ADMINISTRATIVE CODE.
SECTION 502. PERSONNEL CODE.
Council shall adopt and maintain in effect a Personnel Code as provided for
in Section 1101. The Personnel Code shall be adopted and may be amended
by ordinance of Council, in accordance with the applicable provisions of
Section 505.
SECTION 503. FORMS OF ACTION BY COUNCIL.
Official actions of Council may be taken by ordinance, resolution or simple
motion. All actions described in Section 504 shall be taken by ordinance
adopted under Section 505. All ordinances and resolutions shall be
presented for action by Council in writing, but simple motions may be
made orally. In all other respects, the forms of action by Council shall be
(a) Purposes and Content. Council shall adopt and maintain in effect an
Administrative Code to implement the provisions of this Charter. The
Administrative Code shall provide for the following matters in
reasonable detail and in a manner consistent with the applicable
provisions of this Charter and of the Constitutions and laws of the
United States and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
(i) The organization and procedures of Council;
(ii) The establishment, structures, duties, powers and procedures of
such administrative departments, commissions and authorities as
Council may authorize;
(iii) The duties and powers of the Manager and other employees and
agents of the Town;
(iv) The procedures for the conduct of the business and affairs of the
Town;
(v) Such other matters, if any, as may be deemed by Council to be
appropriate. Council may, at its discretion, from time to time adopt
by ordinance additional and more detailed provisions relating to
the above-listed matters, consistent with the provisions of the
Administrative Code.
(b) Adoption. Council shall adopt the Administrative Code, by ordinance,
within one (1) year following the first Organization Meeting of Council
(under Section 401(a)).
(c) Amendment. The Administrative Code may be amended by an
ordinance adopted under the same procedural requirements as are
specified in Section 505 for its adoption.
SECTION 501 CHARTER SECTION 503
C:13
determined in accordance with Section 406 and other applicable provisions
of this Charter and of the Administrative Code.
SECTION 504. SPECIFIC ACTIONS REQUIRING ADOPTION BY
ORDINANCE.
Any and all actions of Council on the following subjects shall be taken, if at
all, in the form of an ordinance:
(a) The adoption or amendment of an Administrative Code under Section
501;
(b) The adoption or amendment of a Personnel Code under Sections 502
and 1101;
(c) The creation, alteration, or abolition of any department, commission,
authority, office or agency of the Town;
(d) The provision of any fine or other penalty, or the establishment of any
requirement or prohibition for the violation of which a fine or other
penalty may be imposed;
(e) The levying of taxes or assessments;
(f) The granting, renewing, amendment or extension of any franchise or
services to be provided in or for the Town or its citizens or others;
(g) The establishment of rates charged for any utility or other services to
be supplied by the Town;
(h) The borrowing of money;
(i) The conveyance, leasing, exclusive licensing or other disposition or
encumbering of any land or other property of the Town (except for the
sale of land or other property by competitive bidding in a tax sale);
(j) The establishment or changing of a zoning map or zoning district or of
regulations governing any other matter pertaining to zoning uses,
subdivision requirements, site plan approvals, excavation permits and/
or building restrictions (see Article IX);
(k) The undertaking of any substantial contract or other commitment of the
Town with respect to the sharing or coordination of municipal functions
or services with other governmental entities or agencies;
(l) The adoption or amendment of a budget (see Article XII);
(m) The adoption of requirements or procedures for the letting of public
contracts of the Town (see Article XIII);
(n) The authorization of any contract in excess of an amount equivalent to
one-quarter of one percent (1/4%) of the previous year's budget of the
Town, except for those contracts awarded to the lowest responsible
bidder after advertisement in the official Town newspaper once a week
SECTION 503 MCCANDLESS CODE SECTION 504
C:14
SECTION 505. REQUISITES OF ACTION BY ORDINANCE.
for two successive weeks with the first advertisement to be published
not less than ten (10) days prior to the date fixed for the opening of
bids. (Ord. 681. Approved by voters November 4, 1975.)
(o) The adoption of any regulation or procedure pertaining to police and
fire protection (see Article X);
(p) Any increase in the compensation of members of Council;
(q) The amendment or repeal of any ordinance previously adopted.
(a) General Requisites. Each ordinance enacted by Council shall be
numbered and shall contain the date of its enactment. Each ordinance
shall be set forth verbatim in the minutes maintained in accordance
with Section 404(a) of the meeting at which it is finally adopted or,
alternatively, in a separate and official ordinance book maintained for
that purpose. The substance of each ordinance having continuing
significance shall be incorporated in a codification of ordinances as
provided in Section 404(b). Each ordinance shall contain at the
beginning a reasonably descriptive title and summary of its subject
matter.
(b) Prior Notice and Publication. Except as is otherwise provided in
Sections 505(f) and 505(g), a notice of each proposed ordinance to be
considered and acted upon at any official meeting of Council shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town at least
once, not more than ninety (90) days nor less than two (2) days prior to
its final enactment. In addition, except as is otherwise provided in
Section 505(f), such notice shall be conspicuously posted at appropriate
locations in and in front of the municipal building throughout the period
of at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the scheduled time for the
commencement of the meeting of Council at which the proposed
ordinance is adopted. The notice required under the preceding two
sentences need not contain the full text of the proposed ordinance, but
it shall include the title and number of the proposed ordinance and a
brief but sufficient description to provide reasonable notice of the
proposed provisions and effect of that ordinance. Such notice may be
provided in the form of an official agenda for the pertinent meeting of
Council, if it contains the requisite information. A copy of the full
proposed text of each such ordinance shall be made available for
inspection and copying by any interested person during reasonable
business hours in the municipal building, throughout the period of at
least six (6) days prior to its final enactment. The Manager also shall
maintain a mailing list of interested citizens and citizen groups to whom
notices and/or copies of all proposed ordinances (or of designated types
to be specified by them) shall be sent at reasonable times prior to their
final enactment, at the request and at the reasonable expense of such
citizens or groups; provided, however, that the validity of an ordinance
SECTION 504 CHARTER SECTION 505
C:15
shall not be affected in any way by any nonperformance of the
requirements of this sentence.
Posting in front of the municipal building shall not be required provided
a bulletin board for posting shall be maintained within the municipal
building, be available for public inspection at all times and a notice as
to the location of that bulletin board be posted at the front entrance
of the municipal building. (Ord. 681. Approved by voters November 4,
1975.)
(c) Public Hearing. A public hearing at which interested citizens shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appear and to be heard with respect
to a specific proposed ordinance, shall be held not more than sixty (60)
days nor less than six (6) days prior to the enactment of any ordinance
relating to the subject matters identified as items (a), (c), (e), (f), (g), (i),
(j), (l), (n), or (p) under Section 504, except as is otherwise provided in
Sections 505(f) and 505(g), in addition to any other instance in which a
public hearing may be required by the Administrative Code or by any
other applicable provision of law. Notice of the time and place of such
public hearing shall be included in the notice of such proposed
ordinance to be published and posted in accordance with Section
505(b); provided, however, that any hearing on a proposed ordinance
involving a change in the zoning map or area classification of a zoning
district shall be preceded by (i) the publication and posting of notice of
that proposed ordinance and of the hearing thereon, in accordance with
Section 505(b), at least ten (10) days in advance, and (ii) the
conspicuous posting of notices thereof on the perimeter of the property
to be rezoned, with at least one such notice to be posted on each public
street abutting that property, throughout that ten (10) day period, and
(iii) the mailing of notices thereof by registered mail to each owner of
any of the property to be rezoned and of any other property abutting on
or directly across a public street from the property to be rezoned. Any
public hearing may be conducted by any two (2) or more members of
Council designated for that purpose by Council.
(d) Notice and Publication after Enactment. Each ordinance shall be
published, in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town, at least
once as soon as is practicable after its final enactment. The full text of
an ordinance need not be published if the title and a reasonably
complete and descriptive summary notice of its provisions and effective
date are published in accordance with the preceding sentence. In
addition, an appropriate notice (but not necessarily the full text) of each
enacted ordinance shall be conspicuously posted at appropriate
locations in and in front of the municipal building for a period of at least
thirty (30) days as soon as is practicable after its final enactment; and a
copy of the full text shall be made available for inspection and copying
by any interested person during reasonable business hours in the
municipal building, within two (2) business days following its final
enactment and at all times thereafter. The Manager also shall maintain
a mailing list of interested persons or groups to whom copies of all
SECTION 505 MCCANDLESS CODE SECTION 505
C:16
enacted ordinances (or of designated types to be specified by them)
shall be sent at reasonable times following their enactment, at the
request and at the reasonable expense of such persons or groups;
provided, however, that the validity of an ordinance shall not be
affected in any way by any nonperformance of the requirements of this
sentence.
Posting in front of the municipal building shall not be required provided
a bulletin board for posting shall be maintained within the municipal
building, be available for public inspection at all times and a notice as
to the location of that bulletin board be posted at the front entrance
of the municipal building. (Ord. 681. Approved by voters November 4,
1975.)
(e) Effective Date. Except as is otherwise provided in Section 505(f), the
effective date of any ordinance shall be ten (10) days after the notice of
the enactment thereof is published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town under Section 505(d), unless a later effective
date is provided for in the text of that ordinance or is required by the
Administrative Code or any applicable provision of law. In the event that
the publication of any enacted ordinance is prevented or delayed by a
strike or other cause beyond the reasonable control of Council, that
ordinance shall take effect ten (10) days after its enactment, unless a
later effective date is provided for in the text of that ordinance or is
required by the Administrative Code or any applicable provision of law.
(f) Emergency Actions. Any other provision of this Charter or of the
Administrative Code to the contrary notwithstanding, and except as
may be otherwise expressly provided by any other applicable provision
of law, Council shall have the power in its discretion to waive all or any
part of the requirements of Sections 505(b) through 505(e) of this
Charter and any other notice or public hearing requirement or other
procedural requirement of the Administrative Code, if all of the
members of Council present and voting at any properly convened
Emergency Meeting of Council under Section 401(d), reasonably
determined such waiver to be necessary to permit Council to enact an
emergency ordinance to protect or promote the public health and/or
safety. Any emergency ordinance enacted pursuant to the waiver
provisions of the preceding sentence shall be limited in its effectiveness
to a duration of not more than ninety (90) days unless it shall have been
confirmed or amended by another ordinance duly adopted in full
compliance with the provisions of this Charter and of the Administrative
Code and all other applicable provisions of law, and without any such
waiver under this Section 505(f), within that period.
(g) Special Voting Requirements for the Enactment of Certain Types of
Ordinances. The enactment, amendment or repeal of any ordinance of
the following types shall require an affirmative vote of at least four (4)
members of Council at an official meeting of Council, after having been
specifically scheduled for final action at that meeting by a motion duly
adopted at a previous meeting of Council:
SECTION 505 CHARTER SECTION 505
C:17
SECTION 506. REQUISITES OF ACTION BY RESOLUTION.
Each resolution adopted by Council shall be numbered and shall contain
the date of its enactment. Each such resolution shall be set forth verbatim
or briefly summarized in the minutes of the meeting at which it is finally
adopted, in accordance with Section 404(a), but any resolution may be
adopted without compliance with any of the other notice requirements and
other formalities specified for the enactment of an ordinance under the
provisions of this Charter and of the Administrative Code. The full text of all
resolutions shall be set forth in a separate and official resolution book.
SECTION 507. CERTIFICATION OF ORDINANCES AND
RESOLUTIONS.
The Secretary of Council or his designated representative, or the Town
Manager, shall prepare and issue certifications of the enactment, terms and
effectiveness of any one or more of the ordinances and/or resolutions of
Council, upon the reasonable request of any interested persons. Council
may at its discretion impose by ordinance or resolution a reasonable charge
for the furnishing of such certifications.
SECTION 508. PERIODIC REVIEW OF ORDINANCES AND
RESOLUTIONS.
Council shall establish and carry out appropriate procedures for the
periodic review and re-enactment, amendment or repeal of all ordinances
and resolutions of Council.
SECTION 509. PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF ORDINANCES.
Council may provide by ordinance for the imposition of penalties for the
violation of any one or more of the duly enacted and effective ordinances of
Council. Such penalties shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/
or thirty (30) days imprisonment for each violation, except to the extent to
which the imposition of greater penalties shall be authorized by the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania applicable to any class of municipalities
from time to time hereafter. Any ordinance may provide, with respect to
continuing violations, that each day on which a violation exists may be
regarded as a separate offense and may be punishable as such.
(i) The Administrative Code;
(ii) Any increase in the compensation of members of Council; and
(iii) The zoning and other land use matters specified in Section 504(j).
(h) Amendment or Repeal. Any ordinance, including but not limited to any
ordinance in effect on the effective date of this Charter, may be
amended or repealed by, and only by, the adoption of another ordinance
in accordance with the provisions of this Charter and the
Administrative Code and all other applicable provisions of law.
SECTION 505 MCCANDLESS CODE SECTION 509
C:18
ARTICLE VI
INVESTIGATIONS BY COUNCIL
SECTION 601. AUTHORITY TO CONDUCT INVESTIGATIONS.
Council shall have the power, by resolution, to conduct or to authorize the
conducting of any investigation by the entire body or any committee of
Council or by any other employee or agent of the Town, with respect to the
performance of the duties of any member of Council or any employee or
agent of the Town, or with respect to any other proper subject matter in aid
of its legislative functions.
SECTION 602. WITNESSES AND DOCUMENTS.
In connection with any proper investigation authorized under Section 601,
Council may issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of any member of
Council or any employee or agent of the Town at any meeting of Council
or of a committee thereof, and/or the production for inspection and copying
of any records or other documents in the possession of such persons which
constitute public documents of the Town or which otherwise may be
reasonably relevant to the performance of the duties of such person as a
member of Council or as an employee or agent of the Town. Such subpoenas
may be signed and issued by the President or Vice President of Council or
by the Chairman of any committee of Council authorized to conduct the
investigation, and they may be served in any part of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
SECTION 603. OATHS OF WITNESSES.
The President of Council or the presiding officer at any meeting of Council
or of any committee thereof in connection with an investigation duly
authorized in accordance with Section 601 shall have the power to
administer oaths to witnesses.
SECTION 601 CHARTER SECTION 603
C:19

ARTICLE VII
TOWN MANAGER
SECTION 701. APPOINTMENT, QUALIFICATIONS AND
COMPENSATION.
Council shall appoint a Town Manager for an indefinite term and shall
fix the Manager's compensation. The Manager shall be a person of
demonstrated executive and administrative ability, preferably with
experience and training in municipal management. The Manager need not
be a resident of the Town at the time of his appointment, but the Manager
may not reside outside the Town while in office without the approval of
Council.
SECTION 702. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TOWN MANAGER.
The Town Manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of
the Town and as such shall be responsible to Council for the administration
of all Town affairs. The Manager shall have the following powers and duties,
in addition to all others delegated to him under this Charter or by Council:
(1) To appoint, suspend, remove and supervise all Town employees, except
as otherwise provided by law or this Charter;
(2) To collect, account for and deposit into the Town treasury, all taxes,
fees, assessments or charges that are levied or established by the Town
for general or special purposes;
(3) To be and perform the duties of Town Clerk in causing appropriate
records to be made, preserved and certified as required by law or this
Charter, in attesting the execution of all instruments, in maintaining
custody of the municipal corporate seal, and in assisting the Secretary
of Council;
(4) To direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices
and agencies;
(5) To attend all Council meetings and to participate in discussions;
(6) To prepare and submit proposed budgets and capital expenditure
programs to Council;
(7) To submit to Council and to make available to the public a report on the
finances and administrative activities of the Town, at the end of each
fiscal year;
(8) To make such other reports as Council shall require;
(9) To meet with citizens of the Town to accept and review complaints,
suggestions and criticisms and to report them to Council for
appropriate action;
SECTION 701 CHARTER SECTION 702
C:21
SECTION 703. FULL TIME EMPLOYMENT.
The Manager shall devote full time to the office and shall hold no other
appointive or elective public office or other remunerative employment.
SECTION 704. REMOVAL.
Council may remove the Manager at any time, with or without cause, by a
majority vote of all members of Council.
SECTION 705. ABSENCE OR INCAPACITY.
Council may appoint an Acting Manager, in the event of a vacancy or of a
temporary absence or incapacity of the Manager. The Acting Manager shall
have all the powers and duties of the Manager.
(10) To sign contracts, drafts and checks on behalf of the Town, except as is
otherwise provided in this Charter;
(11) To carry out and administer the ordinances, resolutions and policies
established by Council;
(12) To delegate any of these powers and duties to another Town Employee,
with the approval of Council.
SECTION 702 MCCANDLESS CODE SECTION 705
C:22
ARTICLE VIII
TOWN ATTORNEY
SECTION 801. APPOINTMENT, QUALIFICATIONS AND
COMPENSATION.
Council shall appoint a Town Attorney for an indefinite term and shall fix
his compensation. The Attorney shall be an official of the Town; shall be
appointed on a full-time, part-time or retainer basis; shall serve the Town as
needed and required; shall be a person learned in the law with at least five
(5) years experience in active legal practice in Pennsylvania; and shall be
admitted to practice before the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania.
SECTION 802. REMOVAL.
Council may remove the Attorney at any time, with or without cause.
SECTION 803. DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
The Attorney may, from time to time, perform his duties by delegation
of authority to qualified persons acting as his agents. However, such
delegation may be made only with the lmowledge and consent of Council.
SECTION 804. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TOWN ATTORNEY.
The Attorney shall be the chief legal officer of the Town; shall prepare and
may sign on behalf of the Town, legal documents to which the Town or
any agency thereof may be a party; shall commence and prosecute all legal
actions brought by the Town; shall defend all legal actions brought against
the Town; and shall perform every professional act incident to the office
which may be authorized or required by Council. The Town Attorney shall
furnish Council and the committees thereof, opinions, in writing, upon any
question of law which may be submitted by them.
SECTION 805. APPOINTMENT OF SPECIAL COUNSEL.
Whenever the exigencies of the business of the Town require such action,
Council shall have the right to employ special counsel.
SECTION 801 CHARTER SECTION 805
C:23

ARTICLE IX
PLANNING AND LAND USE ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 901. PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT ADMINISTRATOR.
SECTION 902. PLANNING COMMISSION.
(a) Appointment and Compensation. The Town shall have a Planning and
Development Administrator, appointed by the Manager with the
approval of Council, at a rate of compensation consistent with the
qualifications and experience of the individual. The Planning and
Development Administrator shall be a qualified person with training
and experience in municipal planning and related matters.
(b) Duties. The Planning and Development Administrator shall have the
following powers and duties, under the general supervision of the
Manager and Council, and in cooperation with the Planning
Commission:
(i) To draft and propose a long-range and comprehensive master plan
for the Town and modifications thereof, embodying land use
planning and practices consistent with the quality of living desired
by the people of the Town;
(ii) To review and to make recommendations regarding proposed
Council actions implementing the comprehensive plan;
(iii) To prepare information and land use recommendations on capital
projects for implementation in the annual capital budget;
(iv) To assist in the acquisition of available federal, state, and county
funding assistance for capital projects and operating programs;
(v) To assist the Planning Commission, Zoning Hearing Board,
Building Inspector, Bureau of Fire Prevention, Manager and
Council with respect to the applications for zoning changes and
other land use and development matters;
(vi) To assist with the administration of zoning ordinances and other
land use controls;
(vii) To assist in the preparation and administration of a building and
housing code for the Town and amendments thereto;
(viii) To prepare and to recommend land development techniques and
practices beneficial to the people of the Town; and
(ix) To carry out such other duties and functions as may be delegated to
him under this Charter or by Council or the Manager.
(c) Removal. The Planning and Development Administrator may be
removed by the Manager, with the approval of Council, at any time, with
or without cause.
SECTION 901 CHARTER SECTION 902
C:25
SECTION 903. LAND USE AND BUILDING REGULATIONS.
(a) Appointment. The Town shall have a Planning Commission consisting of
such number of qualified electors of the Town as may be determined by
Council, who shall be appointed by Council for such terms as may be
established by Council.
(b) Expenses. The members of the Planning Commission shall serve
without compensation, but they shall be reimbursed for the reasonable
expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
(c) Duties. The Planning Commission shall have the following powers and
duties:
(i) To review and to make recommendations to Council with respect to
all applications for changes in zoning districts, for subdivision
approvals, for site plan approvals, and for excavation permits;
(ii) To review and to make recommendations to Council with respect to
proposals for the enactment or amendment of the master plan or of
ordinances regulating any of the matters referred to in Section
902(c); and
(iii) To provide such other advice and assistance as may be requested at
any time by Council, the Manger, or the Planning and Development
Administrator.
(d) Procedures. Council shall establish procedures for the performance of
the powers and duties of the Planning Commission; provided, however
(i) that all recommendations of the Planning Commission with respect
to the matters referred to in Sections 902(c)(1) and 902(c)(2) shall be
approved by the Planning Commission at public meetings, and (ii) that
the agenda of all public meetings of the Planning Commission shall be
established and made available to interested citizens and taxpayers of
the Town at least six (6) days in advance.
(a) Regulations Required. Council shall adopt, maintain in effect, and
enforce each of the following forms of regulations, containing
provisions consistent with this Charter and with all applicable
provisions of law:
(i) A comprehensive plan and official zoning map;
(ii) A Zoning Ordinance applicable to all land within the Town;
(iii) A Subdivision Ordinance applicable to all subdivisions of land;
(iv) A Site Plan Ordinance applicable to all proposed land uses except
for single family residences;
(v) An Excavation Ordinance applicable to all substantial excavation
and earth moving activities; and
SECTION 902 MCCANDLESS CODE SECTION 903
C:26
SECTION 904. ZONING HEARING BOARD.
The Town shall have a Zoning Hearing Board consisting of such number
of qualified electors of the Town as may be determined by Council who
shall be appointed by Council for such terms as may be established by
Council, subject to the applicable provisions of law. The Zoning Hearing
Board shall have such powers and duties and shall utilize such procedures
as shall be determined by Council, subject to the applicable provisions of
law; provided, however (i) that all hearings held by the Zoning Hearing
Board shall be open to the public, and (ii) that the agenda for all such
hearings shall be established and made available to interested citizens and
taxpayers of the Town at least six (6) days in advance.
(vi) A Building and Housing Code, wnich may consist in whole or in part
of the adoption by reference of a nationally recognized model
building code.
(b) Review by Planning Commission. Council shall not adopt or amend any
ordinance concerning the matters referred to in Section 903(a), and it
shall not approve any application for an approval under any of these,
without having first referred the proposal to the Planning Commission
for its consideration and recommendations.
SECTION 903 CHARTER SECTION 904
C:27

ARTICLE X
PUBLIC SAFETY
SECTION 1001. POLICE DEPARTMENT.
Council shall, subject to this Charter and to the applicable provisions of law:
SECTION 1002. FIRE PREVENTION.
(a) Appoint and fix the number, rank and compensation of the police and
prescribe all necessary rules and regulations for the organization and
operation of the Police Department;
(b) Appoint and fix the compensation of a Chief of Police, who shall be
generally responsible for the supervision of the Police Department, and
shall be subject to removal at any time, with or without cause.
The Police Department shall have all powers and duties granted to it by
Council under the Administrative Code, other applicable ordinances, and the
applicable provisions of law.
(a) Bureau of Fire Prevention. Council shall establish and provide for the
duties of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, which shall consist of a Fire
Marshal and the Fire Chiefs of the various districts of the Town or their
delegated assistants. The Fire Marshal shall be appointed for an
indefinited term by Council after consultation with the Fire Chiefs of
the various districts. The Fire Marshal shall receive such compensation,
if any, as may be determined by Council. He shall be entitled to receive
reimbursement for reasonable expenses properly incurred by him in the
performance of his duties. The Fire Chiefs or their delegated assistants
shall act as inspectors in their respective districts. The Fire Marshal,
assisted by the Fire Chiefs or their delegated assistants, shall be
generally responsible for the administration and enforcement of the
Fire Code. The Fire Marshal and the Fire Chiefs shall have all powers
granted to them by Council pursuant to the terms and provisions of the
Administrative Code and other applicable ordinances.
(b) Independent Fire Companies. Council may provide for the discharge of
the fire prevention and fire protection responsibilities of the Town
through independent fire companies, so long as it determines that such
independent fire companies are willing and able adequately to carry out
those responsibilities. Council may contribute to the purchase,
maintenance, and operation of fire engines and other fire equipment by
such independent fire companies; provided, however, that all such
contributions shall be made subject to the condition that the fire
equipment purchased with Town funds shall revert to the Town in the
event of a dissolution of an independent fire company.
(c) Fire Prevention Code. Council shall adopt, maintain in effect, and
enforce a Fire Prevention Code, which shall include provisions
SECTION 1001 CHARTER SECTION 1002
C:29
concerning the construction, use, maintenance and inspection of
structures as related to fire prevention.
SECTION 1002 MCCANDLESS CODE SECTION 1002
C:30
ARTICLE XI
PERSONNEL
SECTION 1101. PERSONNEL CODE.
Council shall adopt, maintain in effect, and enforce a Personnel Code
providing for the employment, supervision, discipline, discharge (temporary
or permanent), resignation, leave of absence, vacation, sick leave, and other
pertinent matters, subject to the applicable provisions of law.
SECTION 1102. MERIT SYSTEM.
Town employees shall be employed, promoted and compensated on the
basis of their respective abilities, knowledge, skills, demonstrated
performance, and potential for greater responsibility.
SECTION 1103. PERSONNEL BOARD.
SECTION 1104. POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
No Town employee shall hold any public office in the Town or any political
party office in the Town.
(a) Appointment. The Town shall have a Personnel Board, consisting of
such number of qualified electors of the Town as may be determined by
Council, who shall be appointed by Council for such terms as may be
established by Council.
(b) Expenses. The members of the Personnel Board shall serve without
compensation, but they shall be reimbursed for the reasonable
expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
(c) Duties. The Personnel Board shall have the following powers and
duties:
(i) To grant a hearing to any employee, except those in a probationary
status, who has been discharged, suspended or demoted, upon the
request of such employee, subject to this Charter and to the
applicable provisions of law. (Ord. 681. Approved by voters
November 4, 1975.)
(ii) To make investigations in the fulfillment of its proper duties, and to
issue subpoenas; and
(iii) To provide such other advice and assistance as may be requested at
any time by Council or the Manager.
(d) Procedures. Council shall establish procedures for the performance of
the powers and duties of the Personnel Board, consistent with this
Charter and with the applicable provisions of law.
SECTION 1101 CHARTER SECTION 1104
C:31
No employee or elected or appointed official shall solicit assessments,
contributions, or services for any political party or candidate from any Town
employee.
SECTION 1104 MCCANDLESS CODE SECTION 1104
C:32
ARTICLE XII
BUDGET AND FISCAL MATTERS
SECTION 1201. FISCAL YEAR.
The fiscal year of the Town shall begin on the first day of January and end
on the last day of December of each year.
SECTION 1202. SUBMISSION OF BUDGET, CAPITAL PROGRAM
AND BUDGET MESSAGE.
On or before the 15th day of October of each year, the Manager shall
submit to Council a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an
accompanying message which shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms
and in terms of programs. At the same time the Manager shall submit to
Council a proposed program and schedule of capital projects for the next
five (5) fiscal years. The capital program shall include cost estimates, time
schedules and plans for financing such projects. The Budget shall provide a
complete financial plan for all Town funds, activities and capital programs,
together with an explanation of major changes from the prior year. Except
as required by this Charter, the budget shall be in such form as Council
may require. The total proposed expenditures for the fiscal year, including
proposed capital appropriations for that year, shall not exceed the total
amount of revenues anticipated or available for that year.
SECTION 1203. PUBLIC RECORD.
The proposed annual budget, capital program, subsequently adopted
budget, budget message, and all supporting documents shall be public
records and shall be available for public inspection in the municipal building
during reasonable business hours.
SECTION 1204. ADOPTION OF BUDGET.
The annual budget, including proposed capital appropriations for that year,
shall be adopted by ordinance in accordance with Section 505 prior to the
commencement of each year.
SECTION 1205. AMENDMENT OF BUDGET.
Council may amend the budget by ordinance during the fiscal year for which
the budget is adopted; provided, however, that such amendment shall not
result in expenditures exceeding the amount of anticipated or available
revenues determined as of the time of the amendment.
SECTION 1206. APPROPRIATION.
Adoption of the budget and amendments, if any, shall constitute
appropriations and authorizations for the specified expenditures, unless
otherwise provided by Council at that time.
SECTION 1201 CHARTER SECTION 1207
C:33
SECTION 1207. PAYMENT OF FUNDS.
No payment of any funds of the Town shall be made unless it is provided for
in the budget and is approved by Council; provided, however, that payments
of payroll and utility charges and other continuing legal obligations based
on previously approved ordinances or contracts may be made at the
direction of the Manager.
SECTION 1208. INDEPENDENT AUDIT.
Council shall provide for an annual audit of all Town revenues and accounts
by an independent Certified Public Accountant who has no personal
interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the Town. Council may
provide for more frequent audits and special audits as it deems necessary.
The results of the annual audit and a certified financial statement of the
fiscal affairs of the Town shall be presented to Council and published in
a newspaper of general circulation in the Town by April 1st of the year
following the fiscal year audited.
SECTION 1209. FIDELITY BONDS.
Council shall require and provide adequate fidelity bonds, with corporate
sureties, covering employees and agents of the Town having responsibility
for the property or funds of the Town.
SECTION 1210. BORROWING OF FUNDS.
Council may authorize the borrowing of money, for any purpose within
the scope of the powers vested in the Town, including revolving funds for
municipal improvements, and for the issuance of bonds of the Town or other
evidences of indebtedness. Council may pledge the full faith, credit and
resources of the Town for the payment of the obligations created thereby.
SECTION 1211. TEMPORARY INVESTMENT OF FUNDS.
Authorized types of investment for the temporary investment of Town funds
shall be those investments authorized for Townships of the First Class under
the Pennsylvania First Class Township Code. (Amended 11-8-83)
SECTION 1212. TAXATION LIMITS.
Concurrently with the adoption of the annual budget, Council shall by
ordinance set the tax rates and levy on the various subjects of taxation.
Subject to the applicable provisions of law, Council shall determine the
rates of all taxes; provided, however, that the limit of real estate taxes
for general purposes shall not exceed twenty (20) mills per one hundred
dollars ($100.00) of taxable assessed valuation of real property situated in
the Town.
SECTION 1207 MCCANDLESS CODE SECTION 1212
C:34
ARTICLE XIII
CONTRACTS
SECTION 1301. REQUIREMENTS.
All contracts of the Town involving the expenditure of sums in excess of
an amount equivalent to one-quarter of one percent (1/4%) of the previous
year's final budget of the Town shall be in writing and shall be executed
on behalf of the Town by the President of Council or, in his absence, the
Vice President of Council. The President of Council shall also execute all
contracts, regardless of amount, for the purchase, sale, leasing, or use
of real estate. Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, the Manager may
execute contracts on behalf of the Town involving sums of not more than
one-quarter of one percent (1/4%) of the previous year's final budget of
the Town. Authorization for contracts for the construction of public capital
improvements shall be given by ordinance. Any officer required to execute
a written contract must request the Town Attorney to approve the same as
to form.
SECTION 1302. BIDDING PROCEDURE.
Except as provided in Section 1303, all contracts of the Town shall be let
to the lowest responsible bidder under a competitive bidding system, which
shall provide for public advertising and include such other procedures,
conditions, and requirements as are established by Council.
SECTION 1303. EXCEPTIONS TO COMPETITIVE BIDDING.
Competitive bidding shall not be required under this Charter for:
(a) Labor or services rendered by any Town Officer or employee;
(b) Labor, material, supplies or services furnished by one Town department
to another Town department;
(c) Contracts for labor, material, supplies, or services, the annual cost of
which shall aggregate less than one-quarter of one percent (1/4%) of
the previous year's final budget;
(d) Upon the unanimous approval of all members of Council, contracts for
labor, material, supplies, or services, the annual cost of which shall
aggregate more than one-quarter of one percent (1/4%) of the previous
year's final budget, but less than one percent (1%) thereof;
(e) Contracts relating to the acquisition or use of real property;
(f) Contracts for labor, materials, supplies, or services of a kind which
Council reasonably determines to be available from only one vendor;
(g) Contracts for professional or unique services;
(h) Contracts for emergency repair of public works or equipment; and
SECTION 1301 CHARTER SECTION 1303
C:35
SECTION 1304. MAXIMUM TERM OF CERTAIN CONTRACTS.
The term of a contract for the purchase of supplies shall not exceed two (2)
years, unless Council determines that such supplies are not obtainable at a
reasonable cost without a longer term contract.
SECTION 1305. EMINENT DOMAIN.
The Town shall have not authority to grant to others, by franchise, contract,
or otherwise, its power and right of eminent domain.
SECTION 1306. ADVERSE INTEREST.
Any elected or appointed official or employee of the Town who has a
substantial financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the
Town, shall make known that interest to Council and shall refrain from
voting on or recommending that contract. Anyone who willfully violates this
requirement shall be guilty of malfeasance and shall forfeit his office or
position. Violation of this section with the express or implied knowledge of
the party contracting with the Town shall render the contract voidable by
Council.
SECTION 1307. BONDING REQUIREMENTS.
Subject to the applicable provisions of law, Council shall require any person
having an improvement contract with the Town to give a sufficient bond,
with corporate surety, or other adequate security, to guarantee the faithful
performance of the contract and the full payment for all labor and materials.
(i) Contracts with other governmental entities, authorities, agencies, or
political subdivisions.
SECTION 1303 MCCANDLESS CODE SECTION 1307
C:36
ARTICLE XIV
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
SECTION 1401. GENERAL AUTHORITY.
SECTION 1402. COMMENCEMENT OF INITIATIVE OR
REFERENDUM PROCEEDINGS.
(a) Initiative. Any citizen or taxpayer of the Town may propose an
ordinance to Council by an initiative petition. If Council fails to adopt
the proposed ordinance without any change in substance, the ordinance
shall be placed on the ballot at a general or primary election, as
provided in Section 1406(b), for adoption or rejection by the electors of
the Town. The right of initiative shall not extend to the budget or capital
program or to any ordinance relating to the appropriation of money,
levying of taxes, fixing of tax rates, salaries of Town employees, or
zoning. A proposed initiative ordinance shall be limited to a single
subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title. An ordinance on the
same subject may not be initiated until two (2) years after the final
disposition, including any failure to comply with the requirements of
this Article XIV, of a previous initiative petition on that subject.
(b) Referendum. Any citizen or taxpayer of the Town may propose, by
petition, the repeal of any adopted ordinance. If Council fails to repeal
the ordinance in response to that petition, the ordinance shall be placed
on the ballot at a general or primary election, as provided in Section
1406(b), for affirmation or repeal by the electors of the Town. The right
to petition for repeal shall not extend to the budget or capital program
or to any ordinance relating to the appropriation of money, levying of
taxes, fixing of tax rates, salaries of Town employees, or zoning. Nor
may the appeal of any ordinance impair any then existing contract
obligation of the Town.
(a) Procedure. Any five (5) citizens or taxpayers of the Town may
commence initiative or referendum proceedings by filing with the
Manager an affidavit stating that they are the petitioners' committee,
their names and addresses, and the address to which all notices to the
committee are to be sent. The affidavit also shall include the full text of
the proposed ordinance or cite the ordinance sought to be repealed.
The petitioners' committee shall be responsible for circulating the
petitions and filing them in proper form. An affidavit to commence a
referendum proceeding must be filed within fifteen (15) days after the
publication of the ordinance sought to be repealed. Within five (5) days
after the affidavit of a petitioners' committee is filed, the Manager shall
issue the appropriate petition blanks to the committee.
(b) Time for Filing of Petitions. An initiative or referendum petition must be
filed within forty-five (45) days after the issuance of the blank petition
forms to the petitioners' committee.
SECTION 1401 CHARTER SECTION 1403
C:37
SECTION 1403. PETITIONS.
SECTION 1404. CERTIFICATION BY MANAGER.
Within twenty (20) days after the petition is filed, the Manager shall certify
as to its sufficiency, specifying any deficiency in detail and shall send a copy
of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail.
SECTION 1405. SUSPENSION OF ORDINANCE IN THE EVENT OF
REFERENDUM PETITION.
When a referendum petition is filed with the Manager, the effectiveness of
the ordinance sought to be repealed shall be suspended until:
SECTION 1406. ACTION ON PETITIONS.
(a) Number of Signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be
signed by at least eight hundred (800) qualified electors of the Town.
(b) Form and Content. Each signature on a petition must be legibly
executed in ink or indelible pencil and must be followed by the date of
the signature and the address of of the person signing. The full text of
the ordinance proposed or sought to be repealed must be contained
within or attached to the petition throughout its circulation.
(c) Affidavit. Each page of the petition shall have attached to it when it is
filed an affidavit of a member of the petitioners' committee, stating that
he or she personally circulated that petition, and knows all of the
signatures on that page to be the signatures of persons whom he or she
believes to be qualified electors of the Town, and that each signer had
an opportunity to read the full text attached before signing the petition.
(a) The final determination of the insufficiency of the petition;
(b) The petitioners' committee withdraws the petition;
(c) The Council repeals the ordinance; or
(d) The certification of the election results.
(a) Action by Council. When an initiative or referendum petition has been
finally determined sufficient, the Council promptly shall consider the
proposed initiative ordinance in the same manner as other ordinances,
or reconsider the ordinance cited in the referendum petition by voting
its repeal. If the Council fails to adopt the proposed initiative ordinance
without any change in substance within sixty (60) days or fails to repeal
the ordinance cited in the referendum petition within thirty (30) days
after the date the petition is determined and certified by the Manager to
be sufficient, it shall submit the matter to the electors of the Town.
(b) Submission to the Voters. The vote of the electors of the Town on the
proposed or cited ordinance shall be held at the next available general
or primary election after final Council action. Copies of the proposed or
SECTION 1403 MCCANDLESS CODE SECTION 1406
C:38
SECTION 1407. RESULTS OF ELECTION.
cited ordinance shall be available to the public at the municipal building
during reasonable business hours at least ten (10) days before the
scheduled election and at the polls on election day.
(c) Withdrawal of Petitions. An initiative or referendum petition may be
withdrawn at any time, subject to the applicable provisions of the
election laws, by a written request signed by a majority of the members
of the petitioners' committee.
(a) Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on the question
vote in favor of the proposed initiative ordinance, the ordinance shall be
considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall
be treated in all respects as if it had been duly adopted by Council. If
conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one
receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail.
(b) Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on the
question vote in favor of repeal of the ordinance cited in the referendum
petition, the ordinance shall be considered repealed upon certification
of the election results. Council shall not enact for a period of two (2)
years any ordinance of like substance as that repealed by referendum.
SECTION 1406 CHARTER SECTION 1407
C:39

ARTICLE XV
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 1501. CHARTER AMENDMENTS.
This Charter may be amended in accordance with the applicable provisions
of law.
SECTION 1502. SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this Charter is determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, that provision will be deemed to
be severable, and all other provisions of this Charter shall be given full force
and effect.
SECTION 1501 CHARTER SECTION 1502
C:41

ARTICLE XVI
TRANSITION
SECTION 1601. ADOPTION AND EFFECTIVE DATE OF CHARTER.
SECTION 1602. STATUS OF ELECTED OFFICIALS.
SECTION 1603. STATUS OF APPOINTED PERSONNEL.
The Township Manager, Township Solicitor, Police Chief and all other
appointed employees and agents of McCandless Township serving as such
on the effective date of this Charter shall continue in the same capacities
unless or until replaced or otherwise removed under the applicable
provisions of this Charter. Members of the Planning Commission, Zoning
Hearing Board, Sanitary Authority and all other commissions, boards and
authorities of McCandless Township serving as such on the effective date
of this Charter shall remain in the same capacities until the expiration of
their respective terms of appointment, if any, or until replaced or otherwise
removed under the applicable provisions of this Charter or of law.
SECTION 1604. STATUS OF PRIOR ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS,
TAXES AND OTHER ACTIONS.
The 1975 budget and all ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, taxes,
assessments, fines or penalties and other official actions of McCandless
Township in effect on the effective date of this Charter and not inconsistent
(a) Election to Adopt Charter. This Charter shall be submitted to the
electors of McCandless Township for approval or disapproval at the
general election to be held in November of 1974.
(b) Effective Date. This Charter, if adopted, shall take effect on January 1,
1975, for all purposes, except as is otherwise specifically provided in
this Charter.
(a) Township Commissioners. All members of the Board of Commissioners
of McCandless Township whose terms of office have not expired prior to
the effective date of this Charter shall continue in office as members of
Council and shall represent their respective Councilmanic Districts
until the expiration of their respective terms. Vacancies occurring on
Council after the effective date of this Charter shall be filed as provided
in Section 306.
(b) Township Treasurer and Tax Collector. The elected Township Treasurer
and Tax Collector of McCandless Township in office on the effective
date of this Charter shall continue in office as such until the expiration
of the term of election of that official. Thereafter his powers and duties
shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. Any
vacancy occurring in that office after the effective date of this Charter
shall not be filled.
SECTION 1601 CHARTER SECTION 1604
C:43
with this Charter, shall remain in effect until they expire by their terms or
are amended or repealed under the applicable provisions of this Charter.
SECTION 1605. EMPLOYEE RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES.
Nothing in this Charter shall impair any right vested in any employee of
McCandless Township on the effective date of this Charter.
SECTION 1606. STATUS OF OTHER TOWNSHIP OBLIGATIONS.
Nothing in this Charter shall impair any contract, liability or other
obligation of McCandless Township existing on the effective date of this
Charter, whether absolute or conditional, and whether accrued or inchoate.
SECTION 1607. STATUS OF TOWNSHIP PROPERTY, RIGHTS AND
LITIGATION.
The Town of McCandless shall be the successor in interest to McCandless
Township in all respects and shall continue to own, possess, exercise,
control and enjoy, as the case may be, all of the property, rights and
privileges of McCandless Township as of the effective date of this Charter.
All rights of action, suits and prosecutions pending or to be instituted to
enforce any right or penalty accruing, or to punish any offense committed,
prior to the effective date of this Charter, shall continue with the same force
and effect thereafter.
SECTION 1608. FIRST ORGANIZATION MEETING OF COUNCIL.
The first Organization Meeting of Council under this Charter shall be held at
the municipal building on the first Monday of January in 1975, commencing
at 8:00 p.m.
SECTION 1604 MCCANDLESS CODE SECTION 1608
C:44
Part 1 - Administrative
Article 101
CODIFIED ORDINANCES
 101.01. Adoption; component codes; file copy.
 101.02. Effective date; repeal of prior ordinances.
Ten days after the notice of enactment of this Adopting Ordinance is
published, all provisions of the Codified Ordinances of The Town of
McCandless, 1976, shall be in full force and effect, and all prior ordinances
or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with any provision of the
Codified Ordinances are hereby repealed, except as specifically saved from
repeal in Section 101.03.
 101.03. Saving certain ordinances from repeal.
The repeal provided for in Section 101.02 shall not affect:
(a) The ordinances of The Town of McCandless, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania, of a general and permanent nature, as recompiled,
revised, codified and renumbered in the component units listed in
subsection (b) are hereby approved, ordained and enacted as the
Codified Ordinances of The Town of McCandless, 1976.
(b) The Codified Ordinances of The Town of McCandless, 1976, shall
consist of the following codes or parts:
Part 1 - Administrative
Part 3 - Business Regulation and Taxation Code
Part 5 - Traffic Code
Part 7 - General Offenses Code
Part 9 - Streets, Utilities and Public Services Code
Part 11 - Health and Sanitation Code
Part 13 - Planning and Zoning Code
Part 15 - Fire Prevention Code
Part 17 - Building Code
(c) One copy of the Codified Ordinances containing each component code
or part as listed above shall be filed with the original copy of this
ordinance and deemed a part hereof.
(a) Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the
effective date of this Adopting Ordinance;
SECTION 1608 CHARTER  101.03
C:45
 101.04. Amendments and supplements.
The Codified Ordinances of The Town of McCandless, 1976, may be
amended or supplemented as provided by law. When any amendment or
supplement is adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Town
Council to make the same a part thereof, such amendment or supplement
shall be incorporated in and deemed a part of the Codified Ordinances,
so that a reference to the Codified Ordinances shall be understood and
construed to include both the Codified Ordinances of The Town of
McCandless, 1976, and any and all such amendments and supplements.
 101.05. Form of amendment or supplement.
(b) Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money by or to the Town, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds, or
any evidence of the Town's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation
assumed by the Town;
(c) Any administrative ordinance or resolution of the Town not in conflict or
inconsistent with the provisions of these Codified Ordinances;
(d) Any right, license, privilege or franchise conferred by any ordinance or
resolution of the Town on any person or corporation;
(e) Any ordinance establishing, naming, relocating or vacating any street
or public way;
(f) Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes, assessments or charges;
(g) Any ordinance providing for positions, duties, vacations, sick leave,
term leave pay or compensation;
(h) Any ordinance establishing or changing the boundaries of the Town;
(i) Any prosecution, suit or other proceeding pending, or any judgment
rendered prior to the effective date of this Adopting Ordinance.
(a) All amendments and supplements enacted as a part of the Codified
Ordinances shall be integrated therewith by following the form of
arrangement and plan of the original Codified Ordinances as follows.
Each part shall be subdivided into titles, articles and sections
respectively. The numbering of all sections, except the penalty sections,
shall be consecutive within each article commencing with the first
section of Article 101, which shall be numbered 101.01; the first digit
"1" signifying Part 1, the two digits "01" before the decimal signifying
the article within the part, and the two digits "01" after the decimal
signifying the first section in Article 101 of the part. Penalty sections
shall be numbered "99" and shall be the last section within an article.
(b) Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, the failure to classify or properly
number any ordinance section amending the Codified Ordinances shall
not invalidate the provisions of any such sections.
 101.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  101.06
C:46
 101.06. How known and cited.
The Codified Ordinances of The Town of McCandless, 1976, including any
amendments or supplements, shall be known and referred to as the
"Codified Ordinances". Sections of the Codified Ordinances may be referred
to and cited in the form "Section __________" as may be applicable and
appropriate to any section.
 101.07. Secretary's master copy; public record.
 101.08. Interpretation.
In the construction of the Codified Ordinances the following rules shall
control, except those inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Town
Council as disclosed in a particular provision, section or part:
(a) The Secretary of the Town Council, in addition to the book-form copy to
be attached hereto pursuant to Section 101.01(c), shall keep one
master copy in book form and, in connection therewith or attached
thereto in such form and manner as he may determine to be most easily
available for ready reference, one copy of all amendments and
supplements bearing such code, title, article or section designation as
may be proper. If in doubt as to such designation, the Town Secretary
shall be guided by the advice of the Town Attorney.
(b) The Secretary's master copy shall be a public record, but it shall not be
his duty or responsibility to furnish extra copies of any material in the
master copy.
(a) Calendar - computation of time. The terms "month" and "year" mean the
calendar month or year. The time expressed in days within which an act
is to be done or a period is to expire shall be computed by excluding the
first and including the last day, except if the last be Sunday it shall be
excluded. If time is expressed in hours the whole of Sunday shall be
excluded.
(b) Conjunctions. "And" includes "or" and "or" includes "and", if the sense
so requires.
(c) Council. The term "Council" or "Town Council" means the legislative
body of the Town.
(d) County. The word "County" means Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
(e) Gender. Words importuning the masculine shall extend and be applied
to the feminine and neuter genders.
(f) General rule. Except as otherwise provided in this section, words and
phrases shall be construed according to the common usage of language.
However, technical words and phrases and such others as may have
acquired a special meaning in the law, shall be construed according to
such technical or special meaning.
 101.06 CHARTER  101.08
C:47
Whenever, in the Codified Ordinances, authority is given to an officer or
an act is required to be performed, such authority may be exercised and
such act may be performed, at the instance of such officer, by a deputy
or subordinate unless contrary to law or to the clear intent of any such
particular provision.
(g) Number. Words in the plural include the singular and words in the
singular include the plural number.
(h) Owner. The word "owner", when applied to property, includes any part
owner, joint owner or tenant-in-common of the whole or any part of such
property.
(i) Person. The word "person" shall extend to and be applied to
associations, clubs, corporations, firms and partnerships, as well as to
individuals.
(j) Premises. The word "premises", when used as applicable to property,
extends to and includes land and buildings.
(k) Public authority. The term "public authority" extends to and includes
the Board of Education, the Town, the County, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the United States of America and any duly authorized
public official.
(l) Property. The word "property" includes real and personal, and any
mixed and lesser estates or interests therein. The words "personal
property" include every kind of property except real property. The
words "real property" include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
(m) Reasonable time. In all cases where provisions is made for an act to be
done or notice to be given within a reasonable time, it shall be deemed
to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt
performance of such act or giving of such notice.
(n) State and Commonwealth. The words "State" and "Commonwealth"
mean the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(o) Street and road. The words "street" and "road" include avenues, alleys,
courts, boulevards, lanes, roads, streets and other public ways and
squares in the Town.
(p) Tenant or occupant. The words "tenant" or "occupant", as applied to a
building or land, shall extend and be applied to any person holding a
written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or any part of, a
building or land, alone or with others.
(q) Tenses. The use of any verb in the present tense includes the future
tense.
(r) Town or municipality. The words "Town" or "Municipality" mean the
Town of McCandless, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
 101.08 MCCANDLESS CODE  101.08
C:48
 101.09. Separability.
Each section and each part of each section of the Codified Ordinances is
hereby declared to be an independent section or part of a section and,
notwithstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby
declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any such section or
part of a section, or any provision thereof, or the application to any person
or circumstances, is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or parts
of sections and the application of such provision to any other person or
circumstances, other than those as to which it is held invalid, shall not be
affected thereby, and it is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that
the Codified Ordinances would have been adopted independently of such
section, sections or parts of a section so held to be invalid.
 101.10. Enactment procedure; legal publication.
This Adopting Ordinance shall be enacted, and legal advertisement
effective, in conformity with the provisions of the Charter and State law.
 101.99. General penalty.
Whenever, in the Codified Ordinances or in any ordinance of the Town, any
act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or
whenever in the Codified Ordinances or in any ordinance the doing of any
act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where
no specific penalty is otherwise provided therefor, the violator of any such
provision or any ordinance shall be fined not more than $300 and costs and,
in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned not more than 30 days.
Article 103
OFFICIAL STANDARDS
(Reserved)
Article 105
WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
 105.01. Map of wards and election districts. [Ord. 1422, passed
11-26-2012]
The seven wards of the Town and the election districts in each ward shall
be as shown on a map of the Town bearing the date of November 26, 2012,
whereby the ward boundaries are delineated in orange and the election
district boundaries within the wards are delineated by color and where the
wards are numbered 1 through 7 and the election districts are numbered
1 through 3 within each ward with the exception of Ward 7 which has four
(s) Town Manager. The term "Town Manager" or "Manager" means the
chief administrative officer of the Town.
 101.08 CHARTER  105.01
C:49
election districts numbered accordingly. The map is attached to original
Ordinance 1422, passed November 26, 2012.
 105.02. Display of map in Town Hall. [Ord. 1422, passed
11-26-2012]
A copy of the map showing the new wards and election districts shall be
prominently displayed in the Town Hall for inspection by any interested
persons during normal business hours.
 105.03. Effective date. [Ord. 1422, passed 11-26-2012]
The seven wards of the Town of McCandless and the election districts in
those wards approved by this article shall become effective for the 2013
municipal primary election and subsequent elections thereto.
Article 113
TITLE AND PURPOSE
 113.01. Title. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
The provisions of this Title Three of the Codified Ordinances shall be known
and may be cited as the McCandless Administrative Code.
 113.02. Purpose. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
The purpose of this Administrative Code is to establish legislative and
administrative procedures, define the responsibilities of Town officials and
to establish fiscal controls all in accord with the Town Charter.
Article 115
TOWN COUNCIL
 115.01. Powers and composition. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
All legal powers of the Town shall be vested in the Town Council, consisting
of seven members elected from seven Councilmanic Districts for terms of
four years beginning the first Monday in January following their election.
The President of Council shall preside at meetings and shall perform
ceremonial duties of the Town's principal elected official. The Vice President
shall act as President for any purpose whenever the later is absent or
incapacitated.
 115.02. Qualifications of members. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
Each member of Council must be a qualified voter in the district to be
represented at the time of election and continuously throughout his term of
office.
 105.01 MCCANDLESS CODE  115.03
C:50
 115.03. Vacancies. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
A vacancy shall occur upon a member's death, resignation, conviction of
a felony or crime of moral turpitude, failure to maintain his qualifications
or absence from three successive meetings of Council without having been
excused by the President or by Council. The remaining members of Council
shall select by majority vote and appoint a qualified replacement from the
same political party. If a vacancy exists for 45 days, Council or any 10
electors may petition the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County to
appoint a qualified replacement from the same political party.
 115.04. Compensation. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
Compensation for each member shall be specified by ordinance, may not be
increased more than 10% at a time nor more often than every four years
and the ordinance must be enacted prior to the year in which that member
was last elected. Members of Council shall receive no other compensation
nor fringe benefits except liability and accident and health insurance while
in the performance of their duties. Members of Council may not hold any
other compensated Town office or Town employment.
 115.05. Meetings. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
(a) A meeting may be an organization, regular, special, emergency or
adjourned meeting. All meetings, except emergency, must be held in the
Town Hall. All meetings are conducted in accordance with Robert's
Rules of Order.
(b) The organization meeting shall be held at 8:00 p.m. on the first Monday
in January of even numbered years (or on Tuesday, January 2, if the first
Monday is January 1.) At that meeting Council shall elect a President, a
Vice President, a Secretary and an Assistant Secretary. The President
and Vice President shall be members of Council. All officers shall be
elected to serve a two-year term but they may be removed and/or
replaced by Council at any time. At the organization meeting, the
President shall appoint such committees as he deems appropriate. At
the organization meeting Council may consider and act upon any
matter which would be appropriate for decision at any regular meeting
of Council.
(c) Regular meetings shall be held at least once a month as per a schedule
to be adopted at the organization meeting by resolution.
(d) Special meetings may be called by the President, the Town Manager or
any three members of Council. Written notice must be given to each
member, advertised and posted on the bulletin board 72 hours in
advance of the meeting time. Only the business stated in the notice of a
special meeting may be conducted at that meeting. The presence of a
member of Council at a special meeting shall constitute a waiver of
notice by that member.
 115.03 CHARTER  115.05
C:51
 115.06. Meeting procedures. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
Four members constitute the quorum necessary to conduct business. The
affirmative vote of a majority of the members present shall constitute
official action except for Class A ordinances.
The vote on ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by roll call and
recorded in the minutes unless the vote is unanimous.
Minutes shall be kept of all meetings of Council and all meeting of
Councilmanic committees. Such minutes shall be distributed to Council
members.
 115.07. Investigations. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
Council may by resolution conduct or authorize any committee, employee
or agent of the Town to conduct an investigation of the performance of
any member of Council, employee or agent of the Town. Council may also
investigate any other proper subject matter in aid of its legislative function.
Council may issue subpoenas to compel attendance of any member of
Council or any employee or agent of the Town and/or production of records
or documents in the possession of such persons which constitute public
documents of the Town or which otherwise may be reasonably relevant to
the performance of the duties of such person as a member of Council or as
an employee or agent of the Town. The presiding officer of the investigating
unit shall have the power to administer oaths. Council shall be guided in all
such procedures by the advice of the Town Attorney.
 115.08. Indemnification policy. [Ord. 1191, passed 10-27-1997]
(e) An emergency meeting may be called by any member of Council or the
Town Manager without notice. If all members present agree emergency
action is necessary to protect or promote the public health and safety of
the Town and if the meeting is attended by at least a majority of all
members of Council, Council may take emergency action. Emergency
legislation is valid for a maximum of 90 days.
(a) To protect the members of the Town Council and certain key employees
from liability in the performance of their duties, indemnification and
liability insurance shall be provided by the Town. The amounts and
limits of said insurance shall be determined annually.
(b) Each member of Town Council shall be indemnified against expenses
including attorney's fees, judgments, fines and amounts paid in
settlement actually and reasonably incurred by him or her in
connection with any adverse action by reason of the fact that he or she
is or was a member of Town Council, if the member of Town Council
acted in good faith and in a manner he or she reasonably believed to be
in the best interests of the Town and, with respect to any criminal action
or proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe his or her conduct
was unlawful. The termination of any action, suit or proceeding by
 115.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  115.08
C:52
judgement, order, settlement, conviction or upon a plea of nolo
contendere or its equivalent shall not, of itself, create a presumption
that the member of Town Council did not act in good faith and in a
manner which he or she reasonably believed to be in the best interests
of the Town and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had
reasonable cause to believe that his or her conduct was unlawful.
(c) Expenses incurred in defending a civil or criminal action suit or
proceeding against a member of Council shall be paid by the Town in
advance of the final disposition of such action, suit or proceeding as
authorized by the Town Council in a specific case upon the
determination of the Town Council that the member of Town Council
acted in good faith and in manner he or she reasonably believed to be in
the best interests of the Town, and with respect to any criminal action
or proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe that his or her
conduct was unlawful.
(d) To the extent that the member of Town Council has been successful on
the merits or otherwise in defense of any adverse action, he or she shall
be indemnified against expenses, including attorney's fees, actually and
reasonably incurred by him or her in connection therewith as of right.
In all other instances, indemnification shall be made by the Town only
as authorized in a specific case upon a determination that the
indemnification of the member of Town Council is proper in the
circumstances because he or she has met the applicable standard of
conduct set forth above. Such determination shall be made by the Town
Council by a majority vote of a quorum consisting of members of
Council who are not parties of the adverse action or, if such a quorum is
not obtainable or if a disinterested quorum of the Town Council so
directs, by an independent legal counsel in a written opinion.
(e) Key employees of the Town of McCandless, hereinafter identified as the
Manager, Assistant Manager, the Police Chief, the Public Works
Superintendent, the Planning and Land Use Administrator, the Building
Inspector and the Fire Marshal, shall be indemnified for said expenses,
etc. stated in subsection (b) hereof in a specific case upon a
determination that the indemnification of said key employee is proper
in the circumstances because he or she has met the applicable standard
of conduct set forth in subsection (b) hereof. Such determination shall
be made by the Town Council by a majority vote of a quorum consisting
of members of Council who are not parties to the adverse action or, if
such a quorum is not obtainable or if a disinterested quorum of the
Town Council so directs, by an independent legal counsel in a written
opinion.
(f) The indemnification provided by this section shall not be deemed
exclusive of any other rights to which those seeking indemnification
may be entitled by any contract or as a matter of law.
 115.08 CHARTER  115.08
C:53
Article 117
LEGISLATIVE PROCESSES
 117.01. Excluded powers. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
Council may exercise all powers and perform all functions not denied by
higher authority. In those areas covered by Federal, State or County law, the
Town may not enact legislation contrary to, in limitation of or enlargement
of the higher authority's legislation. Future State law will supersede the
Town ordinances in the case of conflict. Council may not legislate on the
following subjects.
 117.02. Classes of legislation. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
Official action by Council may be taken by ordinance, resolution or simple
motion. A simple motion is made orally and is adequate to record a decision
on a question of only current import. A resolution is presented in writing,
is usually drafted by the Town Attorney and, if adopted, is permanently
recorded in the Resolution Book. An ordinance must be drafted by the Town
Attorney and presented in written form. It usually requires prior notice,
may require a public hearing and must be advertised and entered into the
Ordinance Book after enactment.
(g) The indemnification shall continue as to such person who has ceased to
be a member of Town Council or key employee and shall inure to the
benefit of the heirs, executors and administrators of such person.
(a) Filing and collection of municipal tax claims or liens and the sale of real
or personal property in satisfaction thereof;
(b) Procedure in the exercise of the powers of eminent domain and the
assessment of damages and benefits for property taken, injured or
destroyed;
(c) Boundary changes of municipalities;
(d) Regulation of public schools;
(e) Registration of electors and conduct of elections;
(f) Fixing of subjects of taxation;
(g) Fixing of rates of non-property or personal taxes levied upon nonresidents;
(h) Assessment of real or personal property and persons for taxation
purposes;
(i) Defining or providing for the punishment of any felony or misdemeanor;
(j) Municipal planning under the provisions of Act 247, Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
 115.08 MCCANDLESS CODE  117.03
C:54
 117.03. Class A ordinances. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
Class A Ordinances concern the following:
 117.04. Class B ordinances. [Ord. 681, approved by voters
11-4-1975]
Class B Ordinances concern the following subjects:
 117.05. Class C ordinances. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
Class C Ordinances concern the following subjects:
(a) Administrative Code;
(b) Compensation of Council members;
(c) Zoning matters of any kind; and
(d) The establishment or changing of regulations pertaining to subdivision
requirements, site plan approvals, excavation permits and/or building
restrictions.
(a) Levying of taxes or assessments;
(b) Adoption or amendment of the budget;
(c) Change in any department, commission, authority, office or agency of
the Town;
(d) Franchises;
(e) Charges for any services to be furnished to the Town;
(f) Conveyance leasing, exclusive licensing or disposition of any land or
other property of the Town; and
(g) Contract authorizations in excess of 1/4% of the previous year's budget.
(a) Personnel Code;
(b) Borrowing of money;
(c) Establishment of a fine or penalty;
(d) Commitment to share or coordinate municipal functions or services
with other government entities;
(e) Procedures for awarding contracts;
(f) Police and Fire Protection;
(g) Amendment or repeal of any existing ordinance not concerned with
Class A or Class B subjects; and
(h) Any other matter requiring action by ordinance.
 117.03 CHARTER  117.06
C:55
 117.06. Class A ordinance procedure. [Ord. 1127, passed
8-22-1994]
The date for enactment of the proposed ordinance must be established by
motion at a previous meeting.
A public hearing is required six to 60 days prior to the enactment of the
ordinance.
Notice of public hearing on any zoning matter shall be published once each
week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Town. The first publication shall be not more than 30 days and the second
publication shall be not less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
Hearings on other matters shall be advertised in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town not more than 90 days nor less than two days prior
to the hearing. In each instance, the notice of the hearing shall also be
posted on the Town bulletin board.
Rezoning hearings also require mailed notice to property owners (abutting
and across the street as well as that to be rezoned) and posting of the
property to be rezoned.
The property perimeter should be posted to that portion of the perimeter
abutting public streets.
Four affirmative votes are required for enactment.
 117.07. Class B ordinance procedure. [Ord. 678, passed
6-23-1975]
A public hearing is required six to 60 days prior to the proposed enactment.
Notice of the public hearing must be given five days in advance by
advertising and by posting of the bulletin board.
A majority vote of those present is required for enactment.
 117.08. Class C ordinance procedure. [Ord. 678, passed
6-23-1975]
Notice of the proposed ordinance must be advertised and posted on the
bulletin board.
A majority vote of those present is required for enactment.
 117.09. Resolutions: numbering, signing. [Ord. 678, passed
6-23-1975]
Each adopted resolution shall be numbered in sequence restarting with
number one each calendar year, shall carry the date of adoption, shall be
signed by the President of Council whose signature shall be witnessed by
the Secretary and shall be inserted in the Resolution Book.
 117.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  117.10
C:56
 117.10. Ordinances: numbering, signing, posting. [Ord. 678,
passed 6-23-1975]
Each enacted ordinance shall be numbered in a continuous sequence, shall
carry the date of enactment, shall be signed by the President of Council
whose signature shall be witnessed by the Secretary and shall be inserted in
the Ordinance Book. A copy shall be posted promptly on the bulletin board
for a period of at least 30 days and a copy or a reasonably complete and
descriptive summary shall be advertised promptly.
 117.11. Effective date. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
The effective date of an ordinance is 10 days after advertisement or 10
days after enactment if advertisement fails to appear for reasons beyond
Council's control.
 117.12. Codification. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
Codification of all ordinances with continuing legal effect shall be prepared
and updated periodically. All ordinances should be reviewed whenever the
codification is updated and revision or repeal of certain ordinances
accomplished where needed.
Article 119
CITIZEN PARTICIPATION
 119.01. Council meetings. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
Council shall provide on the agenda for comments and suggestions from
those in the audience and shall encourage the use of this opportunity to
the maximum extent consistent with the orderly conduct of the business at
hand.
 119.02. Committee meetings. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
The committee chairmen shall permit and encourage comments from the
audience to the extent consistent with the orderly conduct of the business
at hand.
 119.03. Bulletin board. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
The Town Manager shall maintain the bulletin board in a current condition.
Posted thereon shall be a schedule of meetings of all Town bodies, currently
proposed legislation, recently enacted legislation and all other matters of
general interest to the citizens. This bulletin board shall be accessible at all
times.
 117.10 CHARTER  119.04
C:57
 119.04. Access to public documents. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
The Town Manager shall provide during normal business hours to any
citizen access to any public documents for the purpose of perusal or
copying. Copies of public documents (certified if requested) shall be
provided at a reasonable fee.
 119.05. Requests and complaints. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
The Town Manager shall have the responsibility of seeing that any request
or complaint received by any Town employee during his duty hours is
answered courteously and as completely and correctly as is practical.
Citizens should report any instance where a non-cooperative answer has
been received to the Town Manager.
Article 121
ADMINISTRATION
 121.01. Town Manager. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975; Ord. 705,
passed 10-25-1976]
Council shall appoint a qualified person as Manager and fix his
compensation. The appointment can be terminated at any time with or
without cause. The Manager shall hold no political office or other
remunerative employment. The Manager shall have sole authority to direct
his subordinates and all requests of Council shall be directed to him or to
the Assistant Manager or to the Police Chief.
 121.02. Manager's responsibilities. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
The Manager is the chief administrative officer and his responsibilities
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(a) To determine the number of employees necessary and the form of
organization desirable to provide the services mandated by law or by
Council;
(b) To employ and supervise all Town employees, except for regular full
time police officers, and to discipline and/or terminate such employees
where desirable;
(c) To collect all monies due to the Town with the exception of taxes on real
property collected by the present treasurer;
(d) To prepare all budgets and to control all expenditures. Each invoice
must be certified as proper prior to processing for payment;
(e) To maintain appropriate records and submit required reports, including
a year end report on finances and administration;
 119.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  121.02
C:58
 121.03. Assistant Manager. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975; Ord.
705, passed 10-25-1976]
The Manager may appoint a qualified person as Assistant Manager and fix
his compensation. The Appointment can be terminated at any time with or
without cause. These actions require concurrence of Council. The Assistant
Manager shall have those responsibilities delegated to him. In the absence
of the Manager, the Assistant Manager shall act as Manager with all the
powers of the position.
 121.04. Police Department. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
Council shall:
 121.05. Chief of Police. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975; Ord. 705,
passed 10-25-1976]
The Chief of Police is responsible for the enforcement of law, prevention of
crime, and the protection of life and property. The Chief is also responsible
for the administration of the department, which responsibility includes, but
is not limited to, the following:
(f) To accept and act upon citizens complaints and suggestions, and where
deemed necessary, to report same to Council;
(g) To administer the policies established by Council;
(h) To attend meetings of Council and Councilmanic committees and to
contribute to the discussion.
(i) To perform such other duties as may be assigned; and
(j) To delegate to subordinates his responsibilities to the extent that he
considers proper and efficient.
(a) Appoint and fix the number, rank and compensation of the police and
prescribe all necessary rules and regulations for the organization and
operation of the Police Department; and
(b) Appoint and fix the compensation of a Chief of Police who shall be
generally responsible for the supervision of the Police Department.
(a) Organization and scheduling;
(b) Training and evaluation of personnel;
(c) Supervision of school guards, radio operators and police secretary;
(d) Maintenance of proper records and submission of required reports;
(e) Conformance with administrative policies established by Council and
the Manager;
(f) Cooperation with other law enforcement agencies; and
 121.02 CHARTER  121.05
C:59
 121.06. Public Works Superintendent. [Ord. 678, passed
6-23-1975]
The Public Works Superintendent's responsibilities include, but are not
limited to, the following:
 121.07. Building Inspector. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
The Building Inspector's responsibilities include but are not limited to, the
following:
 121.08. Earned Income Tax Collector. [Ord. 678, passed
6-23-1975]
The Earned Income Tax Collector is responsible for:
(g) Control of departmental expenses.
(a) Accomplishment of road maintenance and other related tasks in a
proper and economical manner;
(b) Supervision and training of all public works employees;
(c) Maintenance of equipment;
(d) Control of departmental expenses;
(e) Maintenance of proper records and submission of required reports; and
(f) Contact with citizens.
(a) Issuance of building and grading permits upon proper request;
(b) Duties of the Zoning Officer in the enforcement of the Zoning
Ordinance;
(c) Enforcement of subdivision, land use development, zoning, building and
other codes or ordinances;
(d) Inspection of all construction other than that done by higher levels of
government to the extent necessary to insure compliance with
applicable codes and ordinances;
(e) Assistance to the Zoning Hearing Board;
(f) Issuance of occupancy permits; and
(g) Collection of permit fees.
(a) Collection of Earned Income Tax for the Town and the School District;
(b) Collection of delinquent Earned Income Tax;
(c) Custody of Earned Income Tax monies and transfer of same to the Town
and to the School District; and
 121.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  121.08
C:60
 121.09. Treasurer. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
The present Treasurer is an elected official operating under the First Class
Township Code. His responsibilities include:
 121.10. Finance Officer. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
The Finance Officer shall have the responsibility of administrative control
over the investment of temporary surplus funds which may exist in any
Town accounts.
When the position of the Town Treasurer becomes vacant, the Finance
Officer will assume the responsibilities and dutes of the Treasurer, under
the direction and control of the Town Manager.
 121.11. Town Attorney. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
Council shall appoint and fix the compensation of the Town Attorney who
must have five years legal practice in Pennsylvania and be admitted to
practice before the Pennsylvania Supreme Court. This may or may not be a
full-time job. The appointment can be terminated any time, with or without
cause.
 121.12. Attorney's responsibilities. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
The powers and duties of the Town Attorney shall include, but are not
necessarily limited to, the following:
 121.13. Planning and Development Administrator. [Ord. 678,
passed 6-23-1975]
(d) Maintenance of proper records and submission of required reports.
(a) Collection of real estate, amusement and mechanical devices tax;
(b) Custody of Town funds, and
(c) Signature on Town checks to conform with properly authenticated
vouchers.
(a) Commencement or prosecution of legal actions brought by the Town;
(b) Defense of legal actions brought against the Town, its agents,
employees or members of Council;
(c) Preparation of contracts and other legal documents;
(d) Preparation of ordinances;
(e) Preparation and/or review of resolutions; and
(f) Attendance and legal guidance at Council meetings and Councilmanic
committee meetings.
 121.08 CHARTER  121.13
C:61
 121.14. Fire Marshal. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975; Ord. 705,
passed 10-25-1976; Ord. 847, passed 7-19-1982]
(a) Appointment and compensation. The Town shall have a Planning and
Development Administrator, appointed by the Manager with the
approval of Council, at a rate of compensation consistent with the
qualifications and experience of the individual. The Planning and
Development Administrator shall be a qualified person with training
and experience in municipal planning and related matters.
(b) Duties. The Planning and Development Administrator shall have the
following powers and duties, under the general supervision of the
Manager and Council, and in cooperation with the Planning
Commission:
(1) To draft and propose a long-range and comprehensive master plan
for the Town and modifications thereof, embodying land use
planning and practices consistent with the quality of living desired
by the people of the Town;
(2) To review and to make recommendations regarding proposed
Council actions implementing the comprehensive plan;
(3) To prepare information and land use recommendations on capital
projects for implementation in the annual capital budget;
(4) To assist in the acquisition of available Federal, State, and County
funding assistance for capital projects and operating programs;
(5) To assist the Planning Commission, Zoning Hearing Board,
Building Inspector, Bureau of Fire Prevention, Manager and
Council with respect to the applications for zoning changes and
other land use and development matters;
(6) To assist with the administration of zoning ordinances and other
land use controls;
(7) To assist in the preparation and administration of a building and
housing code for the Town and amendments thereto;
(8) To prepare and to recommend land development techniques and
practices beneficial to the people of the Town;
(9) To carry out such other duties and functions as may be delegated to
him under the Charter or by Council or the Manager; and
(10) Administration of contracts with firm serving as Planning and
Development Consultant.
(c) Removal. The Planning and Development Administrator may be
removed by the Manager, with the approval of Council, at any time, with
or without cause.
 121.13 MCCANDLESS CODE  121.14
C:62
Article 123
AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Editor's Note: The Town of McCandless has authorized joint creation
of various authorities by ordinance, pursuant to the Municipality
Authorities Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382), as follows:
(a) North Allegheny Joint Authority by Ordinance 16 adopted October 7,
1949, for public school building purposes.
(b) McCandless Township Sanitary Authority by Ordinance 110 adopted
December 14, 1955, for sewer and treatment systems purposes.
(a) The Fire Marshal shall be responsible for the fire inspections of all
buildings except residential. The public portions of apartments and
dormitories (such as stairwells, corridors, garages, etc.) are not
excepted.
This inspection shall include readiness of fire extinguishers and
sprinkler systems as well as other proper concerns. This inspection
shall be made at least once every calendar year with the buildings
considered to be higher risk being inspected more often. A report of
each inspection shall be prepared.
The Fire Marshal shall work closely with the volunteer fire company
and use their assistance whenever practical.
(b) The Fire Marshal shall have no power or authority to direct, take
charge, dispatch equipment and manpower or issue orders at the scene
of any emergency, fire or disaster in the Town. These powers shall
remain the responsibility of the fire companies of the Town.
The Fire Marshal shall have no authority in any of the internal affairs of
the fire companies.
The Fire Marshal shall investigate, or cause to be investigated, every
fire or explosion occurring within the jurisdiction that is of a suspicious
nature or which involves the loss of life or serious injury or causes
destruction or damage to property. Such investigation shall be initiated
immediately upon the occurrence of such fire or explosion; and if it
appears that such an occurrence is of a suspicious nature, the Fire
Marshal shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence and
in order to preserve any physical evidence relating to the cause or
origin of such fire or explosion, take means to prevent access by any
person or persons to such buildings, structure or premises until such
evidence has been properly processed. The Fire Marshal shall notify
such persons designated by law to pursue investigations into such
matters and shall further cooperate with such authorities in the
collection of evidence and prosecution of the case and shall pursue the
investigation to its conclusion.
 121.14 CHARTER  121.14
C:63
(c) McCandless - Franklin Park Ambulance Authority by Ordinance 707
adopted December 13, 1976, as amended by Ordinance 714 adopted
February 7, 1977, and Ordinance 749 adopted October 23, 1978, for public
ambulance service purposes.
(d) Northland Public Library Authority by Ordinance 712 adopted February
7, 1977, for free public library service purposes.
(e) McCandless Township Industrial Development Authority by Resolution
8 of 1969 adopted October 27, 1969; changed to McCandless Industrial
Development Authority on October 4, 1979, by amending the Articles of
Incorporation of such Authority.
 123.01. Planning Commission membership. [Ord. 678, passed
6-23-1975]
Council shall appoint seven qualified electors of the Town to serve
overlapping four-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled promptly as they
occur. A member may be removed for cause but may request a hearing
before Council prior to removal. No members may be paid.
 123.02. Planning Commission functions. [Ord. 678, passed
6-23-1975]
Planning Commission functions include:
 123.03. Zoning Hearing Board membership. [Ord. 678, passed
6-23-1975]
Council shall appoint three qualified electors of the Town to serve
overlapping three-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled promptly as they
occur. A member may be removed for cause but may request a hearing
before Council prior to removal. Members may receive compensation as
established by Council. Members of the Board shall hold no other office in
the Town, except that no more than one member of the Board may also be a
member of the Planning Commission.
(a) Review of request from land developers;
(b) Recommendations to Council concerning approval of such requests;
(c) Recommendations concerning preparation of and changes in codes
and/or ordinances affecting land use;
(d) Recommendations concerning preparation of and changes in the
comprehensive plan or an official map;
(e) Recommendations to the Zoning Hearing Board upon request, and
(f) Recommendations on other matters covered by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
 121.14 MCCANDLESS CODE  123.04
C:64
 123.04. Zoning Hearing Board functions. [Ord. 678, passed
6-23-1975]
Zoning Hearing Board functions as prescribed by the Pennsylvania
Municipal Planning Code include holding hearings on the following:
 123.05. Personnel Board membership. [Ord. 678, passed
6-23-1975]
Council shall appoint three qualified electors of the Town to serve
overlapping three-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled promptly as they
occur. A member may be removed for cause but has a right to a hearing
prior to removal. No member may be paid.
 123.06. Personnel Board functions.1
 123.07. Police Pension Committee.2
 123.08. Sanitary Authority Board. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
Council shall appoint five qualified electors to serve overlapping five-year
terms on the Sanitary Authority Board. Members may receive compensation
from the Authority's funds at rates fixed by Council. Vacancies shall be filled
promptly as they occur.
 123.09. Development Authority Board. [Ord. 678, passed
6-23-1975]
To serve on the Development Authority Board, Council shall appoint one
qualified elector from each of the following five municipalities: McCandless,
Pine, Marshall, Franklin Park and Bradford Woods, to overlapping five-year
terms. Appointees must be recommended by the governing body of the
municipality they are to represent.
(a) Requests for variances from the Zoning Ordinance;
(b) Requests for special exceptions;
(c) Appeals from actions of the Zoning Officer, and
(d) Challenges to the validity of the Zoning Ordinance or map. The Zoning
Hearing Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with Town ordinances but shall be bound by and
shall follow any procedures, notice requirements and any other
mandated requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code. With the approval of Council, the Zoning Hearing Board may
employ legal counsel other than the Town Attorney in any cases where
Council might be in an adversary position as to any decision or finding
made by the Zoning Hearing Board.
1. Editor's Note: This section was repealed 3-6-1978 by Ord. No. 734. See now  137.04.
2. Editor's Note: This section was repealed 10-25-1976 by Ord. No. 705.
 123.04 CHARTER  123.09
C:65
Article 125
FISCAL PROCEDURES
 125.01. Fiscal year. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
The fiscal year shall be the calendar year.
 125.02. Budget submission and approval. [Ord. 678, passed
6-23-1975; Ord. 705, passed 10-25-1976]
 125.03. Operating budget. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
The operating budget shall include all special funds and accounts and shall
be in the general form prescribed for First Class Townships. It shall include
repetitive items such as police cars. It shall not exceed anticipated or
available revenues. It shall be accompanied by an explanation both in fiscal
terms and in terms of programs with special references to changes from the
current year.
 125.04. Capital improvement budget. [Ord. 678, passed
6-23-1975]
The Capital Improvement Budget shall include proposed expenditures for:
 125.05. Deposit of taxes and other incoming money. [Ord. 678,
passed 6-23-1975]
Taxes and other incoming moneys shall be deposited in the bank reasonably
promptly.
(a) The Manager shall submit in early October an operating budget for the
next year and a capital improvement budget for the next five years.
Council shall approve all budgets before the start of the fiscal year.
(b) The Manager is responsible for budget control. He shall notify Council
promptly whenever present and anticipated obligations under any
budget item indicate an overrun that is both greater than $5,000 and
greater than 10% of the amount budgeted. Council may either take
immediate action to reduce the anticipated expenditure so as to be
consistent with the budget item or to amend the budget.
(a) Purchase of land;
(b) Construction or extension of buildings;
(c) Construction of new roads and drainage facilities, and
(d) Purchase of major equipment.
The budget shall indicate proposed spending by year and the proposed
funding.
 123.09 MCCANDLESS CODE  125.06
C:66
 125.06. Expenditures. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
Payment of bills shall be by check after approval of the list of bills by
Council.
 125.07. Bonds. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
Council shall require and provide bonds in such amounts as they deelll
proper for the Manager, Assistant Manager, Earned Income Tax Collector,
Treasurer and the Town Attorney.
 125.08. Surplus funds. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975; Amended by
referendum authorized by Ord. 869, adopted 11-8-1983]
Surplus funds shall be invested in United States Treasury notes or bills,
insured certificates of deposit or insured savings accounts.
 125.09. Reimbursement of expenses. [Ord. 678, passed
6-23-1975]
Reimbursement shall be made for travel and other proper expenses
incurred on Town business. Approval by Council is required prior to
reimbursement.
 125.10. Audit. [Ord. 678, passed 6-23-1975]
Council shall provide for an annual audit of all Town revenues and accounts
by an independent Certified Public Accountant who has no personal
interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the Town. Council may
provide for more frequent audits and special audits as it deems necessary.
The results of the annual audit and a certified financial statement of the
fiscal affairs of the Town shall be presented to Council and published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town by April 1 of the year following
the fiscal year audited.
 125.11. Budgetary Reserve Account. [Ord. 1126, passed
8-22-1994]
(a) There is hereby created for the Town a Budgetary Reserve Account.
(b) The Town Manager/Secretary is hereby directed to deposit all funds
received from the State Treasurer pursuant to Act 77 of 1993 for the
period of the first calendar year in which the additional 1% sales tax is
in effect into such Budgetary Reserve Account.
(c) Such Budgetary Reserve Account created by this section shall be
maintained by the Town and the funds therein shall be retained by the
Town until such time as Council shall direct their expenditure, whether
total or partial, in connection with an unanticipated fiscal emergency of
the Town.
 125.06 CHARTER  125.11
C:67
Article 127
COST RECOVERY FOR EMERGENCY CONDITION
ABATEMENT
 127.01. Abatement of emergency condition; cost liability. [Ord.
990, passed 9-26-1988]
The Town, through its various emergency services, is authorized to clean up
or abate, or cause to be cleaned up or abated the effects of any hazardous
materials or substances deposited upon or into properties or facilities
within the municipal boundaries of the Town or having a direct or
identifiable effect on person or property within the municipal boundaries
of the Town, including, but not limited to, traffic control, evacuation,
relocation, substance monitoring, establishment of medical care facilities
and all other costs incurred in the mitigation of the emergency situation;
and any person or persons, partnership, corporation or corporations who
intentionally or accidentally or negligently caused such deposit shall be
liable for all costs incurred by the Town as a result of such clean up
or abatement activity. The remedy provided by this article shall be in
addition to any other remedies provided by other laws or ordinances of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Town of McCandless.
 127.02. Hazardous materials defined. [Ord. 990, passed
9-26-1988]
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS  Any substances or materials in a quantity
or form which, in the determination of the Emergency Management
Coordinator or his authorized representative, poses an unreasonable and
(d) An unanticipated fiscal emergency as set forth in subsection (c) hereof
may be defined to include, but shall need not be limited to, an
unbudgeted or underbudgeted expense relating to:
(1) The construction, repair or maintenance (including winter
maintenance) of public roads within the Town;
(2) The purchase, lease, repair or maintenance of vehicles or other
equipment necessary to protect the public health, welfare and
safety; or
(3) Such other unanticipated fiscal emergency as may be defined by
Council in its Resolution.
(e) If a final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction holds any
provision of this section, or the application of any provision to any
circumstances to be illegal or unconstitutional, all the other provisions
to other circumstances, shall remain in full force and effect. The
intention of the Town is that the provisions of this section shall be
severable and that this section would have been adopted if any such
illegal or unconstitutional provisions had not been included.
 125.11 MCCANDLESS CODE  127.02
C:68
imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to
the ecological balance of the environment, and shall include, but not be
limited to, such substances as explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum
products or gases, poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents, flammables,
corrosives or materials listed in the hazardous substances list of the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry.
 127.03. Cost inclusion. [Ord. 990, passed 9-26-1988]
For purposes of this article, costs incurred by the Town emergency services
shall include, but not be limited to, the following: actual labor costs of
Town personnel, including worker's compensation benefits, fringe benefits,
administrative overhead, cost of equipment operation, cost of special fire
extinguishing agents used and cost of any contracted labor and materials.
 127.04. Fire suppression services excluded. [Ord. 990, passed
9-26-1988]
The authority to recover costs under this article shall not include actual
fire suppression services which are normally or usually provided by the Fire
Departments.
Article 137
PERSONNEL BOARD
 137.01. Establishment. [Ord. 1272, passed 7-15-2002]
A Town Personnel Board is hereby established, consisting of three members
and up to two alternate members, all of whom shall be qualified electors of
the Town.
 137.02. Terms of members. [Res. 9-1975, passed 4-28-1975; Ord.
1272, passed 7-15-2002]
Initial appointment of the three members of the Personnel Board shall be
one member for a one-year term, one member for a two-year term and one
member for a three-year term. Subsequent appointments of members and
alternate members shall be for a three-year term.
 137.03. Noncompensatory; expenses. [Res. 9-1975, passed
4-28-1975]
The members of the Personnel Board shall serve without compensation,
but they shall be reimbursed for the reasonable expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties.
 137.04. Powers and duties. [Ord. 1410, passed 12-19-2011]
The Personnel Board shall have the following powers and duties:
 127.02 CHARTER  137.04
C:69
 137.05. Rules of procedure. [Ord. 960, passed 9-28-1987; Ord.
1137, passed 1-23-1995; Ord. 1196, passed 12-15-1997; Ord. 1272,
passed 7-15-2002; Ord. 1410, passed 12-19-2011]
Rule I - General.
101 - Composition of Board: The Personnel Board shall consist of three
qualified electors of the Town, appointed by Council, to serve three-year
overlapping terms, without pay. The Board shall organize each year prior
to January 10, by electing a Chairman and a Vice Chairman. Once a
panel of members and/or alternate members commences consideration
of a matter, a majority of that same panel shall be required to complete
consideration of such matter.
102 - Meetings: Meetings may be called by the Chairman or by the
other two members. Two members constitute a quorum. Two affirmative
votes are required for approval of any motion. Conduct of meetings shall
be governed by Robert's Rules of Order. Meetings shall be open to the
public unless a public meeting would broach the normal confidentiality of
employee data. Minutes shall be kept and minutes of open meetings shall
be made available to the public upon request. Minutes shall be approved
by the majority of the Board and signed by the Chairman.
103 - Powers and Duties: The Personnel Board shall have the powers and
duties specified in Section 137.04.
(a) To solicit and evaluate all applicants for the police force;
(b) To make a listing of eligible police applicants with numerical rating
scores;
(c) To conduct noncompetitive examination of police chief nominees, if
directed by Council;
(d) To conduct a hearing, when requested in writing, by any nonprobationary
employee who has been discharged, suspended or
demoted and who has exhausted the prescribed grievance procedures;
(e) To conduct a hearing, when requested in writing, by any nonprobationary
employee who believes that he or she has been aggrieved
in the promotion process, as set forth in Rule III;
(f) To make investigations in the fulfillment of its proper duties, and to
issue subpoenas;
(g) To hear appeals from any applicant or person who has been examined
for a promotional vacancy; and
(h) To perform such other functions and duties as may be provided for in
the Personnel Code.
 137.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  137.05
C:70
104 - Rules: The Personnel Board has the power to prescribe, amend
and enforce rules and regulations for the purpose of implementing the
provisions of this Article and the Home Rule Charter. Before any such
rules and regulations are implemented, the same shall first be approved
by Town Council. No changes shall be made in these rules without
approval of Town Council.
Rule II - Police Appointments.
201 - Advertisement: Whenever the Board is advised that Council desires
a new list of eligible candidates from which to fill existing or anticipated
vacancies, the Board shall advertise this fact and establish a period of
time during which applications will be received.
202 - Qualifications: An applicant for employment as a police employee
shall meet at least the following qualifications:
a. Be at least 18 years of age;
b. Have a bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university,
or have at least four years (8,320 hours) law enforcement
experience as determined by the Personnel Board after
consultation with the Chief of Police;
c. Be licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to operate a
motor vehicle;
d. Be a citizen of the United States of America;
e. Be a person who has successfully completed a basic police training
course in conformity with current law (formerly PA Act 120) and
commits to the taking of a certification examination administered
by the Municipal Police Officers' Education and Training
Commission (MPOETC) within 60 days of notice by the Town to take
and pass the examination, or is otherwise certified under applicable
law and further has satisfied all other federal, state and local rules
and regulations regarding his/her ability to act as a police officer.
f. Be of good moral character;
g. Be free of habitual addiction of intoxicated liquors or drugs;
h. Indicate a willingness to establish residence within a defined
geographical boundary (as determined by the Town or as
determined in a collective agreement) within one year of
appointment;
i. Be eligible to carry a firearm and be free from conviction of a
disqualifying crime in accordance with the Police Officers
Education and Training Program of Title 37 of the Pennsylvania
Code; and
j. Such other qualifications which may be proposed by the Personnel
Board and approved by Council.
 137.05 CHARTER  137.05
C:71
203 - Applications: Each applicant shall complete fully the prescribed
application form. The applicant is responsible for all information placed
upon the form. False or incorrect information will void the application
form and any subsequent action taken upon it.
When the form is returned, the following shall be provided by the
applicant at that time:
a. The fee as set by resolution of Town Council;
b. Proof of any honorable discharge, and a full and complete
explanation, if appropriate, of any claim for veteran's preference.
All veteran's preference claims shall be made along with the return
of the application form, and within the time required of the return
of the application form. Any person claiming veteran's preference
shall execute whatever release may be required in order to
investigate fully the circumstance of the claim of veteran's
preference.
204 - Examinations: All examinations shall be practical in character and
shall relate to such matters and include such inquiries as will fairly test
the merit and fitness of the persons examined to discharge the duties of
the position sought. The examination shall consist of:
a. A written examination, and
b. An oral examination.
The written examination shall constitute 60% of the final composite score,
and the oral examination shall constitute 40% of the final composite
score.
The written examination shall have a minimum passing score of 85%, and
the oral examination shall have a minimum passing score of 80%.
205 - Contenders: The Board shall administer the oral examination to
the highest 12 applicants who have attained the passing scores of 85%
or greater on the written examination, and any person possessing a
veteran's preference right who has achieved a passing score on the
written examination and who may place in the top 12 if provided with
veteran's preference after the oral examination.
206 - Background Investigation: The Board may refuse to examine, or
may refuse to certify, any applicant who is found to lack any of the
minimum qualifications as prescribed and adopted for the position or the
employment for which he has applied, or who is disabled and/or unfit
to perform the duties of the position for which he seeks employment, or
who is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors or narcotic
drugs, or who has been guilty of any crime involving moral turpitude or of
infamous or notoriously disgraceful conduct, or who has been dismissed
from public service for delinquency or misconduct in office, or who is
affiliated with any group whose politics and activities are subversive to
the form of government set forth in the Constitution or laws of the United
States and Pennsylvania.
 137.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  137.05
C:72
The Chief of Police shall be furnished with a list of contenders, and
shall conduct a background investigation of each one. The investigation
will include, but is not limited to, questioning neighbors, schools and
employers. The Chief may question the applicant.
The applicant may be required to execute releases or waivers permitting
any investigation as determined by the Chief or the Board.
The Board may utilize the services of the Chief of Police or other persons
to aid in any background investigation.
207 - Hearing: If any applicant or person feels himself or herself
aggrieved by the action of the Board in refusing to examine or certify him
or her, the Board shall, at the request of such person, within 10 days after
the request notify such person to appear personally and by counsel before
the Board. The Board shall then review its refusal to make an examination
or certification and take such testimony as may be offered. The decision
of the Board shall be final.
208 - List of Eligibles: All contenders who have successfully passed the
written examination and the oral examination and have a score of at
least 85% on the written examination and 80% on the oral examination,
shall be included on a list of eligibles. {i1}The list shall be prepared
in descending numerical order of composite scores. The written score
shall be multiplied by 60% (.60) and the oral score shall be multiplied by
40% (.40); the addition of these two calculations shall form a composite
score. To the composite score shall be added 10 points to anyone properly
entitled to veteran's preference points. The names of those persons with
the highest three scores may be considered by Council for selection as a
police employee.
Town Council may decide to interview some members of the list of
eligibles. Any contender requested to attend an interview shall appear at
the time and place set by Council. Failure to attend any such interview
shall be deemed to be a willful decision not to accept a position which
may be offered by the Town.
209 - Conditional Offers of Employment: Examinations: Any person from
the list of eligibles who has been given and accepted a conditional offer
of employment shall be given physical, medical and psychological
evaluations which shall be reasonably designed to test the individual's
ability to perform the duties of a police officer. The Personnel Board
shall determine which psychological, physical or medical tests are to
be administered and who shall administer them in conformance with
applicable law or regulations. These tests shall fairly determine whether
the individual to be tested is able to perform the duties required to be
performed by a police officer for the Town. The successful completion of
any tests administered under this Section shall be a condition precedent
to employment with the Town. In the event any test is approved to
determine if unacceptable levels of alcohol are or have been consumed,
or whether any controlled substances are or have been ingested, the
applicant shall be notified prior to the test.
 137.05 CHARTER  137.05
C:73
Each person from the list of eligibles who has been given and accepted
a conditional offer of employment shall also be required to pass an
agility test conducted at a location of the Town's choice. Each individual
subject to such an agility test shall be required to sign a waiver releasing
any and all rights and claims for damages while taking the agility test.
Any individual to be tested under this section should also be notified,
generally, concerning any further tests which may be administered during
his/her probationary period, or whether physical standards must be met
to conclude successfully the probation period.
210 - Confidentiality of Scores: The Board shall advise any applicant
(upon written request) of the scores made by the applicant.
Rule III - Police Promotions.
301 - Announcements: Whenever the Board is advised of a vacancy in any
rank above patrolman, the Board shall post on the police bulletin board
notice of such vacancy and the interval of time during which applications
from the Town's police officers will be accepted.
302 - Examinations: Written and oral examinations will be administered
as required for police appointments. A review of each applicant's
personnel record will be made by the Board. No background investigation
will be made.
303 - Scoring: Any applicant who obtains 70% or more, in both the written
and oral examination, shall be included on the eligibility list.
Both written and oral examinations shall be scored on the basis of a
possible 100% with 70% of the minimum passing score on each
examination. The composite score shall be 70% of the written score plus
30% of the oral score.
Example: 70% of 80 written = 56; 30% of 90 oral = 27; 56 + 27 = 83%
composite score. Apparent ties shall be broken by favoring the contender
with the higher written score.
Only the top three names may be considered for each selection by Council
and any one of the top three candidates may be selected by Council.
304 - Medical Examination: Any applicant selected to fill the vacancy,
must undergo the same medical examination as prescribed for police
appointment.
305 - Chief of Police: The appointment or selection of a new Chief of
Police, whether by promotion or otherwise, shall be at the sole discretion
of Council and Council shall determine what procedure shall be followed
in making the appointment or selection.
306 - Hearings for Officers Denied Promotion:
 137.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  137.05
C:74
a. Any non-probationary employee who has been examined for the
purpose of filling a promotional vacancy and believes he or she is
aggrieved by the action of the Personnel Board with regard to the
conduct or results of his or her examination under Section 302,
or in not being selected as one of the top three candidates to be
considered for promotion by Council pursuant to Section 303 of
this Rule may request, in writing, a hearing before the Board. The
Board shall, at the request of such person, within 10 days after the
request, notify such person to appear personally and by counsel, if
desire, before the Board. The Board shall then review its refusal to
promote such person and take such testimony as may be offered.
The Board shall notify the aggrieved individual of the results of the
hearing, in writing, within 10 days of its conclusion.
b. Within 10 days of receiving the written results of his or her hearing
under Section 306(a), if an aggrieved individual is not satisfied
with the result reached by the Personnel Board pursuant to Section
a. above, he may, in writing, make a request to the Board that
a hearing before an impartial hearing officer be conducted in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Local Agency Law, Subchapter
B, 2 Pa. C.S.  551, et seq. The impartial hearing officer shall be
selected by the Town and shall have no affiliation or interest with
the Town or the aggrieved individual. The cost of the impartial
hearing officer shall be divided evenly between the Town and the
aggrieved individual. The decision of the partial hearing officer
shall be final.
Rule IV - Hearings.
401 - Hearing Request: Any non-probationary employee, who has been
discharged, suspended or demoted, may request, in writing, a hearing
before the {i1}Personnel Board within 10 days of the formal issuance of
the discharge, suspension or demotion to which he seeks challenge. If
such a request is made, the Personnel Board shall grant him or her a
hearing which shall be held within a period of 10 days from the filing of
the request by the employee unless continued by the Personnel Board for
cause at the request of the Town. A hearing shall be open to the public, or
closed to the public, as desired by the individual requesting the hearing.
402 - Pre-Hearing Procedure: A member of the Personnel Board shall
meet or otherwise confirm with the employee and the Town Manager
within seven days of the receipt of the request for a hearing:
a. The date, time and location of the hearing;
b. Whether the hearing will be public or closed; and
c. Whether the employee requesting a hearing will employ counsel.
 137.05 CHARTER  137.05
C:75
403 - Counsel: The Town and the person sought to be suspended, removed
or demoted shall at all times have the right to employ counsel before
the Personnel Board and upon appeal to the Allegheny County Court
of Common Pleas. The Personnel Board shall be represented by legal
counsel who shall not be the Town Attorney or an attorney within the
office of the Town Attorney.
404 - Evidence: Evidence presented at the hearing may be oral or
documentary. The parties shall not be bound by technical rules of
evidence, and all relevant evidence of reasonably probative value may
be received. Reasonable examination and cross examination shall be
permitted. The Chairman of the Personnel Board shall rule on the
admissibility of evidence. In the event another Personnel Board member
should disagree with the ruling of the Chairman, the Personnel Board may
recess to resolve the difference of opinion. The Chairman shall reaffirm or
modify his ruling as soon as the hearing has resumed in accordance with
the decision of the majority of the Personnel Board.
405 - Testimony: The employee, the Town and the Personnel Board have
the right to call and question witnesses and to question witnesses called
by others. All testimony shall be taken under oath to be administered
by the Chairman. The Chairman is empowered to subpoena witnesses
and documents and must do so, if requested in writing, no later than
two business days prior to the hearing. All Officers in public service and
all Town Employees shall attend and testify when required to do so by
the Personnel Board. If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any
subpoena issued by the Personnel Board, it may apply by petition to the
Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County for its subpoena requiring
the attendance of such person before the Personnel Board or the court,
there to testify and to produce any records and papers necessary, and in
default thereof shall be held in contempt of court. A stenographic record
of all testimony taken at such hearings shall be filed with and preserved
by the Personnel Board, which record shall be sealed and not be available
for public inspection in the event the charges are dismissed or a closed
hearing was held at the request of an aggrieved individual.
406 - Procedure at Hearing: The Chairman shall open the hearing by
reading the employee's request for hearing. If the hearing is a closed
hearing, the Chairman shall require each person present in the hearing
room to identify himself and state his position in the hearing. The
Chairman shall then read the communication to the employee imposing
discharge, suspension or demotion. The Chairman shall then have the
Town or the supervisory official who ordered the discharge, suspension
or demotion present the facts of the charge or case against the employee.
The employee who has been discharged, suspended or demoted shall
then be given the opportunity to present his case against the discharge,
suspension or demotion. If either the Town (or its supervisory official)
or the employee wishes to present a summation of the evidence, either
individually or through counsel, such summation shall be briefly and
concisely stated, with the employee's summation being last.
 137.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  137.05
C:76
407 - Disposition: The Personnel Board shall render a written decision
deciding whether the discharge, suspension or demotion is to be
sustained, reversed or varied within 30 days of the conclusion of the
hearing. An employee who has been discharged, suspended or demoted
by the final action of the Personnel Board shall have the right to appeal
to the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County within 30 days from
the date of the decision by the Personnel Board. For that purpose, the
employee shall be entitled to secure a full and complete transcript of
the record of the hearing by the Personnel Board at the cost of the
employee. The decision of the court affirming or reversing the decision of
the Personnel Board shall be final and the employee shall be suspended,
discharged, demoted or reinstated in accordance with the order of the
court.
408 - Distribution of Costs: The employee shall be responsible for any
hearing costs he incurs, including, but not limited to, the employee's
counsel, court reporter, witnesses and other fees.
Article 139
PERSONNEL CODE
 139.01. Short title. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
This article shall be known as and may be referred to as the Personnel Code.
 139.02. Purpose. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
As required by the Home Rule Charter, the purpose of this Code is to
provide the Town administration with guidelines for handling personnel
matters and to provide each employee with the essential conditions of his/
her appointment.
Uniformed police officers are covered by the Police Policy and Procedure
Manual and Personnel Code.
This Code also creates a Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual.
In the event this Code conflicts with any law, applicable administrative
requirement, collective bargaining agreement, arbitration award, or other
term or condition of employment, such modification, insofar as required by
law, shall modify this Code to the extent required. The use of male or female
personal pronouns shall include persons of the other sex unless the context
clearly intends otherwise.
 139.03. Town Manager. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
The Home Rule Charter established the Town Manager as the Town's chief
executive and administrative officer; he has the responsibility for
administering this Code.
 137.05 CHARTER  139.03
C:77
The Manager shall develop a Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual and
make necessary amendments thereto.
The Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual shall implement this Code,
and may contain guidelines and policies on matters not directly covered by
this Code, and further clarify its operation.
The Manager may overrule any decisions made by subordinates.
 139.04. Town employees. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
All employees share a common responsibility of providing courteous and
efficient service in the public interest. Public employees are obliged to
discharge their duties faithfully regardless of personal considerations and
shall abide by the provisions of this Code and the Personnel Policies and
Procedures Manual.
 139.05. Types of employees. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
Town employees are considered regular, part-time or temporary:
 139.06. Political activity. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
No employee shall be a candidate for nomination or election to any public
office unless he/she shall have first obtained an approved leave of absence
from employment. If elected, employee shall resign from employment
immediately upon election to any public office.
 139.07. Violations. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
Any employee violating the letter or spirit of this Code, or the Policies and
Procedures Manual, may invite disciplinary action thereby. Any disciplinary
action taken shall be job related and where possible shall be utilized in an
attempt to rehabilitate or change the behavior of an employee.
 139.08. Hiring application. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
Each applicant must complete the Town's application form as developed by
the Manager.
(a) Regular employees are those who work full-time on a regular basis;
(b) Part-time employees are those who work less than full-time on a regular
schedule, such as school guards;
(c) Temporary employees are those hired to work for a certain or definite
period of time or for the duration of a need, such as summer help and
recreation aides.
 139.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  139.09
C:78
 139.09. Interview. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
The Manager shall develop procedures for interviewing prospective
employees.
 139.10. Qualifications. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
An applicant for a position must meet the standards of the established
job description and qualifications. The Manager shall describe and rate all
positions, including part-time and temporary positions.
 139.11. Physical examination. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
Any applicant selected for a full-time position shall undergo a medical and
physical examination by a physician selected and paid for by the Town to
determine the applicant's physical and medical capacity to fill the position.
 139.12. Employment of relatives. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
No person shall be hired or transferred to work with or under the direct
supervision of a blood relative or a relative by law.
 139.13. Hiring authority. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
The Manager is the hiring authority for all positions except uniformed
police. Unformed police are hired by Town Council.
 139.14. Hours. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
The basic work week shall be set by the department head in conjunction
with the Manager.
This shall not be construed as a guarantee of hours of work each day, week,
month or year.
Employees shall work the hours scheduled by the department head and the
Manager.
 139.15. Overtime. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
The overtime rate is the employee's normal hourly rate plus 1/2 for all hours
worked (not paid for) in excess of any statutory requirement.
Absent approval of the department head and the Manager, part-time or
temporary employees shall not receive overtime pay unless more than 40
hours in a work week is worked.
 139.16. Pay periods. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
Employees are paid every two weeks.
 139.09 CHARTER  139.17
C:79
 139.17. Job descriptions. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
The job description (for those positions for which a job description is
available) shall be a written description containing a title, statement of
typical duties and responsibilities, and the minimum or desirable
qualifications for employees to assure satisfactory performance.
The description, and the job rating for salary/wage purposes, shall be
amended by the Manager when circumstances require.
 139.18. Evaluations. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
Evaluation instruments shall be developed by the Manager. The Manager
shall also determine how, when and in what manner employees shall be
evaluated.
 139.19. Transfers; promotions; demotions. [Ord. 1206, passed
11-23-1998]
 139.20. Uniforms. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
The Town shall provide uniforms under the terms and conditions set by the
Manager.
 139.21. Reimbursement of expenses. [Ord. 1206, passed
11-23-1998]
Employees shall be reimbursed for travel and other expenses incurred on
behalf of the Town and authorized by the Manager.
 139.22. Grievances. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
Regular full-time and regular part-time persons who fill non-policy making
positions may utilize the following procedure:
(a) An employee who is transferred to another position which has the same
pay scale shall have his/her pay remain the same as before the transfer.
An employee promoted to a higher position shall have his/her pay
adjusted.
An employee who is demoted or transferred to a lower position shall
receive a lower rate of pay.
(b) Any employee who temporarily serves in a position with a higher pay
scale shall receive at least the rate of the lowest step in the higher
position while serving.
(a) These employees may file grievances limited to working conditions.
During this grievance procedure the grievant shall continue to work
under the direction of his/her supervisor.
 139.17 MCCANDLESS CODE  139.22
C:80
 139.23. Termination, etc. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
An employee who does not give the Town two weeks' notice of his/her
resignation shall receive no benefits which may otherwise then be due.
An employee who is discharged for cause by the Town shall be paid full
wages and benefits due to the date of discharge.
The return of appropriate pension contributions to an employee shall be
determined by the Manager.
 139.24. Retirement. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
The Town provides retirement arrangements for those persons who have
given it long and faithful service. These benefits are based upon pension
documents in the possession of the Manager.
 139.25. Benefits. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
(b) When the grievance procedure is to be invoked and no Grievance
Committee has been selected, one shall be named at that time. The
Grievance Committee shall consist of three employees of the
department involved. One member shall be named chairperson. Any
employee having a grievance shall discuss the grievance with his/her
immediate supervisor. If the grievance is not resolved, he/she may
present his/her grievance in writing to the Grievance Committee. If the
Committee finds merit in the grievance, it shall proceed to the next
step. The written grievance shall be given to the Manager within 10
days from the occurrence of the grievance. The Manager shall meet
within seven working days thereafter with the department head,
chairperson of the Grievance Committee and the aggrieved employee.
(c) If the matter is not resolved, the written grievance may be given to the
Personnel Board within 10 working days from the Manager's decision,
and be considered in a meeting within 30 working days thereafter.
Within seven working days thereafter, a recommendation shall be made
by the Personnel Board to Council which shall make a final decision
promptly thereafter.
(d) Extensions of time shall be only by mutual consent.
(e) The Town shall not be obligated to pay any employee for the time spent
in processing grievances or grievance meetings.
(a) Full-time employees. The Policies and Procedures Manual shall set
forth benefits such as vacation, holiday pay, sick leave, and other leaves
granted employees. The Manager is authorized to amend such benefits
in his reasonable discretion with the approval of Council.
(b) Part-time and temporary employees. Employees who work less than a
full-time schedule or who are temporary employees are entitled to no
leaves or other benefits unless prescribed by law.
 139.22 CHARTER  139.25
C:81
 139.26. No discrimination; affirmative action. [Ord. 1206, passed
11-23-1998]
No Discrimination - The Town does not discriminate based upon the race,
sex, national origin, physical abilities and disabilities, religion, or politics
of its employees. The Manager is instructed and authorized to create and
implement policies and procedures which make sure that no discrimination
of the type or kind set forth herein does occur, and to create and implement
effective affirmative action policies.
 139.27. Sexual harassment. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
The Town maintains a working environment free from all sexual
harassment. Sexual harassment is any unwelcome sexual advance, request
for sexual favors, and other verbal, visual, or physical conduct of a sexual
nature. Any such harassment is prohibited and shall be the subject of
disciplinary action by the Town.
The Manager shall create a policy which allows an employee who believes
he/she has been sexually harassed to bring the matter to the attention of
the Town and to take appropriate action thereafter.
 139.28. Drug free workplace. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
The Town shall provide a drug free workplace, free of drugs and free of
those individuals who use drugs.
The Manager shall create a drug free policy which prohibits the use of
drugs or other controlled substances in the workplace, which shall meet
all provisions of state, federal or other law, requirement or condition and
inform employees promptly of the policy.
 139.29. Modification. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
The provisions of this Code may be modified by a collective bargaining
agreement, arbitration award, or other term or condition of employment.
Any such modification, insofar as required by law, shall govern.
 139.30. Employees at will. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
Employees of the Town are employees at will unless otherwise expressly
employed. Employees may be terminated with or without cause, or notice,
at any time. No person, other than the Manager, and then only with the
written approval of a majority of Council, has any authority to enter into any
agreement for employment for any specified period of time, or to make any
agreement contrary to this section.
(c) Other benefits. The Manager shall, in the Town's Personnel Policies and
Procedures Manual, set out other benefits, such as health insurance,
which are available to employees, as well as the contribution the Town
shall make toward the cost of these benefits.
 139.25 MCCANDLESS CODE  139.30
C:82
The Manager shall develop procedures to indicate when a person is not
an employee at will, which shall, at a minimum require (1) the express
statement that the employment is an "enforceable employment agreement"
and (2) is expressly approved in writing by Council.
 139.31. Amendment. [Ord. 1206, passed 11-23-1998]
This Code may be amended or modified at any time.
Part 3 - Business and Taxation
Article 301
ADVERTISING
 301.01. Intent. [Ord. 662, passed 10-28-1974]
This chapter is enacted because certain persons, firms or corporations have
recently begun the distribution of advertising materials to Town residents
by placing or hanging the advertising material on mail boxes or posts or
by depositing such material upon other portions of private property without
the request or consent of the owners or occupiers of the property and in
the judgment of the Town Council this manner of distribution of advertising
materials is unsightly, constitutes an invasion of privacy and, unless picked
up by the property owner within a reasonable time, the presence of such
advertising material would be a clear indication that the residence was
unoccupied and thus increase the possibility of vandalism and/or burglary.
 301.02. Distributing advertising material at residences. [Ord.
1123, passed 6-27-1994]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to distribute
advertising materials at a residence within the Town of McCandless (other
than at the home of the person, firm or corporation distributing the same)
by placing such material at the residence, on the property or on the
residential mailbox of the person owning or occupying the residence unless
the person, firm or corporation, its agents, servants, employees and/or
independent contractors distributing such advertising materials:
(a) Is making such distribution based upon an affirmative request or
consent of the person occupying the residence; or
(b) Is making such distribution through the use of the United States mail
service; or
(c) Is making such distribution through a procedure whereby a resident
can notify the person, firm or corporation, its agents, servants,
employees and/or independent contractors of a desire not to receive
unsolicited distributed materials and such procedure provides for:
 139.30 CHARTER  301.02
C:83
 301.99. Penalty. [Ord. 662, passed 10-28-1974]
Any violation of any provision of this article shall be considered a summary
offense and shall be fined not more than $300. Each unlawful distribution to
a residence shall be considered as a separate offense.
Article 305
TRANSIENT VENDORS
 305.01. Short title. [Ord. 1450, passed 4-27-2015]
This Article shall be known as the Transient Vendors Ordinance.
 305.02. Purpose. [Ord. 1450, passed 4-27-2015]
It is the purpose of this Article to regulate Transient vendors who enter the
Town of McCandless to sell or attempt to sell, to take orders or attempt
to take orders, or to solicit contributions, pledges, or subscriptions or
attempt to solicit contributions, pledges or subscriptions, such regulations
being in the interest and for the protection of the residents of the Town
of McCandless and further requiring license fees to offset the cost of
regulation and administration of this Article.
 305.03. License required. [Ord. 1450, passed 4-27-2015]
No Transient vendor may conduct a business within the geographic limits
of the Town without first obtaining a license in accordance with the
requirements of this Article.
 305.04. Definitions. [Ord. 1450, passed 4-27-2015]
For the purpose of interpreting this Article, words used herein shall have
the following definitions:
(1) The honoring of any and all "no distribution" requests from a Town
of McCandless resident by not leaving or otherwise distributing any
materials to residents from whom such person, firm or corporation,
its agents, servants, employees and/or independent contractor has
received a "no distribution" request; and
(2) The patrolling and monitoring of a service area of a person, firm or
corporation, its agents, servants, employees and/or independent
contractors on a weekly basis and the collection of unwanted and/
or unclaimed materials distributed by such person, firm or
corporation within one week of its delivery; and
(3) The termination of distribution of materials within one week by a
person, firm or corporation, its agents, servants, employees and/or
independent contractors to a residence where prior materials have
not been claimed.
 301.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  305.04
C:84
CONDUCTING BUSINESS  The conducting of retail sales of goods, wares
or merchandise, including work commonly done by peddlers or hucksters on
commercial property behind the zoning buffer area including solicitations
or taking of orders, whether verbal or written, and with the owner's prior
written consent. (For a definition of zoning buffer area, see Section 1311.04
of the Codified Ordinances.) Where no buffer area exists on commercial
property, conducting of business shall take place at least 10 feet off the
paved road cartway. Transient vendors are prohibited from conducting
business on any portion of any right-of-way or zoning buffer area within
the Town of McCandless. Conducting business may include work performed
by door-to-door salespersons so long as such business is conducted in
compliance with the other sections of this Article. Conducting business
may also include, without limitation, work performed by a person at a flea
market or a farmers market so long as the conduct of such business is
conducted in compliance with the other sections of this Article.
SOLICITOR  Any person, corporation, partnership, association or other
entity and any agent thereof soliciting funds to further its non profit
purpose.
TRANSIENT VENDOR  Includes any person, corporation, partnership,
association or other entity and any agent thereof who is conducting
business in the Town off of their own property or at the request of the owner,
and shall include, without limitation, any peddler, canvasser, huckster,
transient merchant and itinerant vendor.
 305.05. Exemptions. [Ord. 1450, passed 4-27-2015]
The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this Article
except for the provisions of Section 305.12 relating to the manner of
conducting business:
(a) Sales conducted pursuant to statute;
(b) Sales conducted pursuant to order by any court;
(c) The sale of personal property at wholesale to dealers;
(d) The sale or disposal of products of a farm or garden by a farmer or truck
gardener where such products are cultivated on his premises;
(e) The sale of personal property at a garage sale held at a person's
residence;
(f) The sale of newspapers from a fixed location;
(g) Any person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity or any
agent thereof delivering a purely political, social, charitable or religious
message or distributing related materials, but not soliciting funds.
(h) The solicitation of funds by any solicitor; provided that the entity has
given advance written notice of their intent to the Chief of Police prior
 305.04 CHARTER  305.05
C:85
 305.06. Application for license; fee. [Ord. 1450, passed
4-27-2015]
Applicants for a license under this Article must file with the Chief of Police
a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the Town which
shall include the following information:
 305.07. Background check. [Ord. 1450, passed 4-27-1915]
The Chief of Police shall conduct a background investigation of the
applicant. The applicant shall execute any and all documentation
authorizing the release of personal information for the background
investigation. Such documentation shall be provided by the Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, issue the
license to the applicant; provided that such fee shall be waived for persons
or entities listed under Section 305.08. The Chief of Police shall deny the
applicant the license if the applicant has:
to conducting such solicitation and that such solicitors carry a photo
identification card while conducting solicitations.
(a) The name and physical description of the applicant;
(b) The complete permanent home and full local address of the applicant
and, in the case of transient merchants and itinerant vendors, the local
address from which proposed sales will be made;
(c) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold;
(d) If employed, the name and address of the employer, the name and
address of the employee's immediate supervisor, together with
credentials establishing the exact employment relationship;
(e) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
(f) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with the
license plate number or other means of identification;
(g) The source of supply of the goods or property proposed to be sold or
orders taken for the sale thereof and the proposed method of delivery;
(h) Two photographs of the applicant which shall be approximately one
inch by one inch, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a
clear and distinguishing manner;
(i) A valid state or federal photographic identification, such as a valid state
driver's license or passport; and
(a) Committed any act consisting of fraud or misrepresentation;
(b) Committed any act which, if committed by a licensee, would be grounds
for revocation of a license;
 305.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  305.07
C:86
 305.08. License fees; expiration of license. [Ord. 1450, passed
4-27-2015]
 305.09. Exhibition of license to citizens. [Ord. 1450, passed
4-27-2015]
It shall be the duty of any Transient vendor to produce his license upon
request of any resident at the Town with whom he does or proposes to do
business.
(c) Within the previous 10 years, been convicted of a felony directly
relating to his or her fitness to engage in the occupation of Transient
vendor, and including, but not limited to, those felonies involving moral
turpitude, fraud or misrepresentation;
(d) Been charged with a felony of the type defined in subdivision (c) of this
subsection, and disposition of that charge is pending;
(e) Been refused a license under the provisions of this Article; provided,
however, that any applicant denied a license under the provisions of this
Article may reapply if and when the reasons for denial no longer exist;
and
(f) Made any false or misleading statements in the application.
(a) The nonrefundable fee for each license application pursuant to this
Article shall be $100 to cover the cost to process the application, plus
$25 for each vendor associated with the applicant, plus the prescribed
fee for any background check conducted by the Chief of Police. Any
renewal shall be at half price if renewed within 15 days of the
expiration of the license. Any and all fee amounts may be adjusted by
Resolution of Town Council, including the cost for the background
check.
(b) Licenses shall be valid for 45 days from the date of issuance. The
expiration date shall be set forth on all licenses.
(c) None of the license fees provided for by this Article shall be applied to
occasion any undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case
where a license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for a license to
place an undue burden upon such commerce, he may apply to the
governing body of the Town for an adjustment of the fee so that it shall
not be discriminatory or unreasonable or unfair as to such commerce.
(d) No fee shall be required for any political, social, charitable or religious
organization or agent thereof desiring to solicit or have solicited in its
name money, donations of money, property or financial assistance of
any kind or desiring to sell or distribute any item of literature, tokens or
merchandise for political, social, charitable or religious purposes.
 305.07 CHARTER  305.10
C:87
 305.10. Exhibition of license to police. [Ord. 1450, passed
4-27-2015]
It shall be the duty of any Transient vendor to produce his license upon
request of any police officer of the Department.
 305.11. Records. [Ord. 1450, passed 4-27-2015]
The Town shall maintain a record for each license issued and a record of the
reports of violations.
 305.12. Manner of conducting business. [Ord. 1450, passed
4-27-2015]
 305.13. Revocation of license. [Ord. 1450, passed 4-27-2015]
Licenses issued under the provisions of this Article shall be revoked by the
Chief of Police or his designee for any of the following causes:
 305.14. Appeals. [Ord. 1450, passed 4-27-2015]
Any person aggrieved by the denial or revocation of a license provided
hereunder shall have the right to appeal to Town Council by filing a Notice
of Appeal within 14 days of the action complained of. Town Council shall set
a time for such hearings and shall provide written notice to the appellant at
least seven days prior to the hearing.
 305.15. Violations and penalties. [Ord. 1450, passed 4-27-2015]
(a) No Transient vendor or solicitor shall enter or attempt to enter a
residence without an express invitation from the occupant, or enter
onto property posted with a sign stating "No Soliciting" or similar
language, or enter onto any property displaying a non-solicitation sign.
(b) A Transient vendor or solicitor may conduct business in the Town from
9:00 a.m. prevailing time until the time of sunset in the Town, as
published by the United States Naval Observatory.
(a) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for license;
(b) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as a Transient vendor;
(c) Any violation of this Article;
(d) Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude; or
(e) Conducting his business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as
to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or general welfare of the general public.
 305.10 MCCANDLESS CODE  305.15
C:88
Article 306
SOLICITATION OF FUNDS
[Editor's Note: Former Article 306 was repealed by Ord. No. 1450.]
Article 307
AMUSEMENTS
 307.01. Definitions. [Ord. 757, passed 2-5-1979]
As used in this article, certain terms are defined as follows:
AMUSEMENT  All manner and form of entertainment including among
others: theatrical and operatic performances, concerts and lectures;
carnivals and side shows, circuses; all forms of entertainment at fair
grounds and amusement parks; sports events; swimming or bathing pools;
vaudeville shows; dancing; golf courses and golf driving ranges; bowling
alleys; tennis, baseball hitting games, billiard and pool games, and all
other forms of entertainment, recreation, sport or pastime for which a
charge is made. "Amusement" does not include any form of entertainment
accompanying or incidental to the serving of food or drink or the sale of
merchandise, where the charge for the entertainment is wholly included
in the price paid for the refreshment or merchandise; and "amusement"
does not include any form of entertainment, the proceeds of which, after
payment of reasonable and customary expenses, inure exclusively to the
benefit of religious, educational or charitable societies or organizations,
private clubs, lodges or fraternal organizations, veteran's organizations, or
police or firemen's pension organizations.
PERSON  Any natural person, firm, association, partnership or
corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty, the term "person" as applied to a partnership or association means
the partners or members thereof, and as applied to a corporation, the
officers thereof.
(a) Any person, firm or corporation or other entity that shall violate any of
the provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of
a summary offense and punished by a fine for each and every separate
offense a sum of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 to be sued for
and recovered as other fines and penalties are now by law recoverable,
including the Town's attorneys' fees, and, in default of payment of the
fine and costs of prosecution, shall be subject to incarceration for a
period not to exceed 30 days. Each day any person, firm or corporation
engages in the business of a Transient vendor in violation of this Article
shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) In addition to the penalties set forth above, the Town is also authorized
to seek equitable relief, including injunctive relief, to enforce
compliance with this Article.
 305.15 CHARTER  307.01
C:89
PRODUCER  Any person or other entity conducting any amusement.
 307.02. Permit required. [Ord. 757, passed 2-5-1979]
On and after January 1, 1979, no producer shall begin or continue to
conduct within the Town any form of amusement at any permanent or
temporary place of amusement, or any itinerant form of amusement unless
an amusement permit has been issued and the fee paid.
 307.03. Permit application and fee. [Ord. 757, passed 2-5-1979]
 307.04. Permit issuance. [Ord. 757, passed 2-5-1979]
 307.05. Enforcement; rules and regulations. [Ord. 757, passed
2-5-1979]
The Town Manager is hereby empowered with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article. He is further empowered
and authorized to appoint and delegate police officers or other officials to
conduct the necessary inspection of such operation as controlled by this
article. The Manager is also empowered to prescribe and enforce rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this article.
(a) On and after January 1, 1979, producers desiring to begin or continue
to conduct any amusement within the Town shall file with the Town
Manager or his designee an application for an amusement permit, and
shall pay the fee for such permit as required by the Town. The permit
fee shall be established by resolution and may be changed from time to
time as deemed necessary by the Town Council.
(b) The Town shall provide application forms for such permits, which shall
include:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The location of the amusement to be covered by the permit.
(3) The name and address of the owner of the property upon which the
amusement is or will be located.
(4) The type of amusement.
(5) The period for which the permit is requested.
(a) Every permit shall be issued in triplicate. The original, signed by the
Town Manager, with the Town seal, shall be given to the permit holder.
(b) No permit shall be issued unless the amusement complies with all Town
codes pertaining to zoning, land use, public safety and other
regulations pertaining to such amusement.
 307.01 MCCANDLESS CODE  307.06
C:90
 307.06. Severability. [Ord. 757, passed 2-5-1979]
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any of its provisions are
held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of this article. It is hereby
declared as the intent of Council that this article would have been adopted
had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid provisions not been included
herein.
 307.99. Penalty. [Ord. 757, passed 2-5-1979]
Any person convicted before any District Magistrate for violation or failure
to carry out any provision or requirement of this article or attempting to
do anything whatever to avoid payment of the whole or any part of the
fee imposed under this article, shall be fined not more than $300 for each
offense and the cost of prosecution thereof, and in default thereof shall be
imprisoned for not more than 30 days. Each day that any person continues
to violate or fails to comply with any requirement of such sections shall be
considered a separate offense.
Article 309
CABLE TELEVISION RATES AND CUSTOMER SERVICES
 309.01. Definitions. [Ord. 1105, passed 9-27-1993]
The following terms are defined as follows:
BASIC SERVICE TIER  At a minimum, all signals of domestic television
broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal secondarily
transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station,
regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable
operator(s)), any public, educational and governmental programming
required by the franchise agreement to be carried on the basic tier, and any
additional video programming signals or service added to the basic tier by
the cable operator(s).
CABLE ACT OF 1992  The Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act, Pub. L. No. 102-385, 106 Stat. 1460 (1992).
CABLE OPERATOR(S)  All cable television operators who are party to a
current franchise agreement with the franchising authority.
CABLE PROGRAMMING SERVICE  Any video programming provided over
a cable television system, regardless of service tier, including installation or
rental of equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other
than:
(a) Video programming carried on the basic service tier;
Video programming offered on a pay-per-channel or pay-per-program
basis; or
(b)
 307.06 CHARTER  309.01
C:91
CERTIFICATION  The certification received by the franchising authority
from the FCC, empowering the franchising authority to regulate certain
cable television rates.
COST-OF-SERVICE RATE APPLICATION  A rate application filed in the
manner prescribed and on the forms adopted by the FCC. A cost of service
rate application may be submitted by a cable operator(s) in its sole
discretion, in support of its current rates or a proposed rate increase.
CURRENT RATES  Those rates in effect for the basic service tier; and
for the equipment and installation necessary to receive the basic service
tier, existing on the date when the franchising authority notifies the cable
operator(s) that it has received certification.
CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS  Those standards governing customer
service which are prescribed by the FCC and may be enforced by the
franchising authority.
FCC  The Federal Communications Commission.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT  The agreement between one or more cable
operator(s) and the franchising authority pursuant to which the cable
operator(s) was granted a franchise to offer cable television services to
subscribers.
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY  The McCandless Town Council.
MAXIMUM PERMITTED RATES  Those rates against which all rate
applications shall be measured. The maximum permitted rates shall be
determined consistent with the rules adopted by the FCC.
OPINION  An opinion issued by the franchising authority in response to
any rate application.
ORDER  An order issued by the franchising authority advising the cable
operator(s) and other interested parties of the franchising authority's intent
to take additional time to review and approve or disapprove any rate
application.
PRESCRIBED RATE  The rate prescribed by the franchising authority for
the basic service tier and/or for the equipment and installation necessary
to receive the basic service tier, which may differ from the proposed rate
submitted by the cable operator(s) in a rate application.
PROSPECTIVE RATE ADJUSTMENT  A reduction by the franchising
authority in the current rates charged by a cable operator(s).
RATE APPLICATION  An application on the form adopted by the FCC to
be submitted by the cable operator(s) for approval of its current rates and/
A combination of multiple channels of pay-per-channel or pay-perprogram
video programming offered on a multiplexed or timeshifted
basis so long as the combined service:
(1) Consists of commonly-identified video programming; and
(2) Is not bundled with any regulated tier of service.
(c)
 309.01 MCCANDLESS CODE  309.01
C:92
or any proposed increase in the rates for the basic service tier and/or for
the equipment and installation necessary to receive the basic service tier.
REFUND  Any refund ordered by the franchising authority of rates
charged for the basic service tier and/or the rates for the equipment and
installation necessary to receive the basic service tier pursuant to the terms
contained in Section 309.04(d)(2).
SUBSCRIBER  A customer of the cable operator(s) receiving cable
television service within the geographic boundaries of the franchising
authority.
 309.02. Obtaining certification. [Ord. 1105, passed 9-27-1993]
 309.03. Regulatory authority. [Ord. 1105, passed 9-27-1993]
Pursuant to the power and authority granted to the franchising authority
under the Cable Act of 1992, its certification by the FCC for regulating
rates for the basic service tier, and rates for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier, and other charges which may be
regulated by the franchising authority pursuant to the regulations adopted
by the FCC under the Cable Act of 1992, the franchising authority shall
exercise regulatory power over the rates charged or to be charged to a
subscriber for the basic service tier, and for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier applicable to those subscribers of
the cable operator(s).
 309.04. Rate applications. [Ord. 1105, passed 9-27-1993]
(a) The franchising authority is hereby empowered to make application for
certification with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to
regulate cable television rates for the basic service tier, the equipment
and installation necessary to receive the basic service tier and to
provide notice to the cable operator(s) of its application for
certification. Application shall be made in the manner and on the forms
adopted by the FCC and notice shall be provided to the cable
operator(s) before or on the same day of filing of the application.
(b) Upon the effective date of certification, the franchising authority shall
provide notice to the cable operator(s) of its certification, its intention
to regulate rates for the basic service tier, the equipment and
installation necessary to receive the basic service tier and its intention
to enforce customer service standards.
(c) In the event that the franchising authority shall not obtain certification,
or that its certification shall be reconsidered and revoked, the
franchising authority is hereby authorized to continue to enforce
customer service standards and to take such steps as are necessary to
receive certification.
(a) Initial procedures.
 309.01 CHARTER  309.04
C:93
(1) The cable operator(s) shall give notice to its subscribers within 90
days (or three billing cycles) of the effective date of the rules
adopted by the franchising authority, and all new subscribers at the
time of installation, of the availability of the basic service tier.
(2) Each cable operator shall submit a rate application to the
franchising authority for approval of that cable operator's current
rates for the basic service tier and for approval of its rates for the
equipment and installation necessary to receive the basic service
tier, and for approval of any proposed rate increase.
A. The rate application for approval of current rates for the basic
service tier and the rates for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier shall be filed within
30 days of notice from the franchising authority to the cable
operator(s) that the franchising authority has been certified by
the FCC and has adopted the regulations required by the FCC
for rate regulation.
B. The rate application for any proposed increase in rates for the
basic service tier or for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier shall be filed a
minimum of 30 days before the effective date of the proposed
increase.
C. Included in a rate application shall be such information as is
set forth in the application form adopted by the FCC.
D. The cable operator(s) shall submit any relevant information as
is permitted by FCC rules, as contained on the application and
worksheets adopted by the FCC for rate applications, and
which the cable operator(s) would like the franchising
authority to consider in evaluating the current rates for the
basic service tier and/or for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier, and/or in evaluating
any proposed rate increase of those same items.
E. If the current rates for the basic service tier and/or for the
equipment and installation necessary to receive the basic
service tier, or any proposed rate increase exceeds the
maximum permitted rates, the cable operator(s) may submit a
cost-of-service rate application in conformity with FCC rules.
Only the cable operator(s) may decide whether to submit a
cost-of-service rate application.
(3) The cable operator shall give written notice to its subscribers that a
rate application has been filed at least 30 days prior to the effective
date of any proposed rate increase. Such notice shall provide the
name and address of the franchising authority before whom the
rate application is pending.
 309.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  309.04
C:94
(4) The cable operator(s) bears the burden of proof that its current
rates or any proposed rate increase complies with the statutes of
the United States and the regulations of the FCC.
(5) Within 10 days of receipt of a rate application, the franchising
authority shall provide notice in a newspaper of general circulation
within the jurisdiction of the franchising authority, which notice
shall contain at a minimum:
A. The rate application has been received from the cable
operator(s);
B. The manner in which interested parties may review and/or
obtain copies of the rate application;
C. The effective date of the proposed rate increase, if that is the
subject of the rate application;
D. The manner in which interested parties may offer their
comments regarding the rate application;
E. The date all comments shall be received by the franchising
authority; and
F. The date on which the franchising authority shall act on the
rate application or the rate application shall have become
effective without action.
(6) Within 30 days of receipt of the rate application the franchising
authority shall:
A. Review the rate application and documentation submitted by
the cable operator(s);
B. Compare the current rates, or the proposed rate increase
submitted by the cable operator(s) with the maximum
permitted rates or with such other applicable standards as
have been adopted and/or approved by the FCC;
C. Consider any public input on the rate application which may
have been provided; and
D. Approve, disapprove or seek additional time to consider the
rate application.
(7) If the franchising authority shall fail to either approve, disapprove
or seek additional time to consider the rate application within such
30 days, the rate application shall be deemed approved on the 30th
day after submission.
(b) Request for additional time.
(1) Rate application. If the franchising authority is unable to determine
from the rate application, including any supporting documentation
 309.04 CHARTER  309.04
C:95
submitted by the cable operator(s), whether the current rates for
the basic service tier and/or for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier and/or the proposed rate
increase are within the maximum permitted rates, the franchising
authority may, in cases not involving cost-of-service showings, take
an additional 90 days to consider the rate application.
A. The franchising authority shall issue an order and serve the
same upon the cable operator(s) indicating that additional time
is required to consider the rate application. The order shall be
issued prior to the expiration of the 30 days during which the
franchising authority may consider the rate application. Within
seven days of issuance of such order, the franchising authority
shall publish notice in a newspaper of general circulation
within the jurisdiction of the franchising authority, which
notice shall contain a summary of the order, including the
additional time requested, and the reason for requesting such
additional time.
B. The cable operator may submit such additional information as
it believes will cure any deficiencies in the rate application
during the additional time.
C. The franchising authority may require the cable operator(s) to
furnish additional specified information, including proprietary
information, when the current rate or proposed rate increase is
in excess of the maximum permitted rate. When the current
rate is equal to or below the maximum permitted rate, the
franchising authority may only require furnishing of
documentation that the rate is within the maximum permitted
rate. Any proprietary information furnished to the franchising
authority shall be retained as confidential in conformity with
regulations adopted by the FCC in this regard, a copy of which
regulations are on file with and available for review upon
request to the franchising authority.
D. If no decision is issued by the franchising authority at the
expiration of the additional time, the current rates or proposed
rate increase shall become effective, subject to any later
refund order adopted by the franchising authority.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the franchising authority, in
order to later order a refund, shall within the text of the order,
direct the cable operator(s) to keep an accurate account of all
amounts received by reason of the rate in issue and on whose
behalf such amounts were paid.
(2) Cost of service rate application. If the cable operator(s) has
submitted a cost-of-service rate application and the franchising
authority is unable to determine whether the current rates for the
basic service tier and/or for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier and/or the proposed rate
 309.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  309.04
C:96
increase are within the maximum permitted rates, the franchising
authority may take an additional 150 days to consider the cost of
service rate application.
A. The franchising authority shall issue an order and serve the
same upon the cable operator(s) indicating that additional time
is required to consider the rate application because it is a costof-
service rate application. The order shall be issued prior to
the expiration of the 30 days during which the franchising
authority may consider the rate application. Within seven days
of issuance of such order, the franchising authority shall
publish notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the
jurisdiction of the franchising authority, which notice shall
contain a summary of the order, including the additional time
requested, and the reason for requesting such additional time.
B. The franchising authority may require the cable operator(s) to
furnish additional specified information, including proprietary
information, when the current rate or proposed rate increase is
in excess of the maximum permitted rate. When the current
rate is equal to or below the maximum permitted rate, the
franchising authority may only require furnishing of
documentation that the rate is within the maximum permitted
rate. Any proprietary information furnished to the franchising
authority shall be retained as confidential in conformity with
regulations adopted by the FCC in this regard, a copy of which
regulations are on file with and available for review upon
request to the franchising authority.
C. If no decision is issued by the franchising authority at the
expiration of the additional time, the current rates or proposed
rate increase shall become effective, subject to any later
refund order adopted by the franchising authority.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the franchising authority, in
order to later order a refund, shall within the text of the order,
direct the cable operator(s) to keep an accurate account of all
amounts received by reason of the rate in issue and on whose
behalf such amounts were paid.
(c) Decision of the franchising authority.
(1) The franchising authority shall issue a written opinion when:
A. The rate application is not approved, in whole or in part, by the
franchising authority;
B. The rate application is approved by the franchising authority
over the objection(s) of any interested party.
(2) The franchising authority may, but is not required, to issue a
written opinion when the rate application is approved and there
have been no objections filed.
 309.04 CHARTER  309.04
C:97
(3) Within seven days of issuance of an opinion, the franchising
authority shall provide notice in a newspaper of general circulation
within the jurisdiction of the franchising authority, which notice
shall contain at a minimum that:
A. The franchising authority has reached a decision on the rate
application, and announcing that decision;
B. The manner in which interested parties may review and/or
obtain copies of the opinion;
C. The right of interested parties to take an appeal from the
opinion of the franchising authority; and
D. The deadline for taking any such appeal.
(4) Notice of the opinion of the franchising authority shall be provided
to the cable operator(s) by mail within seven days of issuance.
(d) Disapproval of the rate application.
(1) Rate reduction.
A. Current rates. If the franchising authority shall issue an
opinion disapproving the current rates of the cable operator(s)
for the basic service tier or for rates for the equipment and
installation necessary to receive the basic service tier, the
franchising authority may order a reduction in the current
rates for the basic service tier and/or for the equipment and
installation necessary to receive the basic service tier. The
prospective rate adjustment may be set at:
1. A level consistent with the FCC adopted maximum
permitted rates;
2. Another rate, based on review of a cost-of-service rate
application; or
3. Another rate consistent with FCC rules.
B. Proposed rates. If the franchising authority shall issue an
opinion disapproving of any proposed rate increase, the
franchising authority may:
1. Prescribe a reasonable rate to be charged by the cable
operator(s) instead of the proposed rate. The prescribed
rate may not be lower than the maximum permitted rate
unless a cost-of-service rate application has been
submitted by the cable operator(s) and the franchising
authority determines that the cost-of-service analysis
justifies a lower rate; or
 309.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  309.04
C:98
2. Advise the cable operator(s) of a rate level to which it
would not object if a modified rate application were
resubmitted.
(2) Refunds. The franchising authority may order a refund if:
A. The cable operator failed to comply with a rate decision by the
franchising authority. The refund period may be retroactive to
the effective date of the rate order issued by the franchising
authority.
B. The franchising authority determines in its initial review of the
current rates that they exceed the maximum permitted rates
and are unsupported by a cost-of-service rate application. In
such instance the refund period may be retroactive to
September 1, 1993 or one year prior to the date on which the
cable operator(s) implement(s) the prospective rate
adjustment, whichever is shorter.
C. The franchising authority:
1. Has issued an order permitting it to take an additional 90
or 150 days to consider a rate application; and
2. Has directed the cable operator(s) to keep an accurate
account of all amounts received by reason of the rate in
issue and on whose behalf such amounts were paid; but
3. Failed to issue an opinion during that time period, causing
the rates to become provisionally effective, and the
franchising authority later finds all or a portion of the rates
to be unreasonable.
In such instance, the refund period may be retroactive to the date
of the order and ending on the date on which the cable operator(s)
implements the prospective rate reduction, or one year, whichever
is shorter.
(3) Before any refund order shall become effective, the franchising
authority shall send notice to the cable operator(s), and provide
such cable operator(s) a maximum of 30 days to submit additional
information to the franchising authority as to why the refund
should not be ordered. At the end of such period, the franchising
authority shall either confirm, amend or rescind such refund order.
(4) Refunds shall include interest computed at applicable rates
published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and
additional tax payments.
(5) If any proposed rate increase has gone into effect due to inaction of
the franchising authority or the failure of the franchising authority
to issue an order stating a need for additional time, the franchising
authority has no right to order a refund.
 309.04 CHARTER  309.04
C:99
 309.05. Customer service standards. [Ord. 1105, passed
9-27-1993]
 309.06. Enforcement. [Ord. 1105, passed 9-27-1993]
(6) Any violation of any order issued hereunder shall be considered a
violation of this article.
(a) Within 90 days of receipt by the cable operator(s) of written notice from
the franchising authority of the franchising authority's intention to
monitor and enforce the customer service standards adopted by the
FCC, a copy of which are attached hereto as Exhibit A and incorporated
herein by reference, the cable operator(s) shall comply with such
standards.
(b) At the next billing cycle after receipt of such notice, as to its existing
subscribers, and at the time of installation for new subscribers, the
cable operator(s) shall provide its subscribers with notice of its
customer service standards, and shall provide such subscribers with
the name of the franchising authority or contact person for such
franchising authority that the subscriber should contact to report any
violation, or alleged violation of such customer service standards.
(c) The franchising authority, upon- receipt of a complaint of an alleged
violation of the customer service standards by the cable operator(s), or
upon discovery of a violation on its own accord, shall provide notice of
the same to the cable operator(s), who may respond thereto within 10
days of such notice.
(d) The franchising authority, upon receipt of a complaint of an alleged
violation of the customer service standards by the cable operator(s), or
upon discovery of a violation on its own accord, shall provide notice of
the same to the cable operator(s), who may respond thereto within 10
days of such notice.
(e) Any failure of the cable operator(s) to cure a violation of the customer
service standards within such time as shall be set by the franchising
authority, or to timely respond to a notice from the franchising authority
regarding a violation, shall be a violation of this article.
(a) Cumulative remedies. Where this article provides alternative penalties
or remedies, they shall be cumulative and the imposition of one penalty
or remedy shall not prevent the franchising authority from invoking any
other penalty or remedy provided herein.
(b) In addition to all other rights and remedies provided herein, the
franchising authority shall have all rights and remedies afforded under
the franchise agreement.
(c) Unless otherwise provided, any person convicted of violating any
provision of this article, including any order issued or any rule or
regulation promulgated hereunder, shall, upon conviction, be fined not
 309.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  309.06
C:100
 309.07. Ratemaking appeals. [Ord. 1105, passed 9-27-1993]
Appeals of all ratemaking decisions by the franchising authority may be
taken to the FCC by the cable operator(s), subscribers or other interested
parties.
 309.08. Other matters. [Ord. 1105, passed 9-27-1993]
more than $500 and costs for each offense, and in default of payment
thereof may be imprisoned for not more than 90 days. Each day of a
continuing violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(a) Appeals shall be filed within 30 days of the date of public release of the
franchising authority's opinion.
(b) Oppositions to an appeal shall be filed within 15 days after the filing of
the appeal and shall be served on the party appealing.
(c) Replies to oppositions shall be filed within seven days of the filing of an
opposition and served on all parties.
(a) Cable programming service rates.
(1) The franchising authority is hereby authorized to file complaints
with the FCC on behalf of itself and/or any subscriber(s) who files a
complaint with the franchising authority for those cable
programming service rates solely regulated by the FCC.
(2) The decision to file a complaint with the FCC by the franchising
authority shall be in the sole discretion of the franchising authority.
(3) Any such complaint filed by the franchising authority shall be in
conformity with the rules of the FCC.
(4) The franchising authority, if it chooses not to file a complaint may,
but is not required, to assist a subscriber in filing a complaint.
(5) No formal review or adjudication by the franchising authority of
any such complaint is permitted.
(b) Information to be included in billing.
(1) A cable operator(s) shall provide the following information to
subscribers on monthly bills:
A. The name and mailing address of the franchising authority;
and
B. The FCC community unit identifier for the cable system.
(2) A cable operator(s) shall provide notice to the franchising authority
at least 30 days in advance of any change in rates for cable
programming service or associated equipment.
 309.06 CHARTER  309.09
C:101
 309.09. Severance. [Ord. 1105, passed 9-27-1993]
This article is adopted pursuant to Pennsylvania law and the authority given
to the franchising authority under the Cable Act of 1992 and the regulations
adopted by the FCC thereunder. If any portion of this article shall become
invalid or unenforceable as a result of any subsequent federal legislation,
or FCC regulation, such invalidity and/or unenforceability shall not affect
the validity and enforceability of the remainder of this article, and the same
shall be interpreted as if the invalid or unenforceable provision were not a
part hereof.
 309.10. Effective date. [Ord. 1105, passed 9-27-1993]
This article shall become effective October 16, 1993.
Article 321
AMUSEMENT TAX
[Editor's Note: Former Article 321 was repealed 2-5-1979 by Ord. No.
757. See now Article 307.]
Article 325
REALTY TRANSFER TAX
 325.01. Short title. [Ord. 967, passed 11-23-1987]
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the
Town of McCandless".
 325.02. Authority. [Ord. 967, passed 11-23-1987]
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or any interest in real estate situated within
the Town of McCandless, regardless of where the documents making the
transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements
on such transfer take place as authorized by Article XI-D "Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax," 72 P.S.  8101-D et seq.
 325.03. Definitions. [Ord. 967, passed 11-23-1987]
As used in this article certain terms are defined as follows:
ASSOCIATION  A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION  A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
Commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
 309.09 MCCANDLESS CODE  325.03
C:102
DOCUMENT  Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely
grant, vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" also includes
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
Section 325.08.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION  A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
GOVERNING BODY  The Town of McCandless.
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY  Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendents of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
PERSON  Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person" as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE 
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
(a)
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
(b)
(c) Fur farming;
(d) Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
(e) Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Town, including
without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees
and other improvements, immovables or interests which by custom,
usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently
attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant;
(a)
 325.03 CHARTER  325.03
C:103
REAL ESTATE COMPANY  A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE 
TRANSACTION  The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE 
(b) A condominium unit; or
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
(c)
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
(a)
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
(b)
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold; or
(a)
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
(b)
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate. Provided, that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
(a)
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
(b)
 325.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  325.03
C:104
 325.04. Imposition of tax; interest. [Ord. 1311, passed
12-20-2004; Ord. 1340, passed 2-26-2007]
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
shall be determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate
for local real estate tax purposes by the common level ratio factor
developed by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax base calculation;
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value
of which is not determinable under subsection (l)(1) or (2) hereof, the
actual monetary worth of such interest; or
(c)
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
(d)
(a) Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay to the Town of McCandless, pursuant to the authority of
the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, 53 P.S.
Section 6901 et seq., for and in respect to the transaction or any part
thereof, a tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate
represented by such document, which tax shall be payable to the Town
of McCandless at the earlier of the time the document is presented for
recording or within 30 days of acceptance of such document or within
30 days of becoming an acquired company. It is the intent of this
paragraph that the entire burden of the 1% tax imposed by the Town of
McCandless, pursuant to the authority granted to it by the Local Tax
Enabling Act, by this Paragraph on a person or transfer shall not exceed
the limitations prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, 53 P.S.  6901 et seq., so that if any other
political subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on
the same person or transfer, then the tax levied by the Town of
McCandless in this Paragraph, under the authority of the Local Tax
Enabling Act shall, during the time such duplication of the tax exists,
except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and such 1/
2 rate shall become effective without any action on the part of the Town
of McCandless; provided, however, that the Town of McCandless and
any other political subdivision which imposes such tax on the same
person or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective
rates to 1/2 of the rate herein provided, they will impose, respectively,
different rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate
permitted under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
 325.03 CHARTER  325.04
C:105
(b) Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall [in
addition to the tax imposed by Paragraph (a) of this section] also be
subject to pay to the Town of McCandless, pursuant to the authority of
the Home Rule Charter for the Town of McCandless and the
Pennsylvania "Home Rule Charter and Optional Plans Law", for and in
respect to the transaction or any part thereof, an additional tax at the
rate of 1/2% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable solely to the Town of McCandless
at the earlier of the time the document is presented for recording or
within 30 days of acceptance of such document or within 30 days of
becoming an acquired company. It is the intent of this Paragraph that
the additional tax of 1/2% imposed herein be and is imposed pursuant
to the authority granted to the Town of McCandless by the Home Rule
Charter for the Town of McCandless and the Pennsylvania "Home Rule
Charter and Optional Plans Law" and, as such, is in addition to the tax
set forth in Paragraph A of this section and is not subject to any of the
limitations set forth either in Paragraph A of this section or in the Local
Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. Section
6901 et seq.
(c) The payment to the Town of McCandless of the taxes imposed by
Paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section shall be evidenced by the affixing
of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder wherein the date of the
payment of the taxes, the amount thereof and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
(d) The tax imposed under Section 325.04 and all applicable interest and
penalties shall be administered, collected and enforced under the Act of
December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511, as amended), known as "The
Local Tax Enabling Act;" provided that if the correct amount of the tax
is not paid by the last date prescribed for timely payment, the Town of
McCandless, pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of
1971 (P.S. 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce
the tax, interest and penalties.
(e) Any tax imposed under Section 325.04 that is not paid by the date the
tax is due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest for delinquent
municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53
P.S.  7101 et seq.), as amended, known as "The Municipal Claims and
Tax Liens Act." The interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate
imposed upon delinquent Commonwealth taxes as provided in Section
806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. 806), as
amended, known as "The Fiscal Code," or the maximum interest rate
permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act for tax claims.
 325.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  325.05
C:106
 325.05. Exempt parties. [Ord. 967, passed 11-23-1987]
The United States, the Commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
 325.06. Excluded transactions. [Ord. 967, passed 11-23-1987]
The tax imposed by Section 325.04 shall not be imposed upon:
(a) A transfer to the Commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of
condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with condemnation
proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning body of the
property condemned to the owner of record at the time of
condemnation which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments provided such reconveyance is made within one year from
the date of condemnation;
(b) A document which the Town is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States;
(c) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school district or
county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax claim bureau
sale;
(d) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend or
limit existing record legal title or interest;
(e) A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration of
property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in value
than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess;
(f) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided
the property or interest therein subject to such transfer was acquired
by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to the granting of the
final decree in divorce, between parent and child or the spouse of such
child, between brother or sister or spouse of a brother or sister and
brother or sister of the spouse of a brother or sister, and between a
grandparent and grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except
that a subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be
subject to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer;
(g) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property passing by
testate or intestate succession from a personal representative of a
decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir;
 325.05 CHARTER  325.06
C:107
(h) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be exempt
if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of the possible
beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or
specifically named. No such exemption shall be granted unless the
recorder of deeds is presented with a copy of the trust instrument that
clearly identifies the grantor and all possible beneficiaries;
(i) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust;
(j) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee;
(k) A transfer:
(1) For no or nominal actual consideration between principal and
agent or straw party; or
(2) From or to an agent or straw party where, if the agent or straw
party were his principal, no tax would be imposed under this
article. Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee
or statement of value fails to set forth that the property was
acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit of, his principal,
there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is the property
of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee claims an
exemption from taxation under this clause;
(l) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation of a
corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation, except
where the department reasonably determines that the primary intent
for such merger, consolidation or division is avoidance of the tax
imposed by this article;
(m) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of record
in the name of the corporation or association where the grantee owns
stock of the corporation or an interest in the association in the same
proportion as his interest in or ownership of the real estate being
conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or the interest in the
association has been held by the grantee for more than two years;
(n) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority
to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that agency or
authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a transfer to a
nonprofit industrial development agency or authority;
(o) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority
to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(1) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
 325.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  325.06
C:108
 325.07. Documents relating to associations or corporations, and
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof. [Ord.
967, passed 11-23-1987]
Except as otherwise provided in Section 325.06, documents which make,
conform or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture; and
(2) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the real
estate transferred;
(p) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in
which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a mortgage,
unless the holder assigns the bid to another person;
(q) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or persons
holding title for a religious organization if such real estate is not being
or has been used by such transferor for commercial purposes;
(r) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954,
(68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C.  501(c)(3)) and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities;
(s) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which directly
owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(t) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation;
(u) A transaction therein the tax due is $1 or less; or
(v) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true,
full and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement
of value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement
of Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil,
natural gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an
explanation of the reason such document is not subject to tax under
this article.
 325.06 CHARTER  325.08
C:109
 325.08. Acquired company. [Ord. 967, passed 11-23-1987]
 325.09. Credits against tax. [Ord. 967, passed 11-23-1987]
(a) A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however affected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
(b) With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
(c) Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition to the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
(a) Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
(b) When there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
(c) Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
(d) Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
(e) If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
 325.08 MCCANDLESS CODE  325.09
C:110
 325.10. Extension of lease. [Ord. 967, passed 11-23-1987]
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
 325.11. Proceeds of judicial sale. [Ord. 967, passed 11-23-1987]
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the State realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or other
officer, conducting such sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
 325.12. Duties of recorder of deeds. [Ord. 967, passed
11-23-1987]
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
(a) As provided in 16 P.S.  11011-6, as amended by the Act of July 7, 1983,
(P.L. 40, No. 21), the recorder of deeds shall be the collection agent for
the local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the Town
based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer
Tax, without compensation from the Town.
(b) In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
(c) On or before the tenth of each month, the recorder shall pay over to the
Town all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax. The 2% commission shall be paid to
the county.
(d) Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the recorder shall rerecord the deed or
record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the State
and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
 325.09 CHARTER  325.13
C:111
 325.13. Statement of value. [Ord. 967, passed 11-23-1987]
Every document lodged with or presented to the recorder of deeds for
recording, shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
 325.14. Civil penalties. [Ord. 967, passed 11-23-1987]
 325.15. Lien. [Ord. 967, passed 11-23-1987]
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Town which lands, tenements,
hereditaments or interest therein, are described in or conveyed by or
transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed, assessed
and levied by this article, such lien to begin at the time when the tax under
this article is due and payable, and continue until discharge by payment,
or in accordance with the law, and the Town attorney is authorized to file a
municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County,
in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of
1923, 53 P.S.  7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
 325.16. Enforcement. [Ord. 967, passed 11-23-1987]
All taxes imposed by this article together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
(a) If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
(b) In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
 325.13 MCCANDLESS CODE  325.17
C:112
 325.17. Regulations. [Ord. 967, passed 11-23-1987]
The Town Attorney is charged with enforcement and collection of tax and
is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable regulations for
enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which have been
promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under 72 P.S.
 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this article.
 325.18. Severability. [Ord. 967, passed 11-23-1987]
Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article be
declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of this article in its entirety or any part thereof other than
that declared to be invalid.
 325.19. Effective date. [Ord. 967, passed 11-23-1987]
This article shall become effective 10 days after the notice of its enactment
is published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town.
 325.99. Penalty. [Ord. 967, passed 11-23-1987; Ord. 1340, passed
9-26-2007]
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be fined not more than
$500 for each offense and costs, and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days. The penalty imposed
under this section shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any
other section of this article.
Article 329
EARNED INCOME TAX
 329.01. Short title. [Ord. 133, passed 11-14-1956]
This article shall be known as "The McCandless Income Tax Ordinance", and
such term shall be its short title and full identification thereof.
 329.02. Definitions. [Ord. 133, passed 11-14-1956; Ord. 1294,
passed 12-15-2003]
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings, ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
ASSOCIATION  A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise, owned by two or more persons.
BUSINESS  An enterprise, activity, profession or undertaking of any
nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by
an individual, partnership, association or any other entity.
 325.17 CHARTER  329.02
C:113
COLLECTOR  That person or agency duly authorized to collect the tax
imposed herein. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
CORPORATION  A corporation or joint stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the State of Pennsylvania, or any other state,
territory, foreign country or dependency.
EARNED INCOME  Compensation as determined under Section 303 of
the act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2.), known as the "Tax Reform Code
of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. I Subpt. B Art. V (relating
to personal income tax). Employee business expenses are allowable
deductions as determined under Article III of the "Tax Reform Code of
1971." The amount of any housing allowance provided to a member of the
clergy shall not be taxable as earned income.
EMPLOYER  An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity employing one or
more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis.
NET PROFITS  The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, except corporations, determined under Section
303 of the act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2) known as the "Tax Reform
Code of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. 1 Subpt. B Art. V (relating
to personal income tax). The term does not include income which is not
paid for services provided and which is in the nature of earnings from an
investment. For taxpayers engaged in the business, profession or activity of
farming, the term shall not include:
NONRESIDENT  An individual, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the Town of McCandless.
PERSON  A natural person, partnership, corporation, fiduciary or
association. Whenever used in any section prescribing and imposing a
penalty, the term "person", as applied to associations, shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers
thereof.
RESIDENT  An individual, partnership, association, or other entity
domiciled in the Town of McCandless.
SALARIES, WAGES, COMMISSIONS AND OTHER COMPENSATION 
Includes salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive payments, fees
and tips that may accrue or be received by an individual for services
rendered, whether directly or through an agent and whether in cash or
Any interest earnings generated from any monetary accounts or
investment instruments of the farming business;
(a)
(b) Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
(c)
(d) Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
 329.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  329.02
C:114
in property, but shall not include periodic payments for sick or disability
benefits and those commonly recognized as old age benefits, retirement pay
or pensions paid to persons retired from service after reaching a specific
age or after a stated period of employment, nor any wages or compensation
paid by the United States to any person for active service in the Army, Navy
or Air Force of the United States nor any bonus or additional compensation
paid by the United States or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
other state for such service.
TAXPAYER  A person, whether an individual, partnership, association or
any other entity, required hereunder to file a return of earnings or net
profits, or to pay a tax thereon.
 329.03. Imposition of tax. [Ord. 1402, passed 1-1-2012]
(a) A tax for Town of McCandless general revenue purposes of 0.5% is
hereby imposed on the following:
(1) Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned on
and after the first day of the year following the enactment or reenactment
of this article, by residents of the Town.
(2) Net profits, earned on and after the first day of the year following
the enactment or re-enactment of this article, of businesses,
professions and other activities conducted by residents of the
Town.
(b) A tax for Town of McCandless general revenue purposes of 1.0% is
hereby imposed on the following:
(1) Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned on
and after the first day of the year following the enactment or reenactment
of this article, by nonresidents of the Town for work
done or services performed or rendered in the Town.
(2) Net profits, earned on and after the first day of the year following
the enactment or re-enactment of this article, of businesses,
professions and other activities conducted in the Town by
nonresidents.
 329.02 CHARTER  329.03
C:115
 329.04. Declaration and payment of tax. [Ord. 133, passed
11-14-1956; Ord. 599, passed 3-6-1972; Ord. 1246, passed
5-21-2001]
The tax levied under subsections (a)(1) and (b)(1) hereof shall relate to and
be imposed upon salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation
paid by an employer or on his behalf to any person who is employed by
or renders services to him. The tax levied under subsections (a)(2) and
(b)(2) hereof shall relate to and be imposed on the net profits of any
business, profession or enterprise carried on by any person as owner or as
proprietor, either individually or in association with some other person or
persons.
This article hereby imposes upon all persons designated herein the duty
to pay the tax to the Collector at times designated, and to file the proper
returns and declarations in accordance with the requirements herein,
regardless of whether or not there is a duty upon the employer of the
taxpayer to withhold the same from the taxpayer's salaries, wages,
commissions or other compensation. In the event that an employer fails to
withhold moneys of the taxpayer, the taxpayer is, nevertheless required to
pay the same.
(a) Every taxpayer who anticipates any net profits, or any earnings not
subject to the provisions of Section 329.05, relating to collection at
source, shall, on or before April 15 of the year following the enactment
or re-enactment of this article, make and file with the Collector on a
form prescribed by the Collector, a declaration of his estimated net
profits or earnings during the period beginning January 1 and ending
December 31 of the year following the enactment or re-enactment of
this article, setting forth the estimated amount of net profits or
earnings anticipated by him during such period and subject to the tax,
together with such other information as the Collector may require.
(b) The declaration shall show the estimated amount of tax imposed by this
article on such estimated net profits or earnings, the estimated amount
of tax which will be collected at source in accordance with Section
329.05, and the balance due. The taxpayer making the declaration
shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay the Collector the estimated
amount of tax shown as due thereon. However, the taxpayer shall have
the right to pay the estimated tax, or the balance of estimated tax due,
as shown on his return, in four quarterly installments as follows: the
first installment at the time of filing the declaration on or before April
15, and the other installments on or before July 15, October 15 and
December 31, respectively, of the year following the enactment or reenactment
of this article.
(c) Any taxpayer, who first anticipates any net profits, or any earnings not
subject to the provisions of Section 329.05 relating to collection at
source, after April 15 of the year following the enactment or reenactment
of this article, shall make and file the declaration
hereinabove required on or before July 15, October 15 or December 31
 329.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  329.04
C:116
of the year following the enactment or re-enactment of this article,
whichever of these dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer
first anticipates such net profits or earnings.
The taxpayer making the declaration shall, at the time of filing thereof,
pay to the Collector the estimated amount of tax shown due thereon.
However, the taxpayer shall have the right to pay the estimated tax,
or the balance of the estimated tax due, as shown on his return, in
equal installments on or before the quarterly installment payment dates
which remain after the filing of the declaration.
(d) On or before April 15 of the year succeeding the taxable year, every
taxpayer who receives earnings or net profits shall make and file with
the Collector on a prescribed form a final return showing all net profits
or earnings for the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31
of the taxable year, the total amount of tax due, the amount of estimated
tax paid under the provisions of this section, the amount of tax
deducted under the provisions of Section 329.05, and the balance due.
However, any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth quarterly
installment of his estimated tax, elect to make and file with the
Collector on or before January 31 of the year following the taxable year,
the final return as hereinabove required. At the time of filing the final
return each taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or shall make
demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
(e) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
year following the enactment or re-enactment of this article shall,
within seven days after the discontinuance of business, file his final
return as hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
(f) Every employee receiving any earnings which are not subject to the
provisions of Section 329.05 relating to collection at source, who
terminates his employment prior to December 31 of the year following
the enactment or re-enactment of this article shall, within seven days
after such termination, file his final return as hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
(g) The Collector may, upon proper application by the taxpayer, and in
accordance with regulations set therefor, grant extensions of time for
payments of tax as provided in this section.
(h) Under the authority of Act No. 511 of the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, approved December 13, 1965, P.L.
1189 as amended, the Collector is hereby directed to require all
township residents who receive any earned income not subject to the
provisions of the Income Tax Ordinance relating to collection at source
to make and file with the collector a quarterly return on or before April
30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the
current year and January 31 of the succeeding year, setting forth the
aggregate amount of earned income not subject to withholding made
during the three month periods ending March 31 of the current year,
 329.04 CHARTER  329.04
C:117
 329.05. Collection at source. [Ord. 133, passed 11-14-1956]
June 30 of the current year, September 30 of the current year and
December 31 of the current year, respectively, together with such other
information as the collector may require. Every taxpayer making such
return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the collector the amount
of tax shown as due thereon.
(a) Every person within the Town who employs one or more persons on a
salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis, other than
domestic servants, shall immediately, or within 15 days after becoming
an employer, register with the Collector his name, address and such
other information as the Collector may require.
(b) Every person within the Town who employs one or more persons on a
salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis, other than
domestic servants, shall deduct monthly, or more often than monthly, at
the time of payment thereof, the tax imposed by this article on the
salaries, wages, commissions and other compensations due to his
employee or employees, and shall, on or before January 15 of the year
following the enactment or reenactment of this article, and on or before
the 15th day of each succeeding calendar month, file a return of taxes
deducted on a form prescribed by the Collector and pay to the Collector
the amount of tax deducted for the preceding month.
(c) On or before January 31 of the year succeeding the year this tax was
due, every such employer shall file with the Collector on forms
prescribed by him:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of salaries, wages,
commissions and other compensation paid, the total amount of tax
deducted, and the total amount of tax paid to the Collector during
the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the
year following the enactment or re-enactment of this article.
(2) A return for each employee employed during all or any part of the
period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the year
following the enactment or re-enactment of this article, setting
forth the employee's name, address and social security number, the
amount of salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation
paid to the employee during such period, the amount of tax
deducted, the amount of tax paid to the Collector, and such other
information as the Collector may require, and every employer shall
furnish a copy of the individual return to the employee for whom it
is filed.
(d) Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
year following the enactment or re-enactment of this article shall,
within seven days after the discontinuance of business, file the returns
hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
 329.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  329.05
C:118
 329.06. Appointment of collector; powers and duties. [Ord. 133,
passed 11-14-1956; Ord. 511, passed 11-25-1968; Ord. 1403, passed
11-28-2011]
Council, by resolution, may appoint any person or agency, so designated,
to collect the tax imposed herein, and Council may set the compensation of
such person or agency who shall be known as "The McCandless Income Tax
Collector" or "Collector".
The Collector shall act in accordance with this article and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto.
(e) The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this
article relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
(a) It shall be the duty of the Collector to collect and receive the taxes, fines
and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a
record showing the amount received by him from each person paying
the tax and the date of such receipt.
(b) The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article. Council is hereby
empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this article, including provisions for the re-examination
and correction of declarations and returns, and of payments alleged or
found to be incorrect, or as to which an overpayment is claimed or
found to have occurred, and to prescribe forms necessary for the
administration of this article.
(c) The Collector, and agents designated by him, are hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers and records of any employer or supposed
employer or of any taxpayer in order to verify the accuracy of any
declaration or return, or, if no declaration or return was filed, to
ascertain the tax due. Every employer or supposed employer and every
taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is hereby directed and required to give
to the Collector or to any agent designated by him the means, facilities
and opportunity for such examinations and investigations as are hereby
authorized.
(d) Any information gained by the Collector, his agents, or by any other
official or agent of the Town of McCandless as a result of any
declarations, returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required
or authorized by this article shall be confidential except for official
purposes and except in accordance with a proper judicial order or as
otherwise provided by law.
(e) Any person aggrieved by any action of the Collector shall have the right
to appeal as provided by law.
 329.05 CHARTER  329.06
C:119
 329.07. Suit for collection of tax. [Ord. 133, passed 11-14-1956]
All unpaid taxes imposed by this article together with interest and penalties
shall be recoverable by the Town Attorney as other debts of like amount are
recoverable, provided, that any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by
this article shall be begun within six years after such tax is due or within six
years after a declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later.
However, this limitation shall not prevent the institution of a suit for the
collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the following cases:
 329.08. Interest and penalties. [Ord. 133, passed 11-14-1956]
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per
annum on the amount of such tax, and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1%
of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during
which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Where suit is
brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in
addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties
herein imposed.
 329.09. Payment under protest and refunds. [Ord. 133, passed
11-14-1956]
The Collector is hereby authorized to accept payment under protest of the
amount of tax claimed by the Town in any case where any person disputes
the validity or amount of the Town's claim for the tax. If it is thereafter
judicially determined by a court of competent jurisdiction that there has
been an overpayment to the Collector, the amount of the overpayment with
legal interest shall be refunded to the person who paid under protest.
The Town Tax Office is empowered and authorized to require all
owners of rental property which is located within the Town to submit
the names and addresses of all persons occupying such property. The
Town Tax Office shall prepare forms for such purposes and shall advise
all such owners of their duty to report the identity of their tenants
within 15 days of occupancy. This information will then be forwarded
to the Town's Earned Income Tax Collector.
(a) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under the
provisions of this article.
(b) Where an examination of the declaration or return in the possession of
the Collector reveals a fraudulent evasion of taxes, including, but not
limited to, substantial understatement of taxes deducted and of actual
or estimated net profits or earnings.
(c) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the Collector.
 329.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  329.10
C:120
 329.10. Exemptions. [Ord. 133, passed 11-14-1956]
The tax imposed by this article shall not apply:
 329.11. (Reserved)3
 329.99. Penalty. [Ord. 133, passed 11-14-1956; Ord. 1211, passed
2-22-1999; Ord. 1403, passed 11-28-2011]
(a) To any person as to whom it is beyond the legal power of the Town to
impose the tax herein provided for under the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(b) To institutions or organizations operated for public, religious,
educational or charitable purposes, to institutions or organizations not
organized or operated for private profit, or to trusts and foundations
established for any of those purposes.
This section shall not be construed to exempt any person who is
an employer from the duty of collecting the tax at source from his
employees and paying the amount collected to the Collector under the
provisions of Section 329.05.
(a) Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return or to pay the tax required by this article; any employer who fails,
neglects or refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his
employees; any person who refuses to permit the Collector or any agent
designated by him to examine his books, records and papers; and any
person who makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return or
attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the
amount of his net profits or earnings to avoid the payment of the whole
or any part of the tax imposed by this article, shall be fined not more
than $500 for each offense and costs, and, in default of payment shall be
imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
(b) Any failure to file a quarterly return within the proper time limit and
any failure to make quarterly payment within the proper time limit by
those subject to the provisions of this article shall be deemed a violation
of this article and a violator may be fined not more than $500 and in
default of payment be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
(c) Any owner of rental property who fails to comply with the provisions of
Section 329.06 of this article shall be fined not more than $500 for each
offense and costs.
(d) Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 329.06 shall, be fined not
more than $500 for each offense and costs, and in default of payment
shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
3. Editor's Note: Former  329.11, Credit, was repealed 11-24-2003 by Ord. No. 1290.
 329.10 CHARTER  329.99
C:121
Article 333
MECHANICAL DEVICES TAX
 333.01. Short title. [Ord. 1176, passed 12-16-1996]
This article shall be known by its short title and cited as the "Mechanical
Devices Tax".
 333.02. Definitions. [Ord. 1176, passed 12-16-1996]
Unless otherwise specifically stated, the following terms shall have for the
purpose of this article the meanings herein respectively provided:
MECHANICAL DEVICE  Any music vending machine, commonly known as
a "juke-box"; any device which is operated for use as a game, entertainment
or amusement by the insertion of a coin or token or currency; and any
automatic or mechanical pinsetting device used in a bowling alley.
PERSON  Any natural person, association, firm partnership or
corporation.
 333.03. Amount of tax. [Ord. 1176, passed 12-16-1996]
A tax is hereby imposed, for general purposes, upon the privilege of using
or operating, within the Town, a mechanical device, as herein defined as
follows:
(e) The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
(f) The failure of any person to receive or procure the forms required for
making the declarations or returns required by this article shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
(a) For each mechanical pinsetting device used in a bowling alley, $50 for
the calendar year or any portion thereof.
(b) For each outdoor baseball or softball pitching device unrelated to any
other recreational or commercial use, $50 for the calendar year or any
portion thereof.
(c) For any golf ball dispensing machine located at a golf driving range
unrelated to any other recreational or commercial use, $50 for the
calendar year or any portion thereof.
(d) For all other mechanical devices, $150 for the calendar year or any
portion thereof.
(e) The tax herein levied shall be paid by the person owning the mechanical
device and/or operating the business establishment in which such
device is installed or used.
 329.99 MCCANDLESS CODE  333.04
C:122
 333.04. Payment date. [Ord. 1176, passed 12-16-1996]
The tax imposed under this article shall be payable to the Town Manager
or such other Town official who may subsequently be charged with the
responsibility of collecting taxes on or before January 15 or immediately
upon the installation of such machine, if installation occurs after January
15. No deduction or refund of any tax payable under this article shall be
granted in the case of any tax payable for less than a full calendar year,
or in case of any device destroyed, stolen, sold or otherwise disposed of
or transferred after the payment of such tax, or after such tax was due.
However, in case of substitution of any device by another device in the same
class, the use of which is taxable under this article, no additional tax shall
be paid.
 333.05. Sticker certificates. [Ord. 1176, passed 12-16-1996]
The Town Manager shall procure at the expense of the Town a sufficient
number of sticker certificates showing the following:
 333.06. Application for sticker certificate. [Ord. 1176, passed
12-16-1996]
On or before January 15 of each year that this article is effective, owners of
machines taxed in this article shall make application to the Town Manager
for a sticker certificate evidencing the payment of the tax. The application
shall show the following:
(a) The name of the Town;
(b) The number of the certificate;
(c) The number of the machine;
(d) The type of device; and
(e) The name of the owner.
(a) The name of the Town;
(b) The name and address of the applicant and the business establishment
at which the device is located.
(c) The name and address of the owner of the machine; and
(d) The identification of the machine by serial number and by type of
device.
 333.04 CHARTER  333.06
C:123
 333.07. Change in location or ownership. [Ord. 1176, passed
12-16-1996]
In case of the removal of any establishment in which a device for the use of
which a tax has been paid under this article to another location in the Town,
or in case of a change in the identity of the person operating or owning
such establishment, the person operating such establishment shall report
such fact within five days of such change in location or personnel, and the
Manager shall immediately amend the certificate.
 333.08. List of certificates. [Ord. 1176, passed 12-16-1996]
The Town Manager shall, on or before March 1 of any year in which
this article is effective, make a list of all persons and establishments to
whom certificates have been issued and shall file the same with the Town
Secretary and the Chief of Police.
 333.09. Severability. [Ord. 143, passed 3-13-1957]
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any of its provisions are
held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, the decisions of the court shall not
effect or impair any of the remaining provisions of this article. It is hereby
declared as the intent of Council that this article would have been adopted
had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid provisions not been included
herein.
 333.99. Penalty. [Ord. 1176, passed 12-16-1996]
Whoever violates or fails to carry out any of the provisions or requirements
of this article or attempts to do anything whatever to avoid payment of the
whole or any part of the tax imposed under this article, shall be fined not
more than $300 for each and every offense and the costs of prosecution
thereof, and in default thereof shall be imprisoned for not more than 30
days.
Article 337
REAL ESTATE TAX
The application shall be accompanied with the tax as provided herein.
The Town Manager shall thereupon issue, before February 15 of the
same year, a sticker evidencing such payment. The sticker certificate
issued by the Town Manager shall be displayed on each machine in
a conspicuous place. In the case of replacement of the machines an
alternate sticker certificate will be issued by the Town Manager upon
prompt application. Replacement of lost or destroyed stickers shall be
made at a fee of $1.
 333.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  337.01
C:124
 337.01. Tax levied; rate established. [Ord. 1471, passed
12-18-2017]
A real estate tax rate is levied by ordinance adopted for each fiscal
(calendar) year.
 337.02. Discount and penalty rate. [Ord. 717, passed 3-7-1977]
 337.03. Interim real estate tax. [Ord. 1317, passed 5-23-2005]
All taxpayers subject to the payment of real estate taxes to the Town
who have their assessment increased by Allegheny County due to new
construction on or additions to an existing building on the property will be
subject to payment of tax on the additional assessed value retroactive to
the first day of the month following the date on which an occupancy permit
for said new building or addition was granted by the Town, subject to the
following:
 337.04. Installment payments. [Ord. 1345, passed 7-2-2007]
Taxpayers that have been granted a homestead/farmstead exclusion under
Act 1 ("Eligible Taxpayers") are eligible to pay current Town real property
taxes in installments. The process through which an Eligible Taxpayer may
choose to pay current Town real property taxes in installments is as follows:
(a) All taxpayers subject to the payment of real estate taxes to the Town
shall be entitled to a discount of 2% from the amount of such tax upon
making payment within two months after the date of the tax notice. All
taxpayers who fail to make payment of such taxes for four months after
the date of the tax notice shall be charged a penalty of 10%, which
penalty shall be added to the taxes by the tax collector and be collected
by the tax collector.
(b) The rates of discount and penalties established by this section shall
become effective in 1977 and shall be effective for subsequent years
unless changed by ordinance.
(a) The Town must submit the interim request to Allegheny County within
the fiscal year of the improvement.
(b) The Town must send in the interim tax notice to the taxpayer within 10
days after receipt of the duplicate addition from Allegheny County. The
additional valuation will be taxed at the Town's tax rate reduced
proportionately to the number of months remaining in the fiscal year.
(c) If the full amount is paid within two months after the date the notice is
mailed, a discount of 2% will apply. If the full amount is paid within four
months of the mailing date of the notice, no penalty may be imposed
and the taxes cannot be considered delinquent, even if payment occurs
after December 31.
 337.01 CHARTER  337.04
C:125
Article 341
BUSINESS PRIVILEGE TAX
 341.01. Enacting authority. [Ord. 830, passed 12-21-1981]
(a) The payment of the first installment by an Eligible Taxpayer on or
before the first payment date set forth in (c) below shall be conclusive
evidence of the intention of the Eligible Taxpayer to pay Town real
property taxes via installments.
(b) When a taxpayer fails to evidence an intention to pay Town real
property taxes in installments as set forth in (a) and (c), the current
Town real property taxes shall become due and payable and be
collected as provided in the Act of May 25, 1945 (P.L. 1050, No. 394),
known as the Local Tax Collection Law, subject to the discounts and
penalties provided by that Act.
(c) The taxpayer shall be required to pay Town real property taxes in
accordance with the following installment schedule, with 1/3 of the
total amount of Town real property taxes due to be paid on each of the
installment payment dates:
First payment due date August 31
Second payment due date October 31
Third payment due date December 31
(d) If any installment is not paid when due, a penalty of 10% shall be added
to each installment on the date when it becomes delinquent; provided,
however, that if the property is turned over to the County for
nonpayment of taxes or a lien is filed, the aforementioned penalty shall
be replaced by the penalty and interest provided for in applicable law.
This penalty shall be collected by the tax collector.
(e) A taxpayer who is delinquent by more than 10 days or more than two
installment payments shall be ineligible for the installment option in the
following calendar year.
The Town shall provide an annual notice of information regarding the
payment of Town real property taxes in installments and the dates on
which the installment payments are due or delinquent on the tax notice
sent to the homestead and farmstead property owners.
(a) This article shall be known as the Business Privilege Tax Ordinance and
is enacted pursuant to the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act
of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, as amended.
 337.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  341.02
C:126
 341.02. Definitions. [Ord. 830, passed 12-21-1981]
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
BUSINESS  Any activity carried on or exercised for gain or profit in
the Town, including, but not limited to, the sale of merchandise or other
tangible personalty and/or realty, the performance of services and the rental
of personalty and/or realty.
CALENDAR YEAR  The period January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
LICENSE YEAR  The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
PERSON  Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association,
firm or corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing
a penalty, the term "person" as applied to associations shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers
thereof.
TAX ADMINISTRATOR  The person duly appointed by Council to collect
and administer the within tax and shall include his or its deputies.
TAX YEAR  The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive, except
that the tax year 1982 shall be the period February 1 to December 31, 1982.
TAXPAYER  A person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this
article.
TOWN  The Town of McCandless, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
 341.03. Imposition of tax; rate; business volume computed;
exemptions; liability to two or more municipalities; records. [Ord.
830, passed 12-21-1981; Ord. 1031, passed 5-29-1990]
There is hereby levied for the tax year 1982 and annually thereafter a tax
for general revenue purposes on the privilege of doing business as herein
defined in the Town as follows:
(a) Rate and basis of tax. The rate of the tax on each and every dollar of the
whole or gross volume of business transacted within the territorial
limits of the Town shall be one mill. One mill shall mean $1 per $1,000
of gross volume of business.
(b) Computation of volume of business.
(1) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
has commenced his business prior to the full calendar year prior to
the tax year shall compute his annual estimated whole or gross
volume of business upon the actual amount of the whole or gross
receipts of the business received by or credited to him during such
immediately preceding calendar year. For the tax year 1982 only,
such computation shall be based upon the actual whole or gross
 341.02 CHARTER  341.03
C:127
amount of business transacted from February 1 through December
31 of the immediately preceding calendar year.
(2) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
has commenced or commences his business before the beginning of
the tax year but after the beginning of the full calendar year prior
to the tax year, shall compute his estimated annual whole or gross
volume of business for the tax year upon the whole or gross volume
of business transacted by him during the prior calendar year,
taking the monthly average during such period and multiplying the
same by 12. In the event that he shall be in business fewer than 90
days in the prior calendar year, he shall be permitted to use
sufficient days in the calendar year in which the tax year begins to
equal 90 successive days after commencement of business, to take
a monthly average thereon, and to multiply the average by 12. For
the tax year 1982 only, such computation shall be based upon the
monthly average multiplied by 1.
(3) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
has commenced or commences his business subsequent to the
beginning of the tax year shall compute his annual whole or gross
volume of business upon the actual whole or gross amount of
receipts received by or credited to him during the tax year.
(4) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
engages in business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by nature,
shall compute his estimated whole or gross amount of business to
be transacted by him for the period such person engages in such
temporary, seasonal or itinerant business within the Town by a
method to be determined by the Tax Administrator.
(5) Every person who ceases to carry on a business during any tax year
after having paid the business privilege tax for the entire year shall,
upon making proper application to the Tax Administrator, be
entitled to receive a refund of the pro-rata amount of the tax based
upon the period of time he was not in business during the tax year.
In the event that a person who discontinues business during any
tax year does so before payment of his tax becomes due for such tax
year, he shall be permitted to apportion his tax for such tax year
and shall pay an amount to be computed by multiplying his gross
receipts for the preceding full calendar year by a fraction whose
numerator shall be the number of months such person was in
business during the tax year and whose denominator shall be 12.
(6) The Tax Administrator is hereby authorized to accept payment
under protest of the amount of business privilege tax claimed by
the Town in any case where the taxpayer disputes the validity or
amount of the Town's claim for tax. If it is thereafter judicially
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction that the Town has
been overpaid, the amount of the overpayment shall be refunded to
the taxpayer.
 341.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  341.03
C:128
(c) Persons, businesses and receipts exempted.
(1) Persons and businesses. Persons employed for a wage or salary,
nonprofit corporations or associations organized for religious,
charitable or educational purposes, agencies of the Government of
the United States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the
business of any political subdivision, or of any authority created or
organized under and pursuant to any act of assembly are exempt
from the provisions of this article.
(2) No such tax shall be assessed and collected on a privilege,
transaction, subject or occupation which is subject to a State tax or
license fee, and which tax or license fee has been held by the
Courts of Pennsylvania to be the basis for exemption from the
imposition of a business privilege tax by a municipality.
(3) Utilities. No such tax shall be assessed and collected on the gross
receipts from utility service of any person or company whose rates
of service are fixed and regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission; or on any public utility service rendered by any such
person or company or on any privilege or transaction involving the
rendering of any such public utility service.
(4) State tax on tangible property. No such tax shall be assessed and
collected on the privilege of employing such tangible property as is
subject to a State tax except on sales of admission to places of
amusement or on sales or other transfer of title or possession of
property.
(5) Production and manufacture. No such tax shall be assessed and
collected on goods, articles and products or on by-products of
manufacture, or on minerals, timber, natural resources and farm
products, manufactured, produced or grown in the Town, or on the
preparation of processing thereof for use of market, or on any
privilege, act or transaction relating to the business of
manufacturing, the production, preparation or processing of
minerals, timber, and natural resources or farm products, by
manufacturers, by producers and by farmers with respect to the
goods, articles and products of their own manufacture, production
or growth, or any privilege, act or transaction relating to the
business of processing by-products of manufacture, or on the
transportation, loading, unloading or dumping or storage of such
goods, articles, products or by-products.
(6) Minimum tax exemption. No such tax is due if the tax amount owed
for any license year is equal to or less than $5. A tax return and
documentation required by the Tax Administrator shall be filed by
the date on which tax is due.
(d) Determination of gross or whole volume business. Gross or whole
volume of business upon which the tax hereunder is computed shall
include the gross consideration credited or received for or on account
 341.03 CHARTER  341.03
C:129
 341.04. Returns; payment; late penalty. [Ord. 830, passed
12-21-1981; Ord. 1437, passed 2-24-2014]
of sales made, rentals and/or services rendered, subject only to the
following allowable deductions and exemptions:
(1) The dollar volume of business transacted by wholesale and retail
dealers derived from the resale of goods, wares and merchandise
taken by any dealer as trade-in or as part payment for other goods,
wares and merchandise, except to the extent that the resale price
exceeds the trade-in allowance.
(2) Refunds, credits or allowances given by a taxpayer to a purchaser
on account of defects in goods, wares or merchandise sold, or on
account of goods, wares or merchandise returned.
(3) Any commissions paid by a broker to another broker on account of
a purchase or sales contract initiated, executed or cleared with
such other broker.
(4) Bad debts, where the deduction is also taken in the same year for
Federal Income Taxation purposes.
(5) Taxes collected as agent for the United States of America,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, County of Allegheny or the Town
of McCandless.
(e) Partial exemptions. Where gross or whole volume of business in its
entirety cannot be subjected to the tax imposed by this article by reason
of the provisions of the Constitution of the United States or any other
provision of law, the Tax Administrator, with the approval of Council,
shall establish rules and regulations and methods of allocation and
evaluation so that only that part of the gross or whole volume of
business which is properly attributable and allowable to doing business
in the Town shall be taxed hereunder.
(f) Rate when same tax is imposed by two taxing bodies. If any person is
liable for the same tax on the same subject imposed under the Local Tax
Enabling Act 1965, December 31, Pamphlet Law 1257, and its
amendments, to the Town and one or more political subdivisions, of the
State, then and in that event the tax shall be apportioned by such
percentage as may be agreed upon by such political subdivisions, but,
in no event, shall the combined taxes of both subdivisions exceed a
maximum rate of tax as fixed by the Enabling Act permitting the
imposition of such taxes.
(g) Records. The taxpayer, to obtain the foregoing enumerated exclusions
and deductions, shall keep books and records of his business so as to
show clearly, accurately and separately the amount of such sales and
services as are excluded from the tax and the amounts of such sales and
services which he is entitled to deduct from the gross volume of
business as hereinbefore provided.
 341.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  341.04
C:130
(a) Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the Tax
Administrator. Every person making a return shall certify the
correctness thereof by affidavit.
(b) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commenced
his business on or before January 1 of the full calendar year previous to
the beginning of any tax year shall on or before May 15 of the tax year
file with the Tax Administrator a return setting forth his name,
business, business address and such other information as may be
necessary in arriving at the actual gross amount of business transacted
by him during the preceding calendar year, and the amount of the tax
due.
(c) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business before the beginning of the tax year but after
January 1 of the full calendar year previous to the beginning of the tax
year shall on or before May 15 of the tax year file with the Tax
Administrator a return setting forth his name, business, business
address and such other information as may be necessary in arriving at
the estimated gross amount of business transacted by him as calculated
under Section 341.03(b)(2) and the amount of tax due.
(d) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced or commences business subsequent to the beginning of any
tax year shall, on or before January 31 of the year immediately following
the tax year, file a return together with payment of the tax due, with the
Tax Administrator, containing the actual gross amount of business
transacted by him calculated under Section 341.03(b)(3).
(e) Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this article
who engages in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant shall on or
before January 31 of the year immediately following the tax year file a
return together with payment of the tax due, with the Tax
Administrator, containing the actual whole or gross amount of business
transacted by him as calculated under Section 341.03(b)(4).
(f) Any person going out of or ceasing to do business shall, within seven
days from the date of ceasing to do business, file a return showing the
actual gross volume of business conducted and done by such person
during that tax year in which such person ceased doing business, and
pay the tax due as computed thereon at the rate herein provided for at
the time of filing such return. If such tax has been previously paid based
upon estimated gross receipts, the taxpayer shall be entitled to a
refund, without interest, of any excess tax paid for the tax year in which
business was terminated.
(g) Payment of tax and penalties for late payment. The Business Privilege
Tax levied pursuant to this article for the tax year 1982, which shall
include the period from February 1, 1982 through December 31, 1982,
shall be due and payable as follows: 1/3 shall be due and payable on
May 15, 1982, 1/3 shall be due and payable on July 15, 1982 and 1/3
 341.04 CHARTER  341.04
C:131
 341.05. License fee. [Ord. 849, passed 8-23-1982]
After the effective date of this section, any person desiring to conduct, or
to continue to conduct any business, as herein defined, within the Town
shall file with the Tax Administrator an application for a Business Privilege
License and shall pay a fee of $5 for the initial license. There shall be no fee
required for license renewal.
 341.06. Posting license. [Ord. 830, passed 12-21-1981]
The license issued shall be conspicuously posted in the place of business for
which such license is issued, and shall remain in effect for the license year
or fraction of year for which the license was issued. In cases where more
than one place of business is conducted, a separate license shall be issued
for each place of business. Any taxpayer who is in default in payment of tax
due hereunder shall be refused a license until such tax is paid in full.
 341.07. Tax Administrator duties. [Ord. 830, passed 12-21-1981]
shall be due and payable on September 15, 1982, and if the same is not
paid on such dates, 10% shall be added thereto, plus an additional 1%
per month or fractional part of a month until paid. For the tax years
1983 and subsequent tax years to which this article is applicable, the
business privilege tax levied pursuant to this article shall be due and
payable on the date on which the taxpayer is required to file a return
as set forth above, and if the same is not paid on such date, 10% shall
be added thereto, plus an additional 1% per month or fractional part
of a month until paid. For Business Privilege Tax due and payable for
2014 and subsequent tax years, if for any reason the tax is not due,
interest at the rate of 6% per annum on the amount of such tax, and an
additional penalty of 0.5% of the amount of unpaid tax for each month
or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added
and collected.
(h) Receipt. The Tax Administrator shall, upon payment to him of the
Business Privilege Tax, give the person paying the same a receipt
therefor.
(a) The Tax Administrator is charged with the duties of collecting and
receiving the taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall
be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him for
each person paying the tax and the date of such receipt. The Tax
Administrator may delegate his authority hereunder, with the approval
and consent of Council to a deputy or deputies.
(b) The Tax Administrator and his duly appointed deputies under the
direction of Council are hereby empowered with the approval of
Council to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement
of this article, including provisions for the examination and correction
of returns, and the payments alleged or found to be incorrect, or as to
 341.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  341.07
C:132
 341.08. Confidential nature of information. [Ord. 830, passed
12-21-1981]
Any information gained by the Tax Administrator or any other official, agent
or employee of the Town, as a result of any returns, investigations, hearings
or verifications required or authorized by this article, shall be confidential,
except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by
law.
 341.09. Suit on collection and penalty. [Ord. 830, passed
12-21-1981]
which an overpayment is claimed, or found to be incorrect, or as to
which an overpayment is claimed, or found to have occurred, and
charged with enforcing the provisions of this article and any rules and/
or regulations promulgated pursuant hereto.
(c) In the event the person to be assessed neglects or refuses to make a
return, then in such case the Tax Administrator or his duly appointed
deputies shall assess such person or persons on such an amount of
whole or gross volume of business as the Tax Administrator or his
deputies deem reasonable and appropriate. In all cases of assessment,
the Tax Administrator or his duly appointed deputies shall give the
parties assessed a notice in which shall be stated the amount of the
Business Privilege Tax imposed or levied.
(d) The taxpayer shall maintain such records and books of account as shall
enable him to make a true and accurate return in accordance with the
provisions of this article. Such accounts and records shall disclose in
detail the gross receipts and other data pertaining to the taxpayer's
gross volume of business, and shall be sufficiently complete to enable
the Tax Administrator or his deputies to verify all transactions. The Tax
Administrator or his deputies are hereby authorized to examine the
books, papers and records of any person or persons subject to or
supposed to be subject to the tax imposed by this article, in order to
verify the accuracy of the return made, or if no return was made, to
ascertain the tax due.
(e) The Tax Administrator or his deputy is hereby authorized to compel the
production of books, papers and records, and/or writings and
documents of every nature and kind, of any person subject or supposed
to be subject to the tax imposed by this article, for his review, inspection
or copying, and the attendance of all persons before him, whether as
parties or witnesses, whom he believes to have knowledge of such
books, papers, records, documents, writings and/or knowledge of the
business transacted by any taxpayer with the Town.
(f) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator shall
have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania.
 341.07 CHARTER  341.09
C:133
 341.10. Severability. [Ord. 830, passed 12-21-1981]
 341.11. Effective date. [Ord. 830, passed 12-21-1981]
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of the Local Tax Enabling
Act, 1965, December 31, Pamphlet Law 1257, as amended, and shall
become effective 30 days after it has been passed by Council and shall
continue thereafter unless amended or repealed.
 341.99. Penalty. [Ord. 830, passed 12-21-1981]
(a) The Tax Administrator or his duly appointed deputies shall have the
power in the name of the Town to institute proceedings against any and
all persons who violate the provisions of this article.
(b) If for any reason the tax is not paid when due and suit is brought for the
recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor, shall, in addition,
be liable for the costs of collection and interest and penalties herein
imposed.
(a) Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Town to levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person, or any
business, or any portion of any business not within the taxing power of
the Town under the Constitution of the United States and the laws and
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(b) If the tax, or any portion thereof, imposed upon any person under the
provisions of this article shall be held by any Court of competent power
or jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States
or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other provision of the
law, the decision of the Court shall not affect or impair the right to
impose the taxes, or the validity of the taxes so imposed upon other
persons as herein provided.
(c) The provisions of this article are severable, and if any of its provisions
shall be held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, the decision of the
Court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of this
article. It is hereby declared to be the intention of Council that this
article would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional provisions had not been included herein.
(a) Whoever conducts, transacts or engages in any of the businesses
subject to the tax imposed by this article, without having first secured a
Business Privilege License for the year, or any person who shall fail to a
file a tax return as required by the provisions of this article, or any
person who shall willfully file a false return, shall, upon summary
conviction before any District Magistrate in the County be fined not
more than $300 for any one offense and recoverable costs.
(b) Each day on which such person violates this article may be considered
as a separate offense and punishable as such as aforeprovided.
 341.09 MCCANDLESS CODE  341.99
C:134
Article 343
LOCAL ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION TAX ASSISTANCE
(LERTA) PROGRAM
 343.01. Title and effective date. [Ord. 1076, passed 7-20-1992]
 343.02. Statutory authority. [Ord. 1076, passed 7-20-1992]
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the following
statutes:
 343.03. Definitions and findings of fact. [Ord. 1076, passed
7-20-1992]
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have
the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly
(a) This article shall be known as the Revenue Allocation Program
Ordinance (hereinafter "R.A.P. Ordinance") and the program created
hereby shall be known as the R.A.P. Program.
(b) The provisions hereof shall become effective immediately upon
enactment and advertising in accordance with the provisions of the
Town of McCandless (hereinafter "Town") Home Rule Charter
(hereinafter "Charter") and its terms shall continue in effect without
annual re-enactment until the expiration provided herein. Changes in
its terms become effective on the date specified in any amending
ordinance; provided, however, no changes shall become effective which
will adversely affect any financing obligations of the Town of
McCandless, as hereinafter set forth, for which the Town has become
obligated prior to the date of the change.
(a) The Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act, the Act of
December 1, 1972, P.L. 237, No. 76, 72 P.S. Sec. 4722 et seq.
(b) The Transportation Partnership Act, as the same may be amended, the
Act of July 9, 1985, P.L. 189, No. 47, 53 P.S. Sec. 1621 et seq.
(hereinafter "TPA").
(c) The Business Improvement District Act, the Act of November 30, 1967,
P.L. 658, No. 305, 53 P.S. Sec. 1551 et seq. (hereinafter "BIDA").
(d) The Home Rule Charter and Optional Plans Law, 53 P.S. Sec. 1-101 et
seq. (hereinafter "HRCOPL").
(e) The Act relating to Inter-Governmental Cooperation, 53 P.S. Sec. 481 et
seq.
(f) The Public School Code of 1949, 24 P.S. Sec. 1-101 et seq. (hereinafter
"School Code").
 341.99 CHARTER  343.03
C:135
indicates a different meaning and the Town, after public hearing, hereby
finds the following facts:
ASSESSMENT  A payment made involuntarily by a taxpayer whose
property is within the Eligible Area to or for the use of the Town in
developing or paying for public infrastructure facilities projects or services.
Such assessments shall be deemed imposed in conformity and under and
subject to the provisions of the TPA, BIDA or MAA.
BOARD  The Board of Property Assessment, Appeals and Review of
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
COLLECTOR  The person or persons appointed to collect real estate taxes
imposed pursuant to the taxing powers of the Town.
CONSTRUCTION  The erection of a building or buildings on previously
unoccupied land, or upon land on which a building or buildings have been
demolished or razed for the purpose of erecting a new building or buildings
consisting of industrial, residential, commercial or other business use
designed to obtain higher standards of safety, health, economic use or
amenity.
CONTRIBUTION  A payment made voluntarily by a taxpayer whose
property is within the Eligible Area to or for the use of the Town in
developing public infrastructure facilities projects or services.
"Contribution" includes, without limitation, grants, gifts and donations as
defined in the TPA, BIDA or MAA.
COUNTY  Allegheny County.
ELIGIBLE AREA 
That geographic area of the Town of McCandless more particularly
described on Exhibit "A" attached to this article as approved after prior
public hearing by the Town Council which meets the requirements
of Sec. 4725 of LERTA. The geographic area designated as the
"McCandless Economic Development District" on Exhibit "A" has been
found and determined to be within the following criteria:
(1) The area contains vacant, overgrown and unsightly lots of ground.
The area lacks public infrastructure and thus has defective design
or arrangement of buildings, streets or lot layouts.
(2)
Much of the area contains economically and socially undesirable
land uses.
(3)
The area is determined to meet the requirements for
redevelopment under criteria set forth in Sec. 1702(a) of the Act
of May 24, 1945, P.L. 991, No. 385 known as the "Urban
Redevelopment Law".
(4)
(a)
The "Eligible Area" as defined by this article shall be limited to that
described on Exhibit "A". Application of the terms and conditions of
the R.A.P. Program shall be limited to the Eligible Area described on
(b)
 343.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  343.03
C:136
ELIGIBLE PROPERTY  Any industrial, residential, commercial or other
business property owned by an individual, association or corporation and
located in the designated area on Exhibit "A" known as the McCandless
Economic Development District or any such property therein which has
been the subject of an order by a government agency requiring the unit
to be vacated, condemned or demolished by reason of noncompliance with
laws, ordinances or regulations.
EXEMPTION  The allocation to the Town by the local taxing authority
of the revenue generated by the tax based upon the additional assessment
valuation attributable to the actual cost of the construction, reconstruction
or improvement made to the eligible property.
IMPROVEMENT  Repair, construction or reconstruction, including
without limitation, alterations and additions, having the effect of
rehabilitating a deteriorating property so that it becomes habitable or
attains higher standards of safety, health, economic use or amenity or is
brought into compliance with laws, ordinances or regulations governing
such standards. Ordinary upkeep and maintenance shall not be deemed an
improvement.
LOCAL TAXING AUTHORITY  A county, city borough, incorporated town,
township, institution, district or school district having authority to levy real
property taxes (i.e., the North Allegheny School District and the Town of
McCandless).
MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF EXEMPTION FOR MCCANDLESS ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT  Pursuant to this article shall be 100% of the
millage in effect on a year to year basis (currently 10 mills) as applied to the
tax assessment attributable to improvements.
MCCANDLESS ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT  That portion of
the Town of McCandless, Allegheny County also known as the "Eligible
Area" and more particularly described on Exhibit "A" attached to this article
as established by the Town Council pursuant to TPA, BIDA, MAA, the
Charter or the HRCOPL.
MUNICIPAL GOVERNING BODY  A city, borough, incorporated town or
township (i.e., Town of McCandless).
PERSON  Any natural person, partnership, unincorporated association or
corporation, nonprofit or otherwise. Whenever used in any provision of this
article, the word "person" as applied to partnerships mean and include all
the partners thereof, as applied to unincorporated associations, mean and
include all members thereof, as supplied to corporations mean and include
all officials or officers thereof. The term "person" used in this article is
synonymous with the word "taxpayer" and "property owner".
Exhibit "A". Properties located in the "Eligible Area" shall be considered
"benefitted properties" within the meaning any of the following: (1) the
BIDA (2) TPA, (3) Municipality Authorities Act, 53 P.S. Sec. 301 et seq.
(hereinafter "MAA") or (4) the HRCOPL.
 343.03 CHARTER  343.03
C:137
RECONSTRUCTION  The rebuilding of a building or buildings previously
erected for the purpose of changing the economic use or amenity of such
structure or to obtain higher standards of safety or health.
SCHOOL DISTRICT  The North Allegheny School District.
TAX  Any tax otherwise permitted by law to be imposed by the Town
but restricted to subjects of taxation located within the Eligible Area and
restricting the receipts of such tax to the financing of economic
development, public infrastructure facilities or services.
TAX ASSESSMENT  The value of a parcel of real property within the Town
and School District as established by the Board of Property Assessment,
Appeals and Review or the Court of Common Pleas pursuant to the
provisions of the Second Class County Assessment Law, 72 P.S. Sec. 5452.1
et seq. for the purpose of the levy of real property taxes.
TAX YEAR  The twelve-month period from January 1 to December 31
annually.
TOWN  The Town of McCandless.
 343.04. Contemporaneous adoption. [Ord. 1076, passed
7-20-1992]
The terms and conditions of this article and the implementation of any
real property tax exemption granted hereunder are contingent upon the
adoption of a companion resolution by the School District. Pursuant to
the Act relating to Inter-Governmental Cooperation, no amendment to this
article shall be effective unless consented to by the School District.
 343.05. Exemption. [Ord. 1076, passed 7-20-1992]
Any property owner, whose real property is located within the Eligible Area
and who makes improvements to such real property may apply for and
receive from the Town an exemption from certain real property taxation
upon such improvements in the amounts and in accordance with the
provisions and limitations set forth in this article. The exemption of real
property taxes by the Town is conditioned upon the receipt of a 45 mil
exemption upon such improvements from the School District in accordance
with the provisions of its resolution.
(a) The maximum amount of the exemption for all taxpayers of all real
estate taxes under this article and the School District resolution shall
be limited to the total sums necessary for payment to the Town to pay
the School District special benefit assessment levied pursuant to the
TPA, fund debt service, costs and expenses (including planning,
financing, acquiring, developing, improving and operating), to sink
bonds and to provide reserves for future phases, all related specifically
to public infrastructure facilities projects or services within the
McCandless Economic Development District undertaken by the Town
pursuant to the TPA, BIDA, MAA, the Charter or HRCOPL.
 343.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  343.05
C:138
 343.06. Procedure for obtaining exemption. [Ord. 1076, passed
7-20-1992]
(b) The maximum amount of the exemption for each taxpayer shall be
determined in each tax year, after levy of real estate taxes for such tax
year by all Local Taxing Authorities.
(c) The exemption from real estate taxes authorized by this article shall be
upon the property exempted and shall not terminate upon the sale or
exchange of the property.
(d) The exemption from real estate taxes shall be limited to 10 years as
permitted by LERTA for each building constructed or reconstructed or
improvements on each eligible property. No exemption granted under
this article shall continue past such time period as determined by
LERTA on an improvement by improvement basis.
(e) Nothing herein shall preclude a taxpayer or the Local Taxing
Authorities from appealing, from time to time, the assessment valuation
of the eligible property or any increases in assessed value as provided
in the Second Class County Assessment Law, 72 P.S. Sec. 5452.1 et seq.
(a) At the time that a property owner secures a building permit for
commencement of construction, reconstruction or improvement of a
property within the Eligible Area, the property owner desiring
exemption from real estate tax pursuant to this article shall file a
request in writing for exemption on a single form provided by the Town,
substantially in the form attached hereto and made a part hereof as
Exhibit B which is hereby approved by the Town.
(b) The property owner must certify on the form provided the following
information:
(1) Name and address of owner.
(2) Lot and block number of the property to be improved.
(3) The date the building permit was issued for construction,
reconstruction or improvement.
(4) The type of construction, reconstruction or improvement for which
exemption is requested.
(5) The summary of the plan of construction or reconstruction or plan
of improvement.
(6) The anticipated date of completion.
(7) The actual costs of construction, reconstruction or improvement.
(8) Where such activity consists of improvements to bring the property
into compliance with laws, ordinances or regulations governing
 343.05 CHARTER  343.06
C:139
safety or health, specific citations must be made to those laws,
ordinances or regulations.
(9) Such other information as may be necessary to process such
application for exemption.
(c) The application shall be submitted by the property owner to the Town
no later than 30 days after the date the building permit was issued.
Failure to submit notice of completion within 30 days may permit the
Town to deny such request for exemption for the initial tax year after
completion of construction, reconstruction or improvement thereby
limiting the length of the schedule of taxes exempted to one less year.
(d) A copy of the exemption request shall be forwarded by the Town to the
Board as well as to the School District within 30 days of the date the
exemption request was submitted to the Town.
(e) Upon receipt of the exemption request, the Board shall certify the
following information to the Town within 30 days of receipt of the
exemption request:
(1) The initial assessed valuation of the property before construction,
reconstruction or improvement.
(2) The taxes due for the current year on the property for the Town and
School District before construction, reconstruction or
improvement.
(f) When the construction, reconstruction or improvement has been
completed, the property owner shall notify the Town and the Town shall
notify the School District and Board in writing. Such notice must occur
within 30 days of completion. Failure to submit notice of completion
within 30 days may permit the Town to deny such request for exemption
for the initial tax year after completion of construction, reconstruction
or improvement thereby limiting the length of the schedule of taxes
exempted to one less year. The notice of completion shall include the
following information:
(1) Name and address of owner.
(2) Lot and block number of property improved.
(3) The date construction, reconstruction or improvement was
completed.
(4) Any modification to the plan of construction, reconstruction or
improvement as previously submitted.
(5) The final, adjusted actual costs of construction, reconstruction or
improvement.
(g) The Board shall, after notice in writing and with a prior physical
inspection, assess the property to determine the assessment valuation
 343.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  343.06
C:140
attributable to the construction, reconstruction or improvement and
eligible for tax exemption under this article and the School District
resolution.
(h) The Board shall provide in writing to the Town and School District and
Tax Collector the following information:
(1) The tax assessment of the property prior to construction,
reconstruction or improvement.
(2) The increase to assessed valuation attributed to the construction,
reconstruction or improvement.
(3) The amount of assessed valuation increase eligible for tax
exemption.
(4) The allocation of the increase in assessed valuation eligible for tax
exemption by the Town and School District.
(i) The Town shall promptly notify the School District and the Tax Collector
with a copy to the property owner in writing of the maximum amount of
tax that may be exempted pursuant to this article.
(j) The Tax Collector shall forward the tax bill to the property owner at the
appropriate time for each Local Taxing Authority utilizing its
established tax collection process as set forth in the School Code and
the Local Tax Collection Law, 72 P.S. Sec. 5511.1 et seq. (the "Local Tax
Collection Law").
(k) The property owner shall have the obligation to pay the tax bill as
directed within the appropriate time periods as provided in the Public
School Code or Local Tax Collection Law.
(l) The Tax Collector utilizing its established procedure shall forward the
appropriate amount due based on the allocation provided by the Board
to each of the Local Taxing Authorities.
(m) The Tax Collector shall arrange for refund of taxes and/or exemption as
the case may be based upon the exemption and shall provide evidence
of tax exemption in writing to each taxpayer or by way of tax receipts or
other documents.
(n) Should the taxpayers "contribution", "assessment" and/or "tax" paid to
the Town during any taxable year not take advantage of the maximum
exemption available from the Town and School District exemptions, the
actual amount of exemption granted to each taxpayer from each Local
Taxing Authority shall be calculated by the Board applying an allocation
based upon the ratio of the participating tax millage of each of the Local
Taxing Authorities for each tax year in which an exemption is claimed.
(o) All remaining taxes whether from the base assessment of taxes or on
unused amounts of exemption shall be paid to the Tax Collectors of the
Local Taxing Authorities according to the normal tax collection process
 343.06 CHARTER  343.06
C:141
 343.07. Annual qualification for exemption. [Ord. 1076, passed
7-20-1992]
 343.08. Notice to the Town. [Ord. 1076, passed 7-20-1992]
As soon as practical after the adoption of the budgets of the Town and
School District and the levy of real estate taxes thereunder, the Local Taxing
Authorities shall notify the Town of the property tax millage rates and
allocation to be applied to any exemption for the taxable year.
of the School Code and/or the Local Tax Collection Law and the
provisions of any other statute or regulation relating to the collection of
real estate taxes.
(p) In the event of a tax delinquency whereby the delinquent tax is
collected by the Tax Claim Bureau of Allegheny County, upon receipt of
its share of tax, the Town shall forward 100% of the millage in effect on
a year to year basis (currently 10 mills) of the tax collected or the
appropriate amount as determined by the Board to the Town.
(q) The Town may, on behalf of the property owners, provide some or all of
the reporting placed upon property owners to the Local Taxing
Authorities and the same may be met by an annual report by the Town
to the Local Taxing Authorities.
(a) After the initial application for exemption, a property owner need not
reapply for an exemption, unless the identity of the property owner
should change. Such new property owner desiring to maintain the
exemption of tax in succeeding tax years shall notify the School District
and Town in writing on or before the 15th day of April, of each tax year.
The notice shall include the following information:
(1) Name and address of current owner.
(2) Name and address of prior owners during exemption period.
(3) Lot and block number of property improved.
(4) Date that construction, reconstruction or improvement was
completed.
(5) Date of initial approval of exemption.
Failure to submit such notice for a succeeding year's exemption before the
15th day of April of each tax year may permit the Town to deny the request
for exemption for the tax year, thereby limiting the length of the schedule
of taxes exempted to one less year.
(b) The Town may, on behalf of the property owners, provide some or all of
the reporting placed upon property owners to the Local Taxing
Authorities and the same may be met by an annual report by the Town
to the Local Taxing Authorities.
 343.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  343.09
C:142
 343.09. Penalties for violation. [Ord. 1076, passed 7-20-1992]
Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any exemption request or
fails, neglects or refuses to file any certificate of completion or evidence of
contribution, assessment or tax as required by this article, within the time
limits provided may suffer loss of the exemption available for that taxable
year at the sole discretion of the Town. The loss of such exemption in any
one taxable year does not preclude exemption in any other taxable year
except insofar as the loss of such exemption reduces the maximum period
of exemption to one less year.
 343.10. Maximum period of exemption. [Ord. 1076, passed
7-20-1992]
The length of the schedule of taxes exempted shall not exceed 10 years,
the maximum time period allowed by LERTA from completion of the
construction, reconstruction or improvement on an improvement by
improvement basis.
 343.11. Effective date. [Ord. 1076, passed 7-20-1992]
The provisions of this article and the School District resolution shall become
effective on the date identified in Section 343.01(b) and shall impact upon
all property within the Eligible Area for which building permits are issued
from its effective date. This article and the School District resolution shall
remain in effect for a period of 20 years from the effective date and requests
for exemptions may be filed at the time of issuance of any building permits
for construction, reconstruction and improvement at any time during this
twenty-year period; provided further, that each property owner shall have
the benefit of the maximum period of exemption set forth in Section 343.10,
except as set forth in Section 343.12.
 343.12. Termination. [Ord. 1076, passed 7-20-1992]
If at any time during the period in which this article is in effect, including
the period of exemption after completion of construction, reconstruction
or improvement, all of the Town's public infrastructure facilities projects
or services within the McCandless Economic Development District shall be
completed, including the payment of all outstanding debt, nonassessable
cost overruns, costs, expenses, and the School District Special Benefit
Assessments, accrued and otherwise, the Town shall so notify the School
District of such completion and the provisions of this article shall become
null and void upon the adoption of an ordinance by the Town terminating
the effect of this article.
 343.13. Severability. [Ord. 1076, passed 7-20-1992]
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any of its provisions shall
be held invalid, illegal or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining provisions of this article. It is hereby declared
to be the intention of the Town Council that this article would have been
 343.09 CHARTER  343.13
C:143
adopted as if such invalid, illegal or unconstitutional provisions had not
been included herein.
 343.14. Compliance with Acts of Assembly. [Ord. 1076, passed
7-20-1992]
This article is enacted and intended to be in compliance with the provisions
of the Acts of Assembly recited above, and where the interpretation of terms
or provisions of this article are not in accordance with or in compliance
with the provisions of such Acts of Assembly, the provisions of such Acts are
intended to be adopted, resolved or enacted by this article as fully as though
incorporated, set forth, and made a part of this article.
 343.15. Repealer. [Ord. 1076, passed 7-20-1992]
Any resolution or part of any resolution conflicting with the provisions of
this article is rescinded insofar as the conflict exists.
 343.16. Town rules and regulations. [Ord. 1076, passed
7-20-1992]
The Town Manager is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate
and enforce rules and regulations related to any matter pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this article. No rule or regulation of any
kind shall be enforceable unless it has been approved by resolution of the
Town Council. A copy of such rules and regulations currently in force shall
be available for public inspection.
 343.17. Cooperation with the school district. [Ord. 1076, passed
7-20-1992]
The President of the Town Council is hereby authorized and directed to
enter into such agreements with the School District as are necessary from
time to time to effectuate the terms of the R.A.P. Ordinance. Such
agreements shall be in a form approved by the Town Solicitor.
 343.18. Adoption. [Ord. 1076, passed 7-20-1992]
This article is adopted this 20th day of July, 1992, to become effective
according to Section 343.01(b), and shall continue in effect thereafter from
year to year pursuant to its terms as approved by the Town Council of the
Town of McCandless.
Article 345
TAX ASSESSMENT LIMITATION PROGRAM
 343.13 MCCANDLESS CODE  345.01
C:144
 345.01. Definitions. [Ord. 1241, passed 4-23-2001]
ACT 77  The Act of December 22, 1993, Public Law 529, No. 77, codified
as the Allegheny Regional Asset District Law, PA. Stat. Ann. Tit. 16  6101-B
et seq.
ALLEGHENY REGIONAL ASSET DISTRICT LAW  See the definition of
"Act 77" above.
BOARD OF PROPERTY ASSESSMENT  The Board of Property Assessment
Appeals and Review of Allegheny County as set forth in Chapter 207 of the
Administrative Code of Allegheny County.
COUNCIL  Council of the Town of McCandless.
COUNTY  Allegheny County.
ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER  A longtime owner/occupant of a principal residence
in the County who is: (1) a single person aged 60 or older during a calendar
year in which County real property taxes are due and payable and whose
household income does not exceed $30,000; or (2) married persons if either
spouse is 60 or older during calendar year in which County real property
taxes are due and payable whose combined household income does not
exceed $30,000; or (3) an unmarried widow or widower aged 50 or older
during the calendar year in which County real property taxes are due and
payable and whose household income does not exceed $30,000; or (4) a
permanently disabled person aged 18 or older during the calendar year in
which County real property taxes are due and payable and whose household
income does not exceed $30,000.
HOUSEHOLD INCOME  All income received by an eligible taxpayer while
residing in his or her principal residence during a calendar year.
INCOME  All income from whatever source derived, including, but not
limited to, salaries, wages, dividends, interest, bonuses, commissions,
income from self-employment, IRA distributions, alimony, support money,
cash public assistance and relief, the gross amount of any pensions or
annuities, including railroad retirement benefits for the calendar years prior
to 1999, and 50% of railroad retirement benefits for calendar years 1999
and thereafter, all benefits received under the Federal Social Security Act
(except Medicare benefits) for calendar years prior to 1999, and 50% of
all benefits received under the Federal Social Security Act (except medical
benefits) for calendar years 1999 and thereafter, all benefits received under
State Unemployment Insurance laws and Veteran's Disability payments,
all interest received from the federal or any state government or any
instrumentality or political subdivision thereof, realized capital gains, net
income from rentals, worker's compensation and the gross amount of loss
of time insurance benefits, life insurance benefits and proceeds, except the
first $5,000 of the total of death benefit payments, and gifts of cash or
property, other than transfers by gift between members of a household, in
excess of a total value of $300, but shall not include surplus food or other
relief in kind supplied by a governmental agency or property tax or rent
rebate or inflation dividend.
 345.01 CHARTER  345.01
C:145
LONGTIME OWNER/OCCUPANT  A Town property owner/occupant who,
for at least 10 continuous years, has owned and occupied a dwelling place
within the County as a principal residence and domicile, or any person
who for at least five years has owned and occupied the same dwelling as
a principal residence and domicile if that person received assistance in the
acquisition of the property as a part of a government or non-profit housing
program.
OFFICE OF PROPERTY ASSESSMENT  The Office of Property Assessment
of Allegheny County or such other entity performing the function of making
valuations of real property for taxation purposes.
PERSON  A natural person.
PRIMARY PERSONAL RESIDENCE  The dwelling place and so much of
the land or lots surrounding it as is reasonably necessary for use of the
dwelling as a home, owned and occupied by a person. The term primary
personal residence shall also include premises occupied by reason of
ownership in a cooperative housing corporation, mobile homes which are
assessed as realty for local property tax purposes and the land upon which
the mobile home is situated, and other similar living accommodations, as
well as part of a multi-dwelling or multi-purpose building and a part of the
land upon which it is built. It shall also include premises occupied by a
person and located on land owned by a nonprofit incorporated association,
of which the person is a member, if the person is required to pay a pro
rata share of the property taxes levied against the association's land. It
shall also include premises occupied by a person if he is required by law to
pay a property tax by reason of his or her ownership or rental (including a
possessory interest) in the dwelling, the land, or both. An owner includes
a person in possession under a contract of sale, deed of trust, life estate,
joint tenancy or tenancy in common or by reason of statutes of descent and
distribution.
PROGRAM  See the definition of "Special Tax Provisions" below.
SENIOR CITIZENS REBATE AND ASSISTANCE ACT  The Act of March
11, 1971, Public Law 104, No. 3, as amended, codified at Pa. Stat. Ann. Tit.
72,  4751-1 et seq.
SPECIAL TAX PROVISIONS  A program of tax relief for eligible taxpayers
authorized under Act 77, as amended, consisting of a discount on the
payment of Town of McCandless real property taxes.
TOWN  Town of McCandless.
TREASURER  The Treasurer of Allegheny County.
 345.02. Special tax provision. [Ord. 1241, passed 4-23-2001; Ord.
1303, passed 6-28-2004]
(a) All eligible taxpayers in the Town who are longtime owner/occupants of
a principal residence shall be deemed a separate class of subjects of
taxation and shall be entitled to the benefit of the special Tax Provisions
of this Article.
 345.01 MCCANDLESS CODE  345.02
C:146
 345.03. Participation in program. [Ord. 1241, passed 4-23-2001]
Any person paying property taxes in the Town may apply to either the Office
of the Treasurer or to the Office of Property Assessment for certification as
a participant in the Program authorized under this Article. In order to be
eligible to participate in the Program, the person must meet the following
conditions:
 345.04. Rules and regulations. [Ord. 1241, passed 4-23-2001]
The Office of the Treasurer and the Office of the Property Assessment
and/or the Town Manager shall promulgate rules and regulations for the
administration of the Program established under this Article. Such rules
and regulations shall include, but not be limited to: application procedures
and deadlines; reasonable proof of household income; proof of residence;
ownership and occupancy of the primary personal residence; provision of
the tax bill or receipt for the Town of McCandless real estate taxes owed
or paid in connection with the primary personal residence; and any other
reasonable requirements and conditions as may be necessary to operate the
property tax relief program.
 345.05. Appeals. [Ord. 1241, passed 4-23-2001]
An appeal from any determination hereunder by the Office of the Treasurer
or the Office of Property Assessment shall be in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Local Agency Law.
Article 347
LOCAL SERVICES TAX
(b) All eligible taxpayers in the Town who are longtime owner/occupants
shall be entitled to apply for and receive a discount of 30% on the gross
or face amount of the Town of McCandless real property taxes then due
and owing during a tax year on an eligible taxpayer(s) primary personal
residence, and this discount shall not be in derogation of the allowable
2% discount permitted to all taxpayers for early payment.
(a) The person must be a single person aged 60 or older; or be married
persons with either spouse being 60 years of age or older; or be an
unmarried widow or widower aged 50 years of age or older; or be a
disabled person aged 18 years of age or older.
(b) The person must be a longtime owner/occupant; and
(c) The property owned by the person(s) must be the primary personal
residence of the person(s).
(d) The person's household income must not exceed $30,000.
 345.02 CHARTER  347.01
C:147
 347.01. Definitions. [Ord. 1351, passed 12-3-2007]
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR  The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED  The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME  Compensation as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257  13, as amended, 53 P.S.  6913, as amended.
EMPLOYER  An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM  Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL  Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS  The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1251,  13, as amended, 53 P.S.  6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION  Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION  The area within the corporate limits of the
Town of McCandless.
TAX  The local services tax at the rate fixed in Section 347.02.
TAX YEAR  The period from January 1 through December 31 in any year
(a calendar year).
 347.02. Levy of tax. [Ord. 1351, passed 12-3-2007]
For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and assessed,
commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging in an
occupation with a primary place of employment within the Town during the
tax year. Each natural person who exercises each privilege for any length
of time during any tax year shall pay the tax for that year in the amount of
$52, assessed on a pro rata basis, in accordance with the provisions of this
article. This tax may be used solely for the following purposes as the same
may be allocated by the Town from time to time:
 347.01 MCCANDLESS CODE  347.02
C:148
 347.03. Exemption and refunds. [Ord. 1351, passed 12-3-2007]
(a) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical services,
police services and/or fire services;
(b) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(c) Reduction of property taxes; or
(d) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S. Ch 85. Subch. F
(relating to homestead property exclusion).
The political subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the funds
derived from the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to
all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the political
subdivision. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for
each calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions
within which a person may be employed.
(a) Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total 100% disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subparagraph, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
(b) Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
 347.02 CHARTER  347.03
C:149
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy
of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the
tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
subsection (b)(2) hereof, the employer shall not withhold the tax
from the person during the calendar year or the remainder of the
calendar year for which the exemption applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the Municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under subsection (b)(3)
hereof.
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
subsection (b)(2) hereof, the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under subsection (b)(2) hereof, a lump sum equal to the
amount of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the
exemption claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the
per payroll amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of
tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in
that calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this clause is subsequently severed in
that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding
balance of the tax due, and the political subdivision may pursue
collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) hereof, it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
(c) Refunds. The Town, in consultation with the Collector, shall establish
procedures for the processing of refund claims for any tax paid by any
 347.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  347.03
C:150
 347.04. Duty of employers to collect. [Ord. 1351, passed
12-3-2007]
person who is eligible for exemption, which procedures shall be in
accord with provisions of the general municipal law relating to refunds
of overpayments and interest on overpayments. Refunds made within
75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the last day the employer
is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of the calendar year,
whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No refunds shall
be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar that do not exceed $1.
The Town or the Collector shall determine eligibility for exemption and
provide refunds to exempt persons.
(a) Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his employ, whether
said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and whether or not
all such services are performed within the political subdivision.
(b) A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 0.01 of a
dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Paragraph (d) of this Section. For purposes of this
paragraph, combined rate shall mean the aggregate annual rate of the
tax levied by the school district and the Municipality.
(c) No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
(d) In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
 347.03 CHARTER  347.04
C:151
 347.05. Returns. [Ord. 1351, passed 12-3-2007]
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
 347.06. Dates for determining tax liability and payment. [Ord.
1351, passed 12-3-2007]
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
 347.07. Self-employed individuals. [Ord. 1351, passed 12-3-2007]
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
 347.08. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision. [Ord. 1351, passed
12-3-2007]
(e) The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
(f) No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of Paragraph (b)
of Section 347.03 of this article and this section and remits the amount
so withheld in accordance with this article.
(g) Employers shall be required to remit the local services tax 30 days after
the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
(a) The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
 347.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  347.08
C:152
 347.09. Nonresidents subject to tax. [Ord. 1351, passed
12-3-2007]
All employees and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his tax is not paid, the political subdivision shall
have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee for
the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
 347.10. Administration of tax. [Ord. 1351, passed 12-3-2007]
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person to
work in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period, the
priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the following
order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his
principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
(b) In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
(a) The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer or self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
(b) The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to proscribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
 347.08 CHARTER  347.10
C:153
 347.11. Suits for collection. [Ord. 1351, passed 12-3-2007]
 347.12. Violations and penalties. [Ord. 1351, passed 12-3-2007]
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his custody and control setting forth the number of employees subject
to this tax and who are in his employment, or whoever fails or refuses to
file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to enforce the
penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person in charge of
the business of any employer who shall have failed or who refuses to file a
return required by this article.
 347.13. Interpretation. [Ord. 1351, passed 12-3-2007]
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
to the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County as in other cases
provided.
(c) The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
(a) In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
(b) If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
(a) Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(b) If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
 347.10 MCCANDLESS CODE  347.13
C:154
Article 349
VOLUNTEER SERVICE CREDIT PROGRAM
 349.01. Definitions. [Ord. 1466, passed 10-9-2017]
The following words and phrases which, when used in this Article, shall
have the meanings given to them in this Article unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
ACTIVE VOLUNTEER  An individual who volunteers at a Volunteer Fire
Company and has satisfied the following conditions:
APPLICATION  A form provided by the Town of McCandless to a volunteer
applying for certification under the Volunteer Service Credit Program.
EMERGENCY RESPONDER  Volunteer who responds to an emergency
call with one or more of the Eligible Entities set forth in this Article.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE CALL  Any emergency call to which a volunteer
responds, including travel directly from and to a volunteer's home, place
of business or other place where he/she shall have been when the call was
received.
VOLUNTEER  A member of a volunteer fire company.
 349.02. Volunteer Service Credit Program. [Ord. 1466, passed
10-9-2017]
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
(a) Completes the activities of the Volunteer Service Credit Program;
Receives certification as an Active Volunteer by the Chief or designee
of a Volunteer Fire Company or the supervisor, Chief or designee of a
nonprofit emergency medical services agency, and
(b)
Receives approval as an Active Volunteer by the Town Council for the
Town of McCandless.
(c)
AUTHORIZED EARNED INCOME TAX COLLECTOR  Keystone
Collections Group or the current regional earned income tax collector.
(a)
COMMISSIONER  The State Fire Commissioner of the
Commonwealth.
(b)
EARNED INCOME TAX  A tax on earned income and net profits levied
under Chapter 3 of the act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511),
known as The Local Tax Enabling Act.
(c)
ELIGIBILITY PERIOD  The timeframe when volunteers may earn
credit under the Volunteer Service Credit Program.
(d)
 347.13 CHARTER  349.02
C:155
(a) Establishment. The Town of McCandless hereby establishes a Volunteer
Service Credit Program. The goal of the program is to encourage
membership and service in the community's volunteer fire companies
and demonstrate appreciation by the Town for this service.
(b) Program criteria. The Town Council shall establish, by resolution, the
criteria that must be met during the eligibility period to qualify for
credits under the program based on the following:
(1) The number of emergency response calls to which a volunteer
responds.
(2) The level of training and participation in formal training and drills
for a volunteer.
(3) The total amount of time expended by a volunteer on administrative
and other support services, including but not limited to:
A. Fundraising;
B. Providing facility or equipment maintenance; and
C. Financial bookkeeping.
(4) The involvement in other events or projects that aid the financial
viability, emergency response or operational readiness of a
volunteer fire company.
(5) The total number of years the volunteer has served.
(c) Eligible entities. The Volunteer Service Credit Program is available to
residents of the Town of McCandless who are volunteers of the
following volunteer fire companies:
(1) Highland Volunteer Fire Department;
(2) Ingomar Volunteer Fire Department No. 2; and
(3) Peebles District Volunteer Fire Company.
(d) Eligibility period. A volunteer must meet the minimum criteria, set by
resolution under this Article, during the eligibility period set forth in
this Article to qualify for the tax credits authorized under Section
349.03.
(1) For Tax Year 2017, the eligibility period under the Volunteer
Service Credit Program shall run from January 20, 2017 until
October 31, 2017.
(2) For Tax Year 2018, and each tax year thereafter, the eligibility
period shall run from November 1st until October 31st of the year
for which the tax credit will apply.
(e) Recordkeeping. The Chief of each eligible entity listed under Section
349.02(c) shall keep specific records of each volunteer's activities in a
 349.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  349.02
C:156
service log to establish credits under the Volunteer Service Credit
Program. Service logs shall be subject to audit/review by:
(1) The Town Manager of the Town of McCandless or the Town
Manager's designee;
(2) The State Fire Commissioner; and
(3) The State Auditor General.
(f) Volunteer application. On or before November 5th of each year,
volunteers who have met the minimum criteria of the Volunteer Service
Credit Program shall sign and submit an application for certification
provided by the Town of McCandless to their Chief or supervisor. The
Chief or supervisor shall sign the application if the volunteer has met
the minimum criteria of the Volunteer Service Credit Program during
the eligibility period, and shall forward said application to the Town
Manager for the Town of McCandless together with the notarized list
required by Section 349.02(g) within the timeframe specified therein.
(g) Notarized list. On or before November 15th of each year, the Chief or
supervisor shall provide to the Town Manager of the Town of
McCandless or the Town Manager's designee a notarized eligibility list
of all volunteers that have met the minimum criteria for the Volunteer
Service Credit Program and applied for certification pursuant to
Section 349.02(f). The Chief or supervisor shall post the notarized
eligibility list in an accessible area of the volunteer agency's facilities.
(h) Municipal review. The Town Manager of the Town of McCandless or the
Town Manager's designee shall review the applications for credit under
the Volunteer Service Credit Program and shall cross reference them
with the notarized eligibility list. At a Regular meeting in December of
each year, the Town Council for the Town of McCandless shall approve
or disapprove the volunteers that appear on the notarized list submitted
by the Chief or supervisor pursuant to Section 349.02(g). All applicants
approved by the Town Council for the Town of McCandless shall be
issued a tax credit certificate by the Town Manager of the Town of
McCandless or the Town Manager's designee by no later than
December 31st of each year.
(i) Appeal of denial of certification. A volunteer who is denied certification
as an active volunteer shall have the right to request a hearing before a
Hearing Officer within 30 days of the denial pursuant to the provisions
of Section 349.04.
(j) Official Tax Credit Register. The Town of McCandless shall keep an
official Tax Credit Register of all Active Volunteers that were issued tax
credit certificates. No later than December 31st of each year, the Town
Manager of the Town of McCandless or the Town Manager's designee
shall issue updates, as needed, of the official Tax Credit Register to the
following:
 349.02 CHARTER  349.02
C:157
 349.03. Earned income tax credit. [Ord. 1466, passed 10-9-2017]
(1) The Town Council for the Town of McCandless;
(2) Chief of the volunteer fire company; and
(3) Authorized Earned Income Tax Collector.
(k) Injured volunteers.
(1) An emergency responder that is injured during an emergency
response call may be eligible for future tax credits. The injury must
have occurred while responding to, participating in, or returning
from an emergency response call with one of the entities listed
under Section 349.02(c).
(2) An injured emergency responder shall provide documentation from
a licensed physician with the application required under Section
349.02(f) stating that their injury prevents them from performing
duties to qualify as an active volunteer. In such a case, the injured
emergency responder shall be deemed an active volunteer for that
tax year.
(3) An injured emergency responder shall annually submit the
application required under Section 349.02(f), along with updated
documentation from a licensed physician stating that the injury still
exists and prevents them from qualifying as an active volunteer.
The injured emergency responder shall again be deemed an active
volunteer for that tax year. An injured emergency responder shall
only be deemed an active volunteer for a maximum of five
consecutive tax years.
(a) Tax credit. Each active volunteer who has been certified under the
Town of McCandless Volunteer Service Credit Program shall be eligible
to receive a tax credit of up to $500 of the Earned Income Tax levied by
the Town of McCandless. When an active volunteer's earned income tax
liability is less than the amount of the tax credit, the tax credit shall
equal the individual's earned income tax liability.
(b) Claim. An active volunteer with a tax credit certificate may claim a tax
credit on his (or her) Town of McCandless Earned Income Tax liability
when filing a final return for the preceding calendar year with the
Authorized Earned Income Tax Collector.
(c) Rejection of tax credit claim.
(1) The tax officer shall reject a claim for a tax credit if the taxpayer is
not on the official Tax Credit Register issued by the Town of
McCandless.
(2) If the tax officer rejects the claim, the taxpayer shall be notified in
writing of the decision. The notice shall include the reasons for the
rejection and provide the method of appealing the decision.
 349.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  349.03
C:158
 349.04. Appeals. [Ord. 1466, passed 10-9-2017]
(3) Taxpayers shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of the tax
officer.
(a) Earned income tax credit appeals.
(1) Any taxpayer aggrieved by a decision under Section 349.02 or
349.03 shall have a right to appeal said decision.
(2) A taxpayer shall have 30 days to appeal a decision or rejection of
claim.
(3) A may appeal the decision of the tax officer to a Hearing Officer
formally appointed by Town Council by submitting a written
request to the tax officer, to be postmarked within 30 calendar days
of receipt of the Tax Collector's ruling. This request must be
accompanied by the payment of a deposit fee of $125, as set by
Town Council. If the result of this appeal is a ruling in your favor,
the deposit fee will be refunded within 30 calendar days of receipt
of the ruling. The request for an appeal is not considered complete
and timely unless the deposit fee accompanies the request. The tax
officer will make every reasonable effort to consider the needs of all
parties involved when requesting the hearing date from the
Hearing Officer. After the Hearing Officer sets the date of the
hearing, the tax officer will notify the taxpayer in writing. Both
parties will then submit directly to the Hearing Officer a brief plus
attachments stating his/her arguments; the length of the brief may
be determined by the Hearing Officer. Each party will submit a
copy to the other on this correspondence, and the documents must
be received by all parties not less than five business days before the
hearing itself. The hearing will take place in Council Chambers at
Town of McCandless' Town Hall, 9955 Grubbs Road, Wexford, PA
15090. If a recording is required, the hearing will take place in the
Assembly Room at Town Hall. The hearing may be recorded at the
option of the Hearing Officer, and taxpayer may be required to
provide verification that all factual information presented is true,
correct, and complete to the best of taxpayer's knowledge and
belief. If a record is made of the hearing, taxpayer may obtain a
copy of the record by paying a fee equal to 50% of all costs incurred
in the preparation and transcription of the record.
(4) The purpose of the hearing shall include, but not be limited to, a
review of all documents, data, and records produced by taxpayer
and the tax officer, and shall provide an opportunity for taxpayer to
be heard on issues directly relating to the filing of taxpayer's
application and payment of taxes. Each party will be given the
opportunity to present his/her case, beginning with the Tax Officer.
The duration of each presentation shall be determined by the
Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer will render an opinion within
10 business days after the hearing or any continuation thereof is
 349.03 CHARTER  349.04
C:159
 349.05. Penalties for false reporting. [Ord. 1466, passed
10-9-2017]
Part 5 - Traffic Code
Article 501
GENERAL PROVISIONS
 501.01. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
Pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 6109, all traffic and parking regulations
of a permanent nature shall be adopted by ordinance of Town Council or as
amendments thereto. In compliance with Vehicle Code Section 6109(c), no
ordinance or regulation shall be effective until official traffic-control devices
giving notice of such provisions are erected upon or at the entrances to the
highway or part thereof affected as may be most appropriate.
 501.02. Emergency powers of Chief of Police. [Ord. 106, passed
10-14-1955]
As authorized by Vehicle Code Section 6109(b), the Chief of Police shall
have the following powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily and
in times of emergency:
completed. The opinion will be in writing and addressed to
taxpayer, with a copy to the tax officer. The opinion will be mailed
to taxpayer's last known address by ordinary mail and shall become
taxpayer's formal notice of tax liability or taxpayer's formal request
for a refund as of the date of that determination. The Hearing
Officer reserves the right to continue the hearing to a future date
if time constraints or other issues prevent completion on the initial
hearing date.
(5) If taxpayer does not agree with the decision of the Hearing Officer,
taxpayer may appeal to the appropriate Court of Common Pleas of
Allegheny County. Taxpayer must file your appeal within 30
calendar days after the notice of the decision of the Hearing Officer.
(a) Any individual who knowingly makes or conspires to make a false
report in an application for certification under this Article commits a
misdemeanor of the first degree punishable by a fine of $2,500.
(b) Any individual who knowingly provides or conspires to provide false
information that is used to compile a service log under this Article
commits a misdemeanor of the first degree punishable by a fine of
$2,500.
 349.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  501.02
C:160
 501.03. Authority of police officers to direct traffic. [Ord. 106,
passed 10-14-1955]
Police officers are hereby given authority to direct traffic on the highways
of the Town, and at the intersections thereof.
 501.04. School guards. [Ord. 682, passed 8-25-1975]
 501.05. Conviction costs.
Any person convicted of a summary offense for violation of this Traffic Code
shall, in addition to the fine imposed, pay the costs of the issuing authority
as provided in Section 6306 of the Commonwealth Vehicle Code.
 501.06. Use of speed timing devices. [Ord. 834, passed 1-25-1982]
(a) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and parking regulations.
(b) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works or in the case of
the conduct of processions and public events, to restrict or prohibit
parking or traffic in limited areas for periods of not more than 24 hours.
(c) The Chief of Police shall have further power and authority to establish,
change and abolish, and to designate by appropriate markings or signs,
crosswalks, traffic lanes and parking spaces.
(a) The Chief of Police is authorized to employ individuals to act as school
guards to cross school children at dangerous road intersections or
crossings.
(b) School guards shall be in uniform and shall wear a badge indicating
that they are peace officers. When regulating, directing, controlling and
stopping vehicular traffic in order to provide for the safe crossing of
school children across public roads, the school guards shall have the
authority of a "police officer" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
(c) School guards shall be regarded as part-time Town employees and shall
not be eligible for the various fringe benefits afforded regular full-time
Town employees, except for workmen's compensation insurance and
life insurance, which has already been provided to the school guards by
the Town.
(d) No operator of any vehicle shall fail or refuse to comply with the signal
or direction of a school guard when such school guard is in the act of
regulating, directing, controlling or stopping vehicular traffic for the
safe crossing of school children across public roads.
(a) The rate of speed of any vehicle may be timed on any street or road
within the Town by trained and authorized police officers of the Town by
any device approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, including, but not limited to, VASCAR Plus and ESP.
 501.02 CHARTER  501.06
C:161
 501.99. Penalty.
Article 505
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
 505.01. One-way streets. [Ord. 106, passed 10-14-1955; Ord. 108,
passed 11-11-1955; Res. 9-69, passed 10-27-1969]
 505.02. Speed limitations. [Res. 11-1955, passed 9-9-1955; Res.
9-1956, passed 4-19-1956; Res. 15-1958, passed 6-23-1958; Res.
19-1958, passed 7-28-1958; Res. 20-1959, passed 10-26-1959; Res.
21-1959, passed 10-26-1959; Res. 14-1960, passed 5-23-1960; Res.
4-1964, passed 3-23-1964; Res. 9-1964, passed 7-27-1964; Res.
10-1964, passed 8-24-1964; Res. 6-1959, passed 6-21-1965; Res.
This authorization shall include any timing device approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation subsequent to the date of
this section for use by local police forces.
(b) No conviction shall be had upon evidence obtained through the use of
the various approved speed timing devices unless the device has been
calibrated and tested for accuracy and found accurate or adjusted for
accuracy within a period of 60 days prior to the alleged violation.
(a) Any person who violates any provision or any regulation provided in
Sections 501.01 or 501.02 shall be liable to the penalty set forth in the
Vehicle Code for such violation, and where no specific penalty is set
forth, such person is guilty of a summary offense and shall upon
conviction be sentenced to pay a fine of $25.
(b) Whoever violates Section 501.04(d) is guilty of a summary offense and
shall upon conviction be sentenced to pay a fine of $25.
(a) Town Council may, by ordinance, designate certain streets within the
Town to be one-way streets. When such action is taken, signs shall be
erected at the entrance and exit of the street, and at points of any
intersecting streets.
(b) No person who shall operate a vehicle on any street or portion thereof
which is established as a one-way street and plainly marked therefor,
other than in the direction established by the markings thereon for
vehicular travel.
(c) A one way traffic restriction is hereby established on that portion of Old
Route 19 from the present Route 19 to Pine Creek Road. Traffic upon
such portion of Old Route 19 shall be limited to one way traffic
proceeding north.
Proper signs shall be erected at each end of the section of Old Route 19
above described giving notice of the one way traffic restriction.
 501.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.02
C:162
7-1966, passed 7-25-1966; Res. 10-1971, passed 8-23-1971; Ord.
652, passed 6-17-1974; Res. 11-1974, passed 6-17-1974; Ord. 702,
passed 9-27-1976; Ord. 728, passed 11-28-1977; Ord. 746, passed
10-23-1978; Ord. 747, passed 10-23-1978; Ord. 778, passed
11-26-1979; Ord. 793, passed 4-28-1980; Ord. 846, passed
7-19-1982; Ord. 850, passed 8-23-1982; Ord. 865, passed 7-25-1983;
Ord. 885, passed 7-23-1984; Ord. 915, passed 10-28-1985; Ord. 921,
passed 12-16-1985; Ord. 951, passed 3-23-1987; Ord. 956, passed
6-22-1987; Ord. 966, passed 10-26-1987; Ord. 969, passed
11-23-1987; Ord. 1099, passed 6-28-1993; Ord. 1119, passed
4-25-1994; Ord. 1128, passed 8-22-1994; Ord. 1151, passed
11-27-1995; Ord. 1171, passed 7-22-1996; Ord. 1220, passed
9-27-1999; Ord. 1230, passed 3-27-2000; Ord. 1233, passed
4-24-2000; Ord. 1234, passed 5-22-2000; Ord. 1248, passed
5-21-2001; Ord. 1253, passed 8-27-2001; Ord. 1268, passed
5-20-2002; Ord. 1271, passed 6-17-2002; Ord. 1274, passed
8-26-2002; Ord. 1286, passed 7-28-2003; Ord. 1288, passed
8-25-2003; Ord. 1307, passed 8-23-2004; Ord. 1319, passed
8-22-2005; Ord. 1322, passed 11-28-2005; Ord. 1333, passed
8-28-2006; Ord. 1382, passed 12-21-2009; Ord. 1385, passed
2-22-2010; Ord. 1392, passed 11-22-2010; Ord. 1412, passed
5-21-2011; Ord. 1421, passed 11-26-2012; Ord. 1431, passed
8-26-2013; Ord. 1439, passed 7-28-2014]
(a) Town Council, may establish, by ordinance, speed limits on Town and
County roads as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and signs giving notice
thereof shall be erected.
(b) Speed limits on certain streets are established as follows:
(1) Babcock Boulevard from McKnight Road northeasterly to North
Park, 35 miles per hour.
(2) Balmoral Drive between Windmill Lane and Regency Drive, 20
miles per hour.
(3) Duncan Avenue and Duncan Avenue Extension between Babcock
Boulevard and the Hampton Township line to the east, 35 miles per
hour.
(4) Duncan Avenue between Thompson Run Road and the Hampton
Township line, 35 miles per hour.
(5) East Arcadia Drive, 35 miles per hour.
(6) Harmony Parkway from Old Perry Highway at the intersection of
Highland Road to Roosevelt Boulevard, 35 miles per hour.
(7) Highland Road from Old Perry Highway on the east to Ingomar
Road on the west, 35 miles per hour.
 505.02 CHARTER  505.02
C:163
(8) Highland Road from Willoughby Road to the McCandless 
Franklin Township line, 35 miles per hour.
(9) Meinert Road from its intersection with Twinhill Road Extension
extending northward and westward to the boundary line between
the Town of McCandless and Franklin Park Borough, 35 miles per
hour.
(10) (Reserved)4
(11) Roosevelt Boulevard from Harmony Parkway to its intersection
with Van Buren Drive, 35 miles per hour.
(12) Thompson Run Road from the Ross Township line to Ferguson
Road, 35 miles per hour.
(13) The portion of Perry Highway (Route 19) from the Ross Township
line northward to Cumberland Road, 35 miles per hour.
(14) Duncan Avenue from Babcock Boulevard eastward to Peebles
Road, 35 miles per hour.
(15) Pine Creek Road from Route 19 to McKnight Road, 35 miles per
hour.
(16) Sloop Road from Rochester Road to Highland Road, 30 miles per
hour.
(17) East Arcadia Drive from McKnight Road to Park Edge Drive;
Hedwig Drive from Babcock Boulevard to Meadow Road; Meadow
Road from its dead end to Peebles Road; and Bellcrest Road from
West Ingomar Road to Pine Creek Road; all at 35 miles per hour.
Editor's Note: Town Council has requested that 35 miles per hour
speed limits be established on the following State highways:
02126 Peebles Road
LR02181 Cumberland Road
LR246 Spur E-2 McKnight Road
LR02130 Oakmont-Sewickley Road
LR02280 Wildwood Road
(18) Gloria Street from Route 19 to Lincoln Boulevard; and Old Perry
Highway to the west of Route 19 which is intersected by Inwood
Road, Moreland Road and Sunset Road; all a 35 miles per hour.
(19) (Reserved)5
(20) Ferguson Road, 35 miles per hour.
4. Editor's Note: Former subsection (b)(10) hereof was repealed 8-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1319.
5. Editor's Note: Former subsection (b)(19) was repealed 8-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1319.
 505.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.02
C:164
(21) Balmoral Drive, 20 miles per hour.
(22) Carriage Hill Road from Red Coach Road to the Ross Township
boundary line, 25 miles per hour.
(23) Grubbs Road, 25 miles per hour.
(24) Sunset Road its entire length, 25 miles per hour.
(25) Reichold Road its entire length and Rinaman Road from Grubbs
Road to McKnight Road, 35 miles per hour.
(26) Portion of Perry Highway (Rt. 19) from the intersection of Old Perry
Highway at the top of Pine Creek Hill northward to the Town line,
35 miles per hour.
(27) Entire length of Rochester Road, 35 miles per hour.
(28) (Reserved)
(29) Ringeisen Road, 25 miles per hour.
(30) Babcock Boulevard from its intersection with Irwin Road
northwardly to the McCandless-Pine boundary line, 40 miles per
hour.
(31) In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 miles per hour is hereby
established on Aldenford Drive from East Arcadia Drive to Whitley
Drive. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the speed limit
in accordance with the Vehicle Code.
(32) In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, the 25 miles per hour speed limit on Meinert Road
from its Park boundary line is hereby extended the full length of
Meinert Road to include Meinert Road from its intersection with
Twin Hill Road. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the
speed limit in accordance with Vehicle Code.
(33) In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code a speed limit of 25 miles per hour is hereby
established the entire length of Fairfield Road.
(34)Winchester Drive, Judy Ann Place and Remington Drive.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 miles per hour is hereby
established on the entire length of Winchester Drive, the entire
length of Judy Ann Place, and on Remington Drive from Peebles
Road to Duncan Avenue.
B. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the speed limit in
accordance with the Vehicle Code.
 505.02 CHARTER  505.02
C:165
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
subsection (b)(34) shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by
Section 3362 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, that is a fine of
$35 and, if convicted of exceeding the speed limit by more than
five miles per hour, an additional fine of $2 per mile for each
mile in excess of five miles per hour over the maximum speed
limit, plus costs of prosecution.
(35)Willoughby Road.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 miles per hour is hereby
established on the entire length of Willoughby Road from Sloop
Road to Highland Road.
B. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the speed limit in
accordance with the Vehicle Code.
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
subsection (b)(35) hereof shall be subject to a fine as
prescribed by Section 3362 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code,
as amended, plus costs of prosecution.
(36) Twin Hill Road and Woodbury Drive.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 m.p.h. is hereby established
on the entire length of Twin Hill Road and on the entire length
of Woodbury Drive.
B. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the speed limit in
accordance with the Vehicle Code.
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
subsection (b)(36) shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by
Section 3362 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, as amended,
that is a fine of $35 and, if convicted of exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five m.p.h., an additional
fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five m.p.h. over
the maximum speed limit, plus costs of prosecution.
(37) Multiple roads.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 m.p.h. is hereby established
on the following streets: Crestmont Road, Forest Avenue,
Guyton Road, Hazlett Road, Hilliard Road, Katherine Drive,
Lincoln Boulevard, Linden Road, Lindisfarne Drive, Oneida
Avenue, Post Road, Red Coach Road, Weller Drive, Harmony
Road (West Ingomar to Highland), Hedwig Drive (Babcock
Boulevard to Meadow Road), Remington Drive (Peebles Road
to Duncan Avenue), Roosevelt Boulevard (Harmony Parkway to
 505.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.02
C:166
Van Buren Drive), Harmony Parkway (Roosevelt Boulevard to
Old Perry Highway), Arcadia Drive, Park Edge Drive.
B. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the speed limit in
accordance with the said Vehicle Code.
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
subsection (b)(37) shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by
Section 3362 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, as amended,
that is a fine of $35 and, if convicted of exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five mph, an additional fine
of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five mph over the
maximum speed limit, plus costs of prosecution.
(38) Guenevere Drive and Oakridge Drive.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 m.p.h. is hereby established
on Guenevere Drive and Oakridge Drive.
B. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the speed limit in
accordance with the said Vehicle Code.
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
subsection (b)(38) shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by
Section 3362 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, as amended,
that is a fine of $35 and, if convicted of exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five mph, an additional fine
of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five mph over the
maximum speed limit, plus costs of prosecution.
(39) Haugh Drive.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 m.p.h. is hereby established
on Haugh Drive.
B. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the speed limit in
accordance with the said Vehicle Code.
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
subsection (b)(39) shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by
Section 3362 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, as amended,
that is a fine of $35 and, if convicted of exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five mph, an additional fine
of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five mph over the
maximum speed limit, plus costs of prosecution.
(40) Hillvue Lane.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Code, Title 67, Chapter 201, Section 201.32(b) and (c), a speed
limit of 15 m.p.h. is hereby established on both sides of Hillvue
 505.02 CHARTER  505.02
C:167
Lane, said zone beginning 20 feet east of the curb line on
Hillvue where it intersects with Route 19 (Perry Highway) and
extending approximately 800 feet east from the first sign. The
effective hours of the speed zone shall be 6:45 a.m.  8:15
a.m., 11:00 a.m.- 1:00 p.m., and 2:15 p.m.  3:15 p.m., Monday
through Friday.
B. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the speed limit in
accordance with the said Pennsylvania Code.
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
subsection (b)(40) shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by
Section 3365 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, as amended,
that is a fine of $35 and, if convicted of exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five mph, an additional fine
of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five mph over the
maximum speed limit, plus costs of prosecution.
(41) Multiple roads.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 m.p.h. is hereby established
on the following streets: Anderson Road, East Barkhurst Drive,
West Barkhurst Drive, Breezewood Drive, Casa Grande Drive,
Demmler Drive, Edwood Road, Fox Ridge Road, Glenbrook
Drive, Inwood Road, Magellan Drive, Olive Street, Saratoga
Drive, Stuyvesant Road, Wittmer Road, Almar Drive, Almar
Place, Louisville Drive, Doral Drive and North Florence Road.
B. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the speed limit in
accordance with the said Vehicle Code.
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
subsection (b)(41) shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by
Section 3362 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, as amended,
that is a fine of $35 and, if convicted of exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five mph, an additional fine
of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five mph over the
maximum speed limit, plus costs of prosecution.
(42) McCandless Drive.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 mph is hereby established on
McCandless Drive.
B. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the speed limit in
accordance with the said Vehicle Code.
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
subsection (b)(42) shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by
Section 3362 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, as amended,
 505.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.02
C:168
that is a fine of $35 and, if convicted of exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five mph, an additional fine
of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five mph over the
maximum speed limit, plus costs of prosecution.
(43) Multiple roads.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 mph is hereby established on
Arden Drive, Broadlawn Drive, Fassinger Lane, Mary Avenue,
Meadowcrest Road, Neuhart Boulevard, Oxbridge Drive,
Regency Drive, Remington Drive (Peebles Road to the Ross
Township line), Van Dyke Street, Waldwick Drive and
Woodview Drive.
B. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the speed limit in
accordance with the said Vehicle Code.
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
subsection (b)(43) shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by
Section 3362 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, as amended,
that is a fine of $35 and, if convicted of exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five mph, an additional fine
of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five mph over the
maximum speed limit, plus costs of prosecution.
(44) Multiple roads.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 mph is hereby established on
Springfield Drive, Northgate Drive, Viewcrest Drive,
Highmeadow Drive, Concord Drive, Chase Place, Brilikim
Drive, Shady Oak Circle and Shady Oak Place.
B. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the speed limit in
accordance with the said Vehicle Code.
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
subsection (b)(44) shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by
Section 3362 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, as amended,
that is a fine of $35 and, if convicted of exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five mph, an additional fine
of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five mph over the
maximum speed limit, plus costs of prosecution.
(45) Multiple roads.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 mph is hereby established on
Albemarle Drive, Allante Court, Allison Avenue, Amber Court,
Blaze Court, Broad Hill Drive, Broad Meadow Drive, Brooks
Road, Calais Drive, Candle Ridge Drive, Center Oak Drive,
 505.02 CHARTER  505.02
C:169
Collington Square, Coyne Avenue, Eastview Road, Harvest
Manor Drive, Highview Road, Ingomar Heights Road,
Memorial Drive, Menold Drive, Moreland Road, Olde Villa
Drive, Pine Heights Place, Pine Line Drive, Pine Road, Reichold
Road Ext., Wallace Road, Wendy View Drive and Woodcrest
Road.
B. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the speed limit in
accordance with the said Vehicle Code.
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
subsection (b)(45) shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by
Section 3362 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, as amended,
that is a fine of $35 and, if convicted of exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five mph, an additional fine
of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five mph over the
maximum speed limit, plus costs of prosecution.
(46) Multiple roads.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 mph is hereby established on
Mohican Avenue, Iroquois Avenue, Pontiac Avenue, Chickasaw
Avenue, Hillcrest Avenue, Chippewa Avenue, Mohawk Avenue,
Huron Avenue and Seminole Avenue.
B. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the speed limit in
accordance with said Vehicle Code.
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
subsection (b)(46) shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by
Section 3362 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, as amended,
that is a fine of $35 and, if convicted of exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five mph, an additional fine
of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five mph over the
maximum speed limit, plus costs of prosecution.
(47) Multiple roads.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 mph is hereby established on
Amaryllis Drive, Dormar Drive, Glenellen Drive, Hazlett Road,
Heather Place, Hubbard Road, Lancelot Drive, Meadow Oaks
Drive, Old Perry Highway (from Pine Creek Road North to
Route 19/Perry Highway), Patricia Drive, Plateau Drive,
Rosalind Road, Victory Road, Whitley Drive, Wyngold Drive.
B. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the speed limit in
accordance with the said Vehicle Code.
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
subsection (b)(47) shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by
 505.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.02
C:170
Section 3362 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, as amended,
that is a fine of $35 and, if convicted of exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five mph, an additional fine
of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five mph over the
maximum speed limit, plus costs of prosecution.
(48) Multiple roads.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 mph is hereby established on
Arthur Drive, Harmony Drive (entire length), Old Perry
Highway #1 (adjacent to Community College of Allegheny
County (CCAC), Pannier Road and Terrace Drive.
B. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the speed limit in
accordance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code (Vehicle Code).
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by subsection
(b)(48) shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by Section 3362
of the Vehicle Code, as amended, that is a fine of $35 and, if
convicted of exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than
five mph, an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in
excess of five mph over the maximum speed limit, plus costs of
prosecution.
(49) Forest Oaks Drive.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 mph is hereby established on
Forest Oaks Drive.
B. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the speed limit in
accordance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code (Vehicle Code).
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
Ordinance shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by Section
3362 of the Vehicle Code, as amended, that is a fine of $35 and,
if convicted of exceeding the maximum speed limit by more
than five mph, an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in
excess of five mph over the maximum speed limit, plus costs of
prosecution.
(50) Multiple roads.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 mph is hereby established on
Lake Marshall Drive (entire length), North Villa Drive and
South Villa Drive (Babcock Boulevard to the Hampton
Township line).
 505.02 CHARTER  505.02
C:171
B. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the speed limit in
accordance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code (Vehicle Code).
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
Ordinance shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by Section
3362 of the Vehicle Code, as amended, that is a fine of $35 and,
if convicted of exceeding the maximum speed limit by more
than five mph, an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in
excess of five mph over the maximum speed limit, plus costs of
prosecution.
(51) Cumberland Road.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 mph is hereby established on
Cumberland Road from Peebles Road to Babcock Boulevard.
B. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the speed limit in
accordance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code (Vehicle Code).
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
Ordinance shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by Section
3362 of the Vehicle Code, as amended, that is a fine of $35 and,
if convicted of exceeding the maximum speed limit by more
than five mph, an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in
excess of five mph over the maximum speed limit, plus costs of
prosecution.
(52) Multiple roads.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 mph is hereby established on
Breckenridge Drive, Edelweiss Drive, Alpen Court, Walden
Court and Connor Court, all within the Breckenridge Plan of
Lots.
B. Proper signage shall be erected to give notice of the speed
limit in accordance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code (Vehicle Code).
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
Ordinance shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by Section
3362 of the Vehicle Code, as amended, that is a fine of $35 and,
if convicted of exceeding the maximum speed limit by more
than five mph, an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in
excess of five mph over the maximum speed limit, plus costs of
prosecution.
(53) Multiple roads.
 505.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.02
C:172
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 mph is hereby established on
Bennington Woods Drive, Covington Place, Elaine Drive,
Brittany Place, Springfield Drive, Highmeadow Road and
Northgate Drive.
B. Proper signage shall be erected to give notice of the speed
limit in accordance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code (Vehicle Code).
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
Ordinance shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by Section
3362 of the Vehicle Code, as amended, that is a fine of $35 and,
if convicted of exceeding the maximum speed limit by more
than five mph, an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in
excess of five mph over the maximum speed limit, plus costs of
prosecution.
(54) Duncan Avenue.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 mph is hereby established on
Duncan Avenue from McKnight Road westward to its terminus.
B. Proper signage shall be erected to give notice of the speed
limit in accordance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code (Vehicle Code).
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
ordinance shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by Section
3362 of the Vehicle Code, as amended, that is a fine of $35 and,
if convicted of exceeding the maximum speed limit by more
than five mph, an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in
excess of five mph over the maximum speed limit, plus costs of
prosecution.
(55) North Meadows Drive and Forest Meadows Drive.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 mph is hereby established on
North Meadows Drive and Forest Meadows Drive.
B. Proper signage shall be erected to give notice of the speed
limit in accordance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code (Vehicle Code).
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
ordinance shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by Section
3362 of the Vehicle Code, as amended, that is a fine of $35 and,
if convicted of exceeding the maximum speed limit by more
than five mph, an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in
 505.02 CHARTER  505.02
C:173
 505.03. Stop signs. [Ord. 765, passed 5-21-1979; Ord. 755, passed
9-24-1979; Ord. 829, passed 11-23-1981; Ord. 843, passed
6-28-1982; Ord. 883, passed 6-18-1984; Ord. 890, passed 9-24-1984;
Ord. 907, passed 5-28-1985; Ord. 909, passed 6-24-1985; Ord. 911,
passed 8-26-1985; Ord. 916, passed 11-25-1985; Ord. 920, passed
12-16-1985; Ord. 928, passed 3-24-1986; Ord. 930, passed
6-16-1986; Ord. 933, passed 7-28-1986; Ord. 941, passed
11-24-1986; Ord. 950, passed 3-23-1987; Ord. 1046, passed
2-25-1991; Ord. 1103, passed 8-23-1993; Ord. 1106, passed
9-27-1993; Ord. 1112, passed 12-20-1993; Ord. 1118, passed
4-25-1994; Ord. 1129, passed 8-22-1994; Ord. 1150, passed
11-27-1995; Ord. 1157, passed 12-18-1995; Ord. 1165, passed
excess of five mph over the maximum speed limit, plus costs of
prosecution.
(56) Cottingham Drive.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a neighborhood speed limit of 25 mph is hereby
established on the entire length of Cottingham Drive.
B. Proper signage shall be erected to give notice of the speed
limit in accordance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code (Vehicle Code).
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
Ordinance shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by Section
3362 of the Vehicle Code, as amended, that is a fine of $35 and,
if convicted of exceeding the maximum speed limit by more
than five mph, an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in
excess of five mph over the maximum speed limit, plus costs of
prosecution.
(57) Blazier Drive.
A. In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, a speed limit of 25 mph is hereby established on
Blazier Drive from its intersection with McKnight Road to its
intersection with Ingomar Road.
B. Proper signage shall be erected to give notice of the speed
limit in accordance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code (Vehicle Code).
C. Any person violating the speed limit established by this
Ordinance shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by Section
3362 of the Vehicle Code, as amended, that is a fine of $35 and,
if convicted of exceeding the maximum speed limit by more
than five mph, an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in
excess of five mph over the maximum speed limit, plus costs of
prosecution.
 505.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.03
C:174
5-28-1996; Ord. 1172, passed 9-23-1996; Ord. 1231, passed
3-27-2000; Ord. 1245, passed 4-23-2001; Ord. 1260, passed
12-17-2001; Ord. 1267, passed 5-20-2002; Ord. 1276, passed
9-23-2002; Ord. 1281, passed 12-16-2002; Ord. 1328, passed
3-27-2006; Ord. 1331, passed 5-22-2006; Ord. 1343, passed
4-23-2007; Ord. 1350, passed 10-22-2007; Ord. 1365, passed
1-28-2008; Ord. 1369, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 1384, passed
2-22-2010; Ord. 1459, passed 7-25-2016; Ord. 1462, passed
2-27-2017; Ord. 1465, passed 6-26-2017]
In accordance with Section 6109(b)(1) of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code,
the following intersections within the Town of McCandless are hereby
designated as being regulated by stop signs, and any person operating
a motor vehicle and failing to come to a complete stop at any of the
designated signs shall be charged with a summary offense under Section
3323(b) of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code and, upon conviction, shall be
subject to the fine and costs established by the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code:
Intersection of
No. of
Signs Sign Located On
Aldenford Drive and
Amaryllis Drive
1 Amaryllis Drive
Aldenford Drive and
Rosalind Road
1 Rosalind Road
Aldenford Drive and Whitley
Drive
1 Aldenford Drive
All driveways connecting to
Covenant Avenue
9
Almar Drive and Almar
Place
1 Almar Drive
Anderson Road and
Saratoga Drive
1 Anderson Road
Anderson Road and
Stuyvesant Road
1 Stuyvesant Road
Anderson Road and
Stuyvesant Road
2 Anderson Road
Anderson Road and
Stuyvesant Road
1 Stuyvesant Road
Arthur Drive and Rinaman
Road
1 Arthur Drive
Babcock Boulevard 2 Corporate Drive
Balmoral Drive and
Regency Drive
2 Balmoral Drive
 505.03 CHARTER  505.03
C:175
Intersection of
No. of
Signs Sign Located On
Bayard Court and
Bennington Woods Drive
1 Bayard Court
Bennington Woods Lane
and Bennington
Breckenridge Drive and
Edelweiss Drive
1 Edelweiss Drive (eastern
intersection)
Breezewood Drive, East
Barkhurst Drive and West
Barkhurst Drive
1 Southbound leg of Breezewood
Drive
Breezewood Drive and East
Barkhurst Drive
1 East Barkhurst Drive
Breezewood Drive and East
Barkhurst Drive
1 Breezewood Drive
Breezewood Drive and West
Barkhurst Drive
1 West Barkhurst Drive
Breezewood Drive and West
Barkhurst Drive
1 Breezewood Drive
Broadlawn Drive and
Broadmeadow Drive
1 Broadmeadow Drive
Broadlawn Drive and
Meadow Crest Drive
1 Meadow Crest Drive
Broadlawn Drive and Wood
View Drive
2 Wood View Drive
Broadlawn Drive and
Woodview Drive
1 Broadlawn Drive
Broadlawn Drive and
Woodview Drive
1 Woodview Drive
Broadmeadow Drive and
Broadhill Drive
1 Broadmeadow Drive
Broadmeadow Drive and
Broadhill Drive
1 Broadhill Drive
Broadmeadow Drive and
Harvest
Caribou Drive and Carriage
Hill Road
1 Caribou Drive
Caribou Drive and Fairhill
Road
1 Fairhill Road
Carriage Hill Road and
Aldergrove Drive
1 Aldergrove Drive
 505.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.03
C:176
Intersection of
No. of
Signs Sign Located On
Carriage Hill Road and
Coventry Drive
1 Coventry Drive
Carriage Hill Road and
Coventry Drive
3 Coventry Drive and two on
Carriage Hill Road
Carriage Hill Road and
Knollwood Drive
1 Knollwood Drive
Carriage Hill Road and
Lingay Drive
1 Lingay Drive
Carriage Hill Road and
Lingay Drive
2 Carriage Hill Road
Carriage Hill Road and Red
Coach Road
1 Carriage Hill Road
Casa Grande Drive and
Glenbrook Drive
1 Casa Grande Drive
Casa Grande Drive and
Glenbrook Drive
1 Glenbrook Drive
Casa Grande Drive and
Prescott Drive
1 Prescott Drive
Casa Grande Drive and
Prescott Drive
1 Casa Grande Drive
Casa Grande Drive and
Santa Rosa Lane
2 Casa Grande Drive
Casa Grande Drive and
Santa Rosa Lane
1 Santa Rose Lane
Casa Grande Drive and
Tierra Place
1 Tierra Place
Center Oak Drive and
Albemarle Drive
2 Albermarle Drive
Center Oak Drive and
Anderson Road
1 Anderson Road
Center Oak Drive and
Saratoga Drive
1 Center Oak Drive
Certain driveways serving
UPMC Passavant property
at its intersection with
Cumberland Road, as
shown on Exhibit A
attached to Ordinance 1384
1 On each driveway shown on
Exhibit A attached to Ordinance
1394
Chickasaw Avenue and
Hillcrest Avenue
1 Hillcrest Avenue
 505.03 CHARTER  505.03
C:177
Intersection of
No. of
Signs Sign Located On
Chickasaw Avenue and
Mohawk Avenue
1 Mohawk Avenue
Chickasaw Avenue and Old
Perry Highway
2 Old Perry Highway
Chickasaw Avenue and Old
Perry Highway
1 Chickasaw Avenue
Chickasaw Avenue and
Oneida Avenue
1 Chickasaw Avenue
Chickasaw Avenue and
Pontiac Avenue
1 Pontiac Avenue
Concord Drive and
Highmeadow Road
1 Concord Drive
Concord Drive at
Springfield Drive
1 Concord Drive
Covered Wagon Court and
West Moccasin Trail
1 Covered Wagon Court
Covington Place and
Buckingham Drive
2 Covington Place
Covington Place and
Buckingham Drive
1 Buckingham Drive
Covington Place and
Canterbury Drive
2 Covington Place
Covington Place and
Canterbury Drive
1 Canterbury Drive
Covington Place and Old
Kummer Road
1 Covington Place
Cromwell Drive and Barry
Drive
1 Barry Drive
Cromwell Drive and
Guenevere Drive
2 Cromwell Drive
Cromwell Drive and Merlin
Drive
1 Merlin Drive
Cromwell Drive and
Winthrop Road
1 Winthrop Road
Darrell Drive and
Guenevere Drive
1 Darrell Drive
Dell Lane and Northview
Drive
1 Dell Lane
 505.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.03
C:178
Intersection of
No. of
Signs Sign Located On
Dolphin Drive and
Aldergrove Drive
1 Aldergrove Drive
Dolphin Drive and Coventry
Drive
1 Coventry Drive
Driveways serving
developed properties
connecting to Duncan
Avenue (West)
6
Driveways serving Holy
Trinity Greek Orthodox
Church and the Office
Building at the South
Eastern corner of the
McCandless Crossing
development
3
Dubonnet Court and
Lammerton Drive
2 Dubonnet Court
East Arcadia Drive and
Aldenford Drive
1 Aldenford Drive
East Arcadia Drive and
Magellan Drive
1 Magellan Drive
East Arcadia Drive and
Parkedge Drive
1 Parkedge Drive
East Barkhurst Drive, West
Barkhurst Drive,
Breezewood Court and
Breezewood Drive
3 West Barkhurst Drive, East
Barkhurst Drive and
Breezewood Court
Edelweiss Drive and
Breckenridge Drive
1 Breckenridge Drive (western
intersection)
Emery Drive and Shirley
Drive
2 Emery Drive
Forest Meadows Drive at
Forest Oaks Drive
1 Forest Meadows Drive
Forest Meadows Drive at
North Meadows Drive
1 Forest Meadows Drive
Forest Oaks Drive at
Richard Road
1 Forest Oaks Drive
Forest Trails Drive and Oak
Grove Court (easterly
intersection)
1 Forest Trails Drive
 505.03 CHARTER  505.03
C:179
Intersection of
No. of
Signs Sign Located On
Forest Trails Drive and Oak
Grove Court (westerly
intersection)
1 Oak Grove Court
Forest Trails Drive and
Richard Road
1 Forest Trails Drive
Fox Ridge Road and
Demmler Drive
1 Fox Ridge Road
Glen Manor Road and
Harmony Drive
2 Glen Manor Road
Glen Manor Road and
Highland Road
1 Glen Manor Road
Glenellen Drive and
Amaryllis Drive
1 Amaryllis Drive
Glenellen Drive and East
Arcadia Drive
1 Glenellen Drive
Glenellen Drive and
Rosalind Road
2 Glenellen Drive
Glenellen Drive and
Rosalind Road
2 Rosalind Road
Glenellen Drive and Whitley
Drive
1 Whitley Drive
Gloria Street and Lincoln
Boulevard
1 Gloria Street
Grosick Road and Cooper
Run Court
1 Cooper Run Court
Grosick Road and Donna
Drive
1 Donna Drive
Grubbs Road and Rustin
Road
1 Rustin Way
Grubbs Road and
Canterwood Lane
1 Canterwood Lane
Grubbs Road and Courtney
Place
1 Courtney Place
Grubbs Road and Gass Road 1 Gass Road
Grubbs Road and Golfside
Drive
1 Golfside Drive
Grubbs Road and Knobs Hill
Court
1 Knobs Hill Court
 505.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.03
C:180
Intersection of
No. of
Signs Sign Located On
Grubbs Road and Lindscot
Lane
1 Lindscot Lane
Grubbs Road and Parkland
Drive
1 Parkland Drive
Grubbs Road and Reichold
Road
1 Reichold Road
Grubbs Road and Reichold
Road Extension
1 Reichold Road Extension
Grubbs Road and Rinaman
Road
1 Rinaman Road
Grubbs Road and Stag Horn
Drive
1 Stag Horn Drive
Guenevere Drive and
Saginaw Drive
2 Guenevere Drive
Guyton Road and Red
Coach Road
1 Guyton Road
Guyton Road and Red
Coach Road
1 Red Coach Road
Harmony Parkway and
Harold Place
1 Harold Place
Harmony Parkway and
Lincoln Boulevard
2 Harmony Parkway
Harmony Parkway and
Lincoln Boulevard
1 Lincoln Boulevard
Harmony Parkway and Old
Perry Highway
1 Harmony Parkway
Harmony Parkway and
Terrace Drive
1 Terrace Drive
Harmony Parkway and
Washington Heights Avenue
1 Washington Heights Avenue
Harrison Street and
Roosevelt Boulevard
1 Harrison Street
Haugh Drive and Edwood
Road
2 Haugh Drive
Haugh Drive and Glenbrook
Drive
1 Glenbrook Drive
Haugh Drive and Glenbrook
Drive
2 Haugh Drive
 505.03 CHARTER  505.03
C:181
Intersection of
No. of
Signs Sign Located On
Hazlett Road and Bramble
Lane
1 Bramble Lane
Hazlett Road and Brittany
Place
1 Brittany Place
Hazlett Road and Dormar
Drive
1 Dormar Drive
Hazlett Road and Elaine
Drive
1 Elaine Drive
Hazlett Road and Patricia
Drive
1 Patricia Drive
Heather Place and Lancelot
Drive
1 Heather Place
Heather Place and Plateau
Drive
1 Heather Place
Hedwig Drive and Meadow
Road
1 Hedwig Drive
Hillcrest Avenue and
Forestvue Avenue
1 Forestvue Avenue
Hillcrest Avenue and Oak
Ridge Drive
1 Hillcrest Drive
Hillvista Drive and Balmoral
Drive
2 Balmoral Drive
Hillvista Drive and Bingay
Drive
2 Hillvista Drive
Hillvista Drive and Hazlett
Road
1 Hillvista Drive
Huron Avenue and
Chickasaw Avenue
1 Huron Avenue
Huron Avenue and Olive
Street
1 Huron Avenue
Inwood Road and Old Perry
Highway
1 Inwood Road
Iroquois Avenue and
Chippewa Avenue
1 Chippewa Avenue
Iroquois Avenue and Seneca
Avenue
1 Iroquois Avenue
Kummer Road and Green
Briar Drive
1 Green Briar Drive
 505.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.03
C:182
Intersection of
No. of
Signs Sign Located On
LeGrand Drive at
McCandless Drive
1 LeGrand Drive
Linden Road and Weller
Drive
1 Northbound Lane of Linden
Road
Lindisfarne Drive and
Malibran Drive
1 Lindisfarne Drive
Lindisfarne Drive and
Malibran Drive
1 Malibran Drive
Lindisfarne Drive and
Nordica Drive
1 Lindisfarne Drive (northbound)
Lindisfarne Drive and
Nordica Drive
1 Nordica Drive
Lochinvar Drive at
Lindisfarne Drive
1 Lochinvar Drive
Lochinvar Drive at Manville
Drive
1 Lochinvar Drive
Madison Street and Lincoln
Boulevard
1 Madison Street
Madison Street and Lincoln
Boulevard
2 Lincoln Boulevard
Madison Street and
Washington Heights Avenue
2 Washington Heights Avenue
Malibran Drive and
Manville Drive
1 Manville Drive
Manor Drive 2 Harvest Manor Drive
Manor Road and Kaylor
Road
2 Kaylor Road
Mary Avenue and Inwood
Road
1 Mary Avenue
McCandless Drive at Blazier
Drive
1 McCandless Drive
McCandless Drive at
Grubbs Road
1 McCandless Drive
McIntyre Square #1 4 As shown on the drawing
attached to Ord. 1281
McIntyre Square #2 4 As shown on the drawing
attached to Ord. 1281
McIntyre Square #3 4 As shown on the drawing
attached to Ord. 1281
 505.03 CHARTER  505.03
C:183
Intersection of
No. of
Signs Sign Located On
McIntyre Square #4 1 As shown on the drawing
attached to Ord. 1281
Meadow Crest Drive and
Woodview Drive
1 Meadow Crest Drive
Meinert Road and Twin Hill
Road
1 Twin Hill Road
Merlin Drive and Guenevere
Drive
1 Merlin Drive
Mohican Avenue and
Hillcrest Avenue
2 Mohican Avenue
Mohican Avenue and
Hillcrest Avenue
1 Hillcrest Avenue
Mohican Avenue and Huron
Avenue
2 Huron Avenue
Mohican Avenue and
Mohawk Avenue
2 Mohican Avenue
Mohican Avenue and
Oneida Avenue
1 Oneida Avenue
Montgomery Road and
Montgomery Road
2 Montgomery Road
Nordica Drive at Manville
Drive
1 Nordica Drive
North Florence Road and
Louisville Drive
1 North Florence Road
North Florence Road and
Pebblewood Court
2 North Florence Road
North Florence Road and
Pebblewood Court
1 Pebblewood Court
Oak Ridge Drive and Oak
Ridge Drive (South)
1 Oak Ridge Drive (South)
Oak Ridge Drive and
Timbarra Court
1 Timbarra Court
Oakhurst Drive at Duncan
Drive
1 Oakhurst Drive
Old Kummer Road at
Kummer Road
1 Old Kummer Road
Olive Street and Almar
Drive
1 Almar Drive
 505.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.03
C:184
Intersection of
No. of
Signs Sign Located On
Olive Street and Almar
Place
1 Olive Street
Olive Street and Almar
Place
1 Almar Place
Olive Street and Doral Drive 2 Doral Drive
Olive Street and Gary Court 1 Gary Court
Olive Street and Inwood
Road
1 Inwood Road
Olive Street and Inwood
Road
1 Olive Street
Olive Street and Mary
Avenue
1 Olive Street
Oneida Avenue and
Seminole Avenue
4 All 4 corners
Pannier Road and
Guenevere Drive
2 Pannier Road
Pannier Road and Winthrop
Road
1 Pannier Road
Parkview Drive and Hedwig
Drive
1 Hedwig Drive
Parkview Drive and
Ridgewood Drive
1 Ridgewood Drive
Pine Line Drive and
Harmony Drive
1 Pine Line Drive
Pontiac Avenue and
Chippewa Avenue
1 Chippewa Avenue
Pontiac Avenue and
Iroquois Avenue
1 Iroquois Avenue
Post Road and Dubonnet
Court
2 Post Road
Post Road and Dubonnet
Court
1 Dubonnet Court
Post Road and Stage Drive 2 Post Road
Providence Boulevard and
Covenant Avenue
4
Red Coach Road and Coach
Court
1 Coach Court
 505.03 CHARTER  505.03
C:185
Intersection of
No. of
Signs Sign Located On
Red Coach Road and
Lammerton Drive
2 Red Coach Road
Red Coach Road and Post
Road
2 Red Coach Road
Red Coach Road and Post
Road
2 Post Road
Reichold Road and Ashley
Hill Drive
1 Ashley Hill Drive
Reichold Road and
Breckenridge Drive
1 Breckenridge Drive
Reichold Road and Country
Lane
1 Country Lane
Reichold Road and Crest
Road
1 Crest Road
Reichold Road and Landau
Drive
1 Landau Drive
Remington Drive and
Balmoral Drive
2 Remington Drive
Remington Drive and
Balmoral Drive
2 Balmoral Drive
Remington Drive and
Balmoral Drive
1 Balmoral Drive
Remington Drive and
Balmoral Drive
1 Remington Drive
Remington Drive and
Bingay Drive
1 Bingay Drive
Remington Drive and
Hazlett Road
2 Remington Drive
Remington Drive and
Hazlett Road
2 Hazlett Road
Remington Drive and Judy
Ann Place
1 Judy Ann Place
Remington Drive and
Regency Drive
2 Remington Drive
Remington Drive and
Regency Drive
2 Regency Drive
Remington Drive and
Winchester Drive
1 Remington Drive
 505.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.03
C:186
Intersection of
No. of
Signs Sign Located On
Rinaman Road and Arthur
Drive (north end)
1 Arthur Drive
Rinaman Road and Blum
Avenue
1 Blum Avenue
Rinaman Road and Country
Manor Lane
1 Country Manor Lane
Rinaman Road and Neuhart
Boulevard
1 Neahart Boulevard
Rinaman Road and
Ridgeview Avenue (north
end)
1 Ridgeview Avenue
Rinaman Road and
Ridgeview Avenue (south
end)
1 Ridgeview Avenue
Rinaman Road and Willow
Drive
1 Willow Drive
Robinson Road and Orchard
Road
1 Robinson Road
Roosevelt Boulevard and
Kind Drive
2 Roosevelt Boulevard
Roosevelt Boulevard and
Kind Drive
1 Kind Drive
Roosevelt Boulevard and
Madison Street
2 Roosevelt Boulevard
Roosevelt Boulevard and
Madison Street
4 All 4 corners
Roosevelt Boulevard and
Van Buren Drive
2 Roosevelt Boulevard
Roosevelt Boulevard and
Van Buren Drive
1 Van Buren Drive
Rosalind Road and Lancelot
Drive
1 Rosalind Road
Rosalind Road and Plateau
Drive
1 Plateau Drive
Rustic Road and Wagon
Wheel Trail
1 Rustic Road
Saginaw Avenue and
Guenevere Drive
1 Saginaw Avenue
 505.03 CHARTER  505.03
C:187
Intersection of
No. of
Signs Sign Located On
Sandle Avenue and Eleanor
Street
1 Eleanor Street
Sandle Avenue and Forest
Avenue
1 Forest Avenue
Sandle Avenue and Louise
Street
2 Sandle Avenue
Sandle Avenue and Louise
Street
1 Louise Street
Saratoga Drive and
Magellan Drive
1 Saratoga Drive
Seminole Avenue and
Hillcrest Avenue
2 Seminole Avenue
Seminole Avenue and
Huron Avenue
1 Seminole Avenue
Seminole Avenue and
Mohawk Avenue
2 Seminole Avenue
Seminole Avenue and Old
Perry Highway
1 Seminole Avenue
Seminole Avenue and
Oneida Avenue
2 Seminole Avenue
Sequoia Street and South
Irwin Avenue
1 Sequoia Street
South Irwin Avenue and
Harmony Drive
1 South Irwin Avenue
South Irwin Avenue and
Ryland Drive
1 South Irwin Avenue
Southvale Road and Hilliard
Road
2 Hilliard Road
Springfield Drive and
Northgate Drive
1 Springfield Drive
Springfield Drive and
Northgate Drive
1 Northgate Drive
Springfield Drive and
Shadyoak Drive
1 Shadyoak Drive
Springfield Drive and
Viewcrest Drive
1 Viewcrest Drive
 505.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.03
C:188
Intersection of
No. of
Signs Sign Located On
S.R. 4070 (Ingomar Road)
and Ingomar Heights Road
at West Ingomar Road and
Highland Road [Added
11-25-2019 by Ord. No.
1492]
4 All 4 corners
Stage Court and Guyton
Road
2 Guyton Road
Stage Court and Guyton
Road
3 Stage Court
Stratford Court and
Bennington
Sudberry Drive and Meinert
Road
1 Sudberry Drive
Sunset Road and Almar
Drive
1 Almar Drive
Sunset Road and Emerald
Drive
1 Emerald Drive
Sunset Road and Old Perry
Highway
1 Sunset Road
Sunset Road and Pine Road 1 Pine Road
The first driveway east of
the intersection of Covenant
Avenue and Providence
Boulevard
2
Timber Trail at Hilliard
Road
1 Timber Trail
Van Buren Drive and East
Van Buren Drive
1 East Van Buren Drive
Victory Road and Harmony
Drive
1 Victory Road
Victory Road and
Willoughby Road
1 Victory Road
Wagon Wheel Trail and
Conestoga Court
1 Conestoga Court
Wagon Wheel Trail and East
Moccasin Trail
1 East Moccasin Trail
Wagon Wheel Trail and East
Moccasin Trail
1 Wagon Wheel Trail
 505.03 CHARTER  505.03
C:189
Intersection of
No. of
Signs Sign Located On
Wagon Wheel Trail and Old
Perry Highway
1 Wagon Wheel Trail
Wagon Wheel Trail and
Tomahawk Trail
1 Tomahawk Trail
Wagon Wheel Trail and
West Moccasin Trail
1 West Moccasin Trail
Waldwick and Remington
Drive
1 Eastbound Lane of Waldwick
Drive
Wallace Road and Menold
Drive
2 Wallace Road
Wallace Road and Menold
Drive
2 Menold Drive
Wallace Road and Menold
Drive
1 Menold Drive
Weller Drive and Linden
Road
1 Weller Drive
West Fairview Avenue at
Route 19
1 West Fairview Avenue
Willoughby Road and
Harmony Drive
2 Harmony Drive
Willoughby Road and Pine
Line Drive
1 Pine Line Drive
Willoughby Road and
Ryland Drive
2 Willoughby Road
Willoughby Road and
Wyngold Drive
1 Wyngold Drive
Winchester Drive and Judy
Ann Place
1 Winchester Drive
Winchester Drive and Judy
Ann Place
1 Judy Ann Place
Winchester Drive and
Remington Drive
1 Winchester Drive
Windmill Lane and Balmoral
Drive
2 Windmill Lane
Woodland Road and Brant
Avenue
2 Brant Avenue
Woodland Road and East
Road
1 East Road
 505.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.03
C:190
Intersection of
No. of
Signs Sign Located On
Woodland Road and Lindsay
Road
2 Woodland Road
Woodland Road and Lindsay
Road
1 Lindsay Road
Woodland Road and
McCutcheon Avenue
2 McCutcheon Avenue
Woods Drive 1 Bennington Woods Lane
Woods Drive 1 Stratford Court
 505.04. Parking. [Res. 10-1960, passed 4-25-1960; Res. 3-1962,
passed 1-22-1962; Res. 5-1965, passed 6-21-1965; Res. 8-1965,
passed 8-23-1965; Res. 8-1967, passed 10-23-1967; Res. 9-1967,
passed 10-23-1967; Res. 2-1969, passed 3-24-1969; Res. 3-1969,
passed 5-26-1969; Res. 10-1969, passed 10-27-1969; Res. 3-1970,
passed 4-27-1970; Res. 4-1970, passed 4-27-1970; Res. 7-1972,
passed 3-27-1972; Res. 11-1972, passed 5-22-1972; Res. 12-1972,
passed 6-26-1972; Ord. 703, passed 9-27-1976; Ord. 738, passed
5-22-1978; Ord. 759, passed 2-26-1979; Ord. 768, passed 7-2-1979;
Ord. 866, passed 7-25-1983; Ord. 884, passed 7-23-1984; Ord. 908,
passed 5-28-1985; Ord. 913, passed 9-23-1986; Ord. 985, passed
5-23-1988; Ord. 1019, passed 11-27-1989; Ord. 1038, passed
11-26-1990; Ord. 1050, passed 3-25-1991; Ord. 1063, passed
9-23-1991; Ord. 1139, passed 2-27-1995; Ord. 106, passed
10-14-1955; Ord. 1149, passed 11-27-1995; Ord. 1204, passed
7-28-1998; Ord. 1224, passed 12-20-1999; Ord. 1261, passed
1-28-2002; Ord. 1287, passed 8-25-2003; Ord. 1306, passed
8-23-2004; Ord. 1469, passed 10-23-2017]
(a) In accordance with and under authority of the Vehicle Code, parking is
hereby prohibited at the following specified locations, and proper signs
shall be erected to give notice of such restrictions as required by the
Vehicle Code.
(b) No parking zones are established as follows:
(1) On both sides of Bellcrest Road from Ingomar Road to Ridge
Avenue.
(2) On both sides of Cumberland Road from McKnight Road to Babcock
Boulevard.
(3) On Guenevere Drive (Also known as Oakwood Road) from Route 19
eastward to Cumberland Road and McKnight Road.
(4) On both sides of Harmony Drive from Ingomar Road northward to
the north end of the property of the Ingomar Volunteer Fire
Department.
 505.03 CHARTER  505.04
C:191
(5) On the east side of Harold Place from Harmony Parkway to
Highland Road.
(6) On both sides of Highland Road from Willoughby Road to Harmony
Drive.
(7) On both sides of Highland Road from its intersection with Old Perry
Highway to its intersection with Terrace Drive.
(8) On north side of Ingomar Road from Valley View Road 150 feet to
the east and from Valley View Road 150 feet to the west.
(9) On north side of Ingomar Road from its intersection with Grubbs
Road westerly for 1,600 feet.
(10)On north side of Ingomar Road between Sunset Road and
McCutcheon Avenue between 7:30 a.m. and 9:30 a.m. and 3:00
p.m. and 5:00 p.m. except on Saturdays and Sundays.
(11) On both sides of Memorial Drive.
(12)On both sides of Old Perry Highway from its intersection with
Gloria Street and Perry Highway to the place where that portion of
Old Perry Highway again rejoins Perry Highway.
(13)On both sides of Old Perry Highway from Pine Creek Road to the
top entrance of St. Alexis Church.
(14)On both sides of the Old Perry Highway from the present Perry
Highway northward to Pine Creek Road.
(15) (Reserved)6
(16) (Reserved)7
(17)On both sides of Presidential Drive from Babcock Boulevard to
Peebles Road.
(18)On both sides of Winchester Drive from Babcock Boulevard to
Remington Drive.
(19) On either side of Ridge Road from Bellcrest Road to Grosick Road.
(20) (Reserved)8
(21)On either side of Saratoga Drive from Stuyvesant Road
northwesterly to the Toftrees Plan of Lots.
6. Editor's Note: Former Subsection (b)(15), regarding parking on Pine Creek Road, was
repealed 7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 1478.
7. Editor's Note: Former Subsection (b)(16), regarding parking on Pine Creek Road, was
repealed 7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 1478.
8. Editor's Note: Former Subsection (b)(20), regarding parking on Pine Creek Road, was
repealed 7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 1478.
 505.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.04
C:192
(22)On either side of North Harding Road from Ingomar Road south a
distance of 75 feet.
(23) (Reserved)9
(24)On the northerly side of East Sandle Avenue from Perry Highway
eastwardly for a distance of 230 feet.
(25)On either side of Grubbs Road from its intersection with Ingomar
Road westwardly for a distance of 1,568 feet.
(26)On the easterly side of Harmony Drive from its intersection with
Ingomar Road southwardly for a distance of 400 feet.
(27) (Reserved)10
(28)On both sides of Weller Drive from its intersection with Route 19
(Perry Highway) westwardly for a distance of 300 feet.
(29)On both sides of Ferguson Road from its intersection with
Thompson Run Road eastwardly for a distance of 300 feet.
(30)On both sides of Duncan Avenue from its intersection with
Ferguson Road northerly for a distance of 300 feet.
(31) (Reserved)11
(32)On both sides of Forest Oaks Drive for its entire length, and along
both outer sides of Forest Edge Court for its entire length.
(33)On both sides of Grosick Road from its intersection with Ingomar
Road in a northerly direction for a distance of 590 feet.
(34) (Reserved)12
(35)On both sides of Winchester Drive from Remington Drive to
Babcock Boulevard.
(36)On both sides of Crestmont Road from its intersection with Perry
Highway (U.S. Route 19), a distance of 346 feet on the northerly
side and a distance of 290' on the southerly side.
(37) (Reserved)13
(38)On the northern side of Mohican Avenue from Route 19 (Perry
Highway) to the western side of Hillcrest Avenue.
9. Editor's Note: Former subsection (b)(23) hereof was repealed by Ord. No. 1455.
10.Editor's Note: Former subsection (b)(27) was repealed by Ord. No. 1468.
11.Editor's Note: Former Subsection (b)(31), regarding parking on Arcadia Drive, was
repealed 5-21-2018 by Ord. No. 1475.
12.Editor's Note: Former Subsection (b)(34), regarding parking on Arcadia Drive, was
repealed 7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 1478.
13.Editor's Note: Former Subsection (b)(37), regarding parking on Pine Creek Road, was
repealed 5-21-2018 by Ord. No. 1475.
 505.04 CHARTER  505.04
C:193
 505.05. Fire lanes established; parking prohibited. [Ord. 529,
passed 7-28-1969; Ord. 563, passed 10-26-1970; Ord. 573, passed
1-25-1971; Ord. 620, passed 1-22-1973; Ord. 626, passed 4-23-1973;
Ord. 733, passed 2-28-1978; Ord. 748, passed 10-23-1978; Ord. 763,
passed 3-26-1979; Ord. 774, passed 8-27-1979; Ord. 814, passed
1-26-1981; Ord. 836, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 863, passed 5-23-1983;
Ord. 977, passed 1-25-1988; Ord. 983, passed 4-25-1988; Ord. 1006,
passed 6-19-1989; Ord. 1010, passed 7-25-1989; Ord. 1197, passed
12-15-1990; Ord. 1045, passed 2-25-1991; Ord. 1051, passed
3-25-1991; Ord. 1069, passed 4-27-1992; Ord. 1101, passed
8-23-1993; Ord. 1140, passed 2-27-1995; Ord. 1141, passed
3-27-1995; Ord. 1142, passed 3-27-1995; Ord. 1197, passed
12-15-1997; Ord. 1458, passed 6-27-2016]
(39)On the western side of Harmony Drive from Pine Line Drive to its
terminus.
(40)On both sides of North Florence Road from its intersection with
Louisville Drive South to the starting point of the cul-de-sac at the
terminus of North Florence Road which is a distance of 373 feet.
(41) Two hundred feet in length at the end of Collington Square,
including both turnaround areas. [Added 3-26-2018 by Ord. No.
1473]
(42)On both turnaround areas at the end of Collington Square. [Added
7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 1477]
(43) The eastern side of Valley View Road, including the turnaround
area at the end of Valley View Road. [Added 6-24-2019 by Ord.
No. 1488]
(c) In accordance with and under the authority of the Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code, no parking shall be permitted from 7:00 a.m. until noon, Monday
thru Friday, on either side of the following streets:
(1) Cromwell Drive from Cumberland Road to Barry Drive,
(2) Pannier Road from Cumberland Road to Winthrop Drive, and
(3) Saginaw Avenue for its entire length.
Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the no parking restriction
established by this subsection in accordance with the Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code. Anyone who violates the provisions of this subsection shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $15 plus costs of prosecution.
(a) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have an
access to the shops and stores in the Duncan Manor Shopping Center
and the Wexford Plaza Shopping Center a fire lane is hereby established
along the front of all of the stores and shops in those shopping centers.
 505.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.05
C:194
(b) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to the North Hills Passavant Hospital, a fire lane is hereby established
on the road immediately in front of the hospital and immediately in
front of the medical office building located on the hospital property.
(c) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to the commercial establishments and offices contained in the
Commodore Perry Square Building a fire lane is hereby established
along all four sides of such building.
(d) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to the front of the Harrison House #11 and Grant House #12, within
the Presidential Arms apartment complex, a fire lane shall hereby be
established along the front of these two buildings, located in this
apartment complex.
(e) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to the various buildings on the property of the North Allegheny School
District located within the Town of McCandless, fire lanes are hereby
established on the roadways adjacent to any such buildings.
For purposes of this subsection, "parking" is hereby defined as
stopping, standing or parking, but shall not apply to vehicles loading or
unloading passengers or materials.
Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of the aforesaid restriction.
Such signs to clearly indicate the existence of the fire lane and to
provide that no stopping, standing or parking shall be permitted at any
time.
(f) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to the building at 8050 McKnight Road located at the intersection of
Peebles Road and McKnight Road, a fire lane is hereby established on
all four sides of such building.
(g) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to the Perrymont Building located on Perry Highway, a fire lane is
hereby established along the westerly side of the building, the northerly
side of the building and for two parking spaces on the southerly side of
the building near the rear doorway and for three parking spaces on the
southerly side of the building near the front doorway.
(h) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to access the
building located at 8352 Babcock Blvd., now known as the Vincentian
Sisters of Charity Residential Facility, a fire lane is hereby established
for a distance of 107 feet from the front entrance to the north west
corner of the building and a distance of 50 feet from the west rear
corner of the building.
(i) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to the Presidential Arms Apartments, a fire lane is hereby established at
 505.05 CHARTER  505.05
C:195
Building No. 16, Cleveland House, and Building No. 17, Roosevelt
House, along the front of these buildings.
(j) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to the Ingomar Shop & Save supermarket at Ingomar Road and
Harmony Drive, a fire lane is hereby established consisting of two
parking spaces at the Siamese fire hose connection on the southerly
side of the building.
(k) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to the Villa Riviera Apartments, a fire lane is hereby established 26 feet
in length at the main entrance to the building.
(l) In order to permit fire truck and fire fighting equipment to access the
commercial establishments located in the property now known as the
Pine Creek Shopping Center, a fire lane is hereby established along all
four sides of the building.
(m) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to the office building at the northeast corner of McKnight Road and
Arcadia Drives, a fire lane is hereby established along the entire rear of
the building.
(n) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to Royal Manor Apartments, a fire lane is hereby established on both
sides of Royal Manor Drive from Duncan Avenue to South Court and
West Court, on both sides of Royal Manor Drive from Building 8870
northwardly to North Court, and then along the southerly line of North
Court and also in front of Building 8898, one space immediately in front
of Buildings 8814, 8818 and 8830 and also areas immediately adjacent
to the grass dividers located in South Court, all as identified and
marked by proper no parking signs.
(o) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to Showcase Cinema North, a fire lane is hereby established along all
four sides of the building.
(p) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
the building located at One Wexford Square, now known as Max Planks,
a fire lane is hereby established along with north, south and east sides
of the building.
(q) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to the Alfred W. Beattie Technical School, a fire lane is hereby
established along all four sides of the building.
(r) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to the building now known as HOP Lumber, a fire lane is hereby
established along the north, south and west sides of the building.
 505.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.05
C:196
(s) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to 551 Blazier Drive, now known as Bally's, a fire lane is hereby
established on the north, south and west sides of the building.
(t) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to 555 Blazier Drive, now known as Trader Horn/Nikki's Brewery, a fire
lane is hereby established on the north, south and west sides of the
building.
(u) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to the LaRoche College, fire lanes are hereby established along the
southern, northern and western side of Academic Hall; 300 feet on the
southern side of the Art Building; 150 feet on the western side of Peters
Hall; and the western and eastern sides of Wright Library.
(v) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fight equipment to have access to
the Sister of Divine Providence Motherhouse, a fire lane is hereby
established along all four sides of the building.
When proper signs have been erected to give notice of the aforesaid
restrictions, no vehicle shall be permitted to park in a fire lane at any
time.
(w) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to the building at 9795 Perry Highway, a fire lane is hereby established
along the full length of the northern side of the building, in front of the
fire department connection and in the loading dock area at the southern
side of the building.
(x) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to the building at 10431 Perry Highway, a fire lane is hereby established
along the northern side of the building facing Albermarle Drive, along
the rear (western side) of the building and in front of the main entrance
(eastern side of the building).
(y) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to the building at 10520 Perry Highway, now known as Wright Nissan, a
fire lane is hereby established for the area adjacent to the fire
department connection on the northern side of the building that faces
Wexford Plaza, in the front of the main entrance (western side), along
the side entrance to the showroom and the driveway along Reichold
Road on the southern side of the areas adjacent to the service garages
on the western side rear of the building.
(z) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to the building at 5500 Corporate Drive, a fire lane is hereby
established along all four sides of the building and along both sides of
the entrance driveway.
(aa) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to the building at 5800 Corporate Drive, a fire lane is hereby
 505.05 CHARTER  505.05
C:197
established along all four sides of the building and along both sides of
the entrance driveway.
(bb) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to the building at 5700 Corporate Drive, a fire lane is hereby
established along the entire front of the building, along both sides of
the entrance driveway, and along the northern, eastern and western
sides of the first and second floor parking deck areas.
(cc) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to have access
to the building at 5300 Corporate Drive, a fire lane is hereby
established along all four sides of the building and along both sides of
the entrance driveway.
(dd) In order to permit fire trucks, fire fighting equipment and other
emergency vehicles to have access to the Community College North
facility located at 8701 Perry Highway, a fire lane is established for the
length of the entrance driveway on both sides and for the exit ramp to
Perry Highway on both sides and in front of the building and along all
four sides of the building except along the gymnasium side where
parking is permitted.
(ee) In order to permit fire trucks, fire fighting equipment and other
emergency vehicles to have access to The Oaks of McCandless located
on Nineteen North Drive, a fire lane is established as follows:
(1) At the front entranceway of Buildings 200, 300, 320, 400, 500, 520,
540, 600, 700, 720, 800, 920 (at the main entrances), 940 (at the
parking space), 1000 (at the parking space), 1100, 1120 and 1140.
(2) At the rear of Building 200, the full width of the roadway, for a
distance of 61 feet.
(3) At the rear entranceway of:
A. Building 400 for a distance of 52 feet.
B. Building 600.
C. Building 800.
D. Building 1,000.
(4) At the rear of Building 200, the full width of the roadway for a
distance of 61 feet.
(5) At the island between Buildings 400 and 600 for a distance of 20
feet.
(6) Between Buildings 500 and 740 for a distance of 20 feet.
(7) Fifteen feet on either side of the fire hydrant located between
Buildings 400 and 600.
 505.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.05
C:198
(8) At the ends of the parking island across from Building 600 for a
distance of 20 feet.
(9) At the rear of Building 800 at the lined off area for a distance of 19
feet.
(10) At the marked off areas between Buildings 800 and 1,000 for a
distance of 20 feet.
(11) At the rear parking island area of Building 800 for a distance of 20
feet.
(12) At the ends of the parking island across from Building 800.
(13) A distance of 15 feet on either side of the fire hydrant adjacent to
Building 1100.
(14)On both sides of the entrance driveway of The Oaks of McCandless
(Oaks) from Building 1,100 past the rental office for a distance of
140 feet on the left and 120 feet on the right.
(15) On the entrance driveway of the Oaks:
A. Along its southern side from Route 19 (Perry Highway) to the
entrance driveway of the Community College of Allegheny
County-North Campus (CCAC-North) a distance of 71 feet.
B. From the northwest corner of the entrance driveway of the
CCAC-North along the entrance driveway of The oaks a
distance of 277 feet.
C. From the parking area adjacent to Building 200 along the
entrance driveway of The Oaks a distance of 144 feet to the
east.
D. From Route 19 (Perry Highway) along the northern side of the
entrance driveway of The Oaks a distance of 175 feet.
(ff) In order to permit fire trucks, fire fighting equipment and other
emergency vehicles to have access to the Administration Building of
North Hills Passavant Hospital at 9106 Babcock Boulevard, a fire lane is
established as follows:
(1) Along the entire front of the building (width of roadway);
(2) For the entire width of the roadway along rear driveway to the
loading dock area; and
(3) At the loading dock and garage area along the entire eastern face
of the building.
(gg) In order to permit fire trucks, fire fighting equipment and other
emergency vehicles to have access to the Support Facilities Building
 505.05 CHARTER  505.05
C:199
and Daycare Center of North Hills Passavant Hospital, a fire lane is
established as follows:
(1) A distance of 214 feet in front of the Daycare Center;
(2) A distance of 189 feet in front of the Support Facilities Building;
(3) A distance of 95 feet on the side of the Support Facilities Building;
and
(4) A distance of 220 feet along the driveway area at the side of the
Support Facilities Building.
(hh) In order to permit fire trucks, fire fighting equipment and other
emergency vehicles to have access to Arcadia Center, McKnight Road, a
fire lane is hereby established from the entrance of the Arcadia Center
development Phase II at its intersection with West Arcadia Drive to a
point 585 feet in a southerly direction.
(ii) In order to permit fire trucks, fire fighting equipment and other
emergency vehicles to have access to the Sears Homelife Building at
9365 McKnight Road a fire lane is hereby established as follows:
On the west side of the building along both side of the driveway for a
distance of 340 feet; on the west side of the building in the area of the
Fire Department connection for a distance of 35 feet; along the south
side of the building in the area of the fire hydrant for a distance of 15
feet; on the north side of the building for a distance of 210 feet for the
side opposite of the building.
(jj) In order to permit fire trucks, fire fighting equipment and other
emergency vehicles to have access to the building located in the
Pittsburgh Office and Research Park complex on Corporate Drive fire
lanes are hereby established as follows:
(1) 5800 Corporate Drive at the entrance driveway and roadway
surrounding the building for the full width of that roadway and at
the end of the parking islands; and
(2) 5900 Corporate Drive at the entrance driveway and the roadway
around the driveway right adjacent to the building for the full width
of the roadway and entrance driveway and at the end of each
parking island.
(kk) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to access the
building at 5100 Corporate Drive, now known as Lone Star Steakhouse,
a fire lane is hereby established along the entire front of the building;
east side, a distance of 132 feet; along the north side of the building a
distance of 103 feet and along the south side of the building a distance
of 60 feet.
(ll) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to access the
building located at 9395 McKnight Road, now known as Outback
 505.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.05
C:200
Steakhouse, a fire lane is hereby established along the entire front of
the building (east side) a distance of 128 feet; the entire rear of the
building (west side) a distance of 103 feet; a distance of 70 feet from
the northwest corner of the building; both corners for a distance of 36
feet from the two (southern side) entrances.
(mm) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to access the
building located at 9335 McKnight Road, now known as Blue Cross Blue
Shield Primary Care Center, a fire lane is hereby established on the
west side of the building for an area 17 feet by 34 feet around the fire
hydrant and on the east side of the building a distance of 125 feet from
the northeast corner of the building going south.
(nn) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to access the
building located at 700 Blazier Drive, now known as State Farm
Insurance Company, a fire lane is hereby established on the north side
of the building a distance of 15 feet in front of the fire department
connection.
(oo) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to access the
building located at 500 Blazier Drive, now known as Allegheny
University Medical Practices - Wexford, a fire lane is hereby established
on the north side in front of the fire hydrant and to the north side, right,
in front of the fire department connection.
(pp) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to access the
building located at 9840 Old Perry Highway, now known as Northwood
Realty Co. Better Homes and Gardens, on the south side of the building
for a distance of 143 feet of the curb.
(qq) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to access the
building located at 100 North Meadows Drive, now known as Sears
Repair Center, a fire lane is hereby established a distance of 115 feet on
the south side of the building; a distance of 15 feet in front of the fire
hydrant; a distance of 90 feet on the west side of the building; a
distance of 22 feet on the north west corner of the building; a distance
of 20 feet on the northeast corner of the building and a distance of 55
feet on the southeast corner of the building.
(rr) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to access the
building located at 10521 Perry Highway, now known as Hosack Real
Estate/Better Homes and Gardens, a fire lane is hereby established for
a distance of 30 feet on the northeast corner of the building; a distance
of 107 feet along the north side of the building and a distance of 70 feet
along the east side of the building.
(ss) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to access the
building located at 9576 Perry Highway, now known as the Crestmont
Building, a fire lane is hereby established for a distance of 15 feet on
the north side in front of the fire hydrant; a distance of 15 feet on the
east side of the front entrance of the building and a distance of 15 feet
from the west entrance of the building.
 505.05 CHARTER  505.05
C:201
 505.06. Obstructing clear view; nuisance. [Ord. 586, passed
10-25-1971]
 505.07. Through highways. [Res. 5-1964, passed 3-23-1964; Res.
3-1966, passed 3-28-1966; Res. 4-1966, passed 3-28-1966]
(tt) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to access the
building located at 111 Perrymont Road, now known as Vincentian
Assisted Living, a fire lane is hereby established on the east side of the
building starting at the southeast corner extending north a distance of
61 feet to the northeast corner; a distance of 206 feet west from the
northeast corner of the rear side of the building to the northwest corner
of the building; a distance of 107 feet in the driveway area adjacent to
the fire hydrant and the fire department connection.
(uu) In order to permit fire trucks and fire fighting equipment to access the
building located at 8800 Peebles Road, now known as Memorial Park
Church, a fire lane is hereby established a distance of 183 feet on the
north side of the building starting at the northwest corner of the
parking lot extending east to the driveway entrance.
(vv) In order to permit fire apparatus and equipment and other emergency
vehicles to maintain access on the driveway serving the Baierl Center,
the Newman Stadium Complex and adjoining tennis courts located at
the North Allegheny High School, 10375 Perry Highway, Wexford, PA
15090, a fire lane is hereby established.
(a) All plantings, structures, vehicles or other things located either within a
public right of way or on private property, which constitute an
obstruction to the clear view and natural sight distance necessary for
the traffic safety of motorist on roads, streets and highways in the Town
are hereby declared to be a nuisance and a traffic hazard. Any person
creating such a nuisance is subject to the penalty provided in Section
505.99.
(b) Any owner, occupant or tenant of property who receives notice from the
Town Manager to abate such nuisance shall do so within 10 days
thereafter. If such nuisance is not abated and removed, the Town may
remove and abate the nuisance at the expense of the owner or owners,
lessee or occupant of the premises. Such expenses together with costs
shall be recovered by the Town as provided by law for the collection of
municipal claims in addition to any other penalty provided by Section
505.99.
(a) Legislative Route 02126, Peebles Road, is designated a thru highway
and all traffic shall come to a full stop before entering or crossing the
same after proper signs have been erected.
(b) Legislative Route 02328, Babcock Boulevard, is hereby designated a
through highway.
 505.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.07
C:202
 505.08. Parking near fire hydrants. [Ord. 719, passed 3-28-1977]
 505.09. Prohibited parking dead-end and hammerhead streets.
[Ord. 1302, passed 5-24-2004]
(c) Legislative Route 02302, McKnight Road, is hereby designated a
through highway.
(a) No person shall park a vehicle, or permit it to stand, whether attended
or unattended, within 15 feet of any fire hydrant whether the hydrant is
located on a public highway, upon a private road or on private property.
(b) In the case of private roads, or plans having private roads, a notice of
this prohibition shall be posted by a sign at the entry to the private road
or at any entry to plans having private roads within the plan.
(a) During the period November 1 through March 31, parking is hereby
prohibited on the following dead end or hammerhead streets:
Name of Street
Adams Street
Birch Avenue
Canterbury Drive
Emerald Drive
Harold Street
Harrison Street
Highview Street
Jackson Street
Jefferson Street
Kind Drive
Madison Place
Monroe Street
Parkway Road
Sequoia Street
Shirley Drive
Towne Court
Tyler Street
Van Dyke Street
Wittmer Road
(b) The length of the No Parking zone shall extend 200 feet from the
terminus of each of the aforementioned streets.
 505.07 CHARTER  505.10
C:203
 505.10. Prohibited left turns. [Ord. 783, passed 12-17-1979; Ord.
785, passed 1-28-1980; Ord. 1057, passed 5-28-1991; Ord. 1217,
passed 5-24-1999; Ord. 1244, passed 4-23-2001; Ord. 1278, passed
10-28-2002; Ord. 1384, passed 2-22-2010; Ord. 1441, passed
8-25-2014]
(a) In accordance with and under the authority of Section 6109(9) of the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, proper signs shall be erected to give notice
of the following prohibited left turns, and no vehicle operator shall
make a left turn in violation thereof:
(1) Exiting from the westerly or lower exit from the Kaufmann's
Department Store Complex, no left turns onto Peebles Road.
(2) Proceeding easterly on Ingomar Road, no left turns onto Showcase
Cinema North entrance roadway; and proceeding on Showcase
Cinema North exit roadway, no left turns onto Ingomar Road.
(3) (Reserved)14
(4) Proceeding easterly on Longvue Avenue, no left turn onto Route 19
(Perry Highway).
(5) Proceeding in a southerly direction on Lindisfarne Drive, no left
turn onto Malibran Drive.
(6) No vehicle being operated in a northerly direction on Forest
Avenue shall be permitted to make a left turn onto Gloria Street.
(7) No vehicle being operated in an easterly direction on Mohican
Avenue shall be permitted to make a left turn onto Route 19 (Perry
Highway).
(8) No vehicle being operated in a southerly direction of the driveway
shown on Exhibit A attached to Ordinance 1384, which center line
is approximately 207 feet from the center line of the intersection of
Babcock Boulevard and Cumberland Road, shall be permitted to
make a left turn on to Cumberland Road.
(9) No vehicle being operated in a easterly direction on Cumberland
Road shall be permitted to make a left turn on to a driveway, which
center line is approximately 207 feet from the center line of the
intersection of Babcock Boulevard and Cumberland Road.
(10)No vehicle being operated on Covenant Avenue shall be permitted
to make a left turn onto Cumberland Road.
(b) Punishment for any violation hereof shall be as provided in Section
505.99.
14.Editor's Note: This subsection was repealed 8-23-1993 by Ord. No. 1102.
 505.10 MCCANDLESS CODE  505.99
C:204
 505.99. Penalty. [Ord. 779, passed 11-26-1979; Ord. 783, passed
12-17-1979; Ord. 785, passed 1-28-1980; Ord. 1302, passed
5-24-2004]
Article 509
COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES
 509.01. Weight limitations. [Ord. 31, passed 3-7-1952; Ord. 367,
passed 6-24-1963; Ord. 369, passed 8-26-1963; Ord. 370, passed
8-26-1963; Ord. 439, passed 2-28-1966; Res. 11-1969, passed
11-3-1969; Res. 13-1974, passed 6-17-1974; Ord. 868, passed
7-25-1983; Ord. 901, passed 3-25-1985; Ord. 932, passed 7-28-1986;
Ord. 1007, passed 6-19-1989; Ord. 1039, passed 11-26-1990; Ord.
1446, passed 1-26-2015]
(a) One-way streets. Whoever violates any provision of Section 505.01 is
guilty of a summary offense and shall upon conviction be sentenced to
pay a fine of $25.
(b) Speed limitations. Whoever violates any provision of Section 505.02 is
guilty of a summary offense and shall upon conviction be sentenced to
pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by
more than five miles per hour shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile
for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over the maximum speed
limit.
(c) Stop signs. Whoever violates any provision of Sections 505.03 or 505.07
is guilty of a summary offense and shall upon conviction be sentenced to
pay a fine of $25.
(d) Parking prohibitions, fire lanes, near hydrants. Whoever violates any
provision of Sections 505.04, 505.05 or 505.08 is guilty of a summary
offense and shall upon conviction be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $15.
(e) Obstructing clear view. Whoever violates any provision of Section
505.06 shall be fined not more than $300 for each offense and in default
of payment shall be imprisoned for not more than five days.
(f) Prohibited parking dead-end and hammerhead streets. Whoever
violates any provision of Section 505.09 shall be fined not more than
$15, plus costs.
(g) Left turns prohibited. Whoever violates any provision of Section 505.10
shall be guilty of a summary offense and shall be fined $25, as set forth
in Section 6502 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
(a) Under authority of Section 4902(a) of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code,
the operation of motor vehicles, tractors, trailers or semi-trailers having
 505.99 CHARTER  509.01
C:205
a gross weight in excess of 20,000 pounds (10 tons) is hereby prohibited
upon the following roads or highways in the Town.
Name of Street
Belle Crest Road
Broad Meadow Drive
Broadlawn Drive
Fairview Road
Fassinger Lane
Grubbs Road
Harmony Park Way
Harvest Manor Drive
Old Perry Highway from its intersection with McKnight Road to its
intersection with Perry Highway
Reichold Road
Remington Drive
Rinaman Road
Ringheisen Road
Roosevelt Avenue
Summit Road
Valley Road
Washington Boulevard
Signs designating the aforesaid weight limits shall be placed at each
end of the named roads and also at intersections of the named roads
with other roads which are not restricted as to weight and which are
through roads to other highways or roads which would allow drivers to
avoid the weight restrictions of this section.
(b) The operation of any vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer on Fairfield Road
between Babcock Boulevard and McKnight Road, having a gross weight
including the vehicle and the load thereon in excess of 10 tons, is
hereby prohibited. Official signs designating the aforesaid weight limit
shall be placed at the intersection of Fairfield Road and Babcock
Boulevard, and the intersection of Fairfield Road and McKnight Road.
(c) The operation of any vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer on Parkedge Drive
between Arcadia Drive and Albemarle Drive, having a gross weight
including the vehicle and the load thereon in excess of 10 tons, is
hereby prohibited. Official signs designating the aforesaid weight limit
shall be placed at the intersection of Arcadia Drive and Parkedge Drive,
and at the intersection of Katherine Drive and Parkedge Drive.
 509.01 MCCANDLESS CODE  509.01
C:206
(d) The operation of any vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer on Katherine Drive
over its entire length, having a gross weight including the vehicle and
the load thereon in excess of 10 tons, is hereby prohibited. Official signs
designating the aforesaid weight limit shall be placed at the
intersection of Parkedge Drive and Katherine Drive.
(e) Multiple roads.
(1) The operation of any vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer on Belvedere
Road having a gross weight including the vehicle and the load
thereon in excess of five tons is hereby prohibited.
(2) The operation of any vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer on that portion
of Center Oak Drive to the east of Albemarle Drive having a gross
weight including the vehicle and the load thereon in excess of five
tons is hereby prohibited.
(3) The operation of any vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer on that portion
of Albemarle Drive to the south of Center Oak Drive in Abbott Acres
Plan of Lots No. 1, having a gross weight including the vehicle and
the load thereon in excess of five tons, is hereby prohibited.
Official signs designating the aforesaid weight limit shall be placed at
the intersection of Albemarle Drive and Center Oak Drive and at the
intersection of Belvedere Road and Covington Place.
(f) Multiple roads.
(1) The weight of any vehicle including its load is hereby restricted to
eight tons on Kaylor Road.
(2) The weight of any vehicle including its load is hereby restricted to
eight tons on Locust Road.
(3) The weight of any vehicle including its load is hereby restricted to
eight tons on Manor Road.
(4) The weight of any vehicle including its load is hereby restricted to
eight tons on Crest Road.
Proper signs shall be erected to give notice of these weight restrictions.
(g) The weight of any vehicle including its load is hereby restricted to eight
tons on Neuhart Boulevard. Proper signs shall be erected to give notice
of this weight restriction.
(h) The operation of any vehicle on Meinert Road, having a gross weight,
including its load, in excess of 10 tons is hereby prohibited. This
restriction is imposed under the authority of Section 4902(a) of the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code inasmuch as it has been determined by
Council that such road may be damaged or destroyed unless the weight
of vehicles is restricted to 10 tons.
 509.01 CHARTER  509.01
C:207
Signs designating the aforesaid weight limit shall be placed at each end
of Meinert Road and shall also be placed at intersections of Meinert
Road with other roads which are not restricted as to weight and which
are through roads to other highways or roads which would allow drivers
to avoid the weight restrictions of this subsection.
The weight limitation herein established shall not apply to school buses,
emergency vehicles, including fire trucks, Town vehicles and garbage
trucks, or to vehicles making local deliveries or pickups to existing
occupied dwellings. Special permits may be issued by the Police Chief
allowing gross vehicle weights in excess of the foregoing limitation in
unusual cases which may not be covered by exceptions stated in this
subsection.
Any person operating a vehicle in violation of the weight restriction
imposed by this subsection shall, upon summary conviction, be
sentenced to pay the fine set forth in Section 4902(g)(1) of the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, plus costs of prosecution.
(i) The operation of any vehicle on McCandless Drive having a gross
weight, including its load, in excess of 10 tons is hereby prohibited. This
restriction is imposed under the authority of Section 4902(a) of the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code inasmuch as it has been determined by the
Town Council of the Town of McCandless that the said road may be
damaged or destroyed unless the weight of vehicles is restricted to 10
tons.
Signs designating the aforesaid weight limit shall be placed at each end
of McCandless Drive in accordance with current Federal and/or State
regulations.
The weight limitation herein established shall not apply to school buses,
emergency vehicles, including fire trucks, Town vehicles and garbage
trucks, or to vehicles making local deliveries or pickups to existing
occupied dwellings.
Any person operating a vehicle in violation of the weight restriction
imposed by this Ordinance shall, upon summary conviction, be
sentenced to pay the fine set forth in Section 4902(g)(1) of the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, plus costs of prosecution.
(j) The weight limitations herein established shall not apply to school
buses, fire vehicles or other emergency vehicles, Town vehicles or
garbage trucks, or vehicles making local deliveries or pickups, nor shall
the weight limits established in subsections (b), (c) and (d) apply to
tractors.
(k) Special permits may be issued by the Town allowing gross weights in
excess of the foregoing limitation in unusual cases or involving
construction on the described streets or for the delivery or picking up of
materials or merchandise.
 509.01 MCCANDLESS CODE  509.02
C:208
 509.02. Tractors damaging roadways. [Ord. 31, passed 3-7-1952]
No person shall operate a tractor upon the highways of the Town in such a
manner as to cause extraordinary damage to the roadway when the roads
are soft because of weather conditions.
 509.03. Loads that litter; removal of mud from roadway. [Ord.
526, passed 5-26-1969; Ord. 786, passed 2-25-1980]
 509.04. Bridge weight limitations.15
 509.99. Penalty. [Ord. 903, passed 3-25-1985]
(a) No person, firm or corporation shall drive or move any truck or other
vehicle with the Town unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as
to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited
upon any street or road in the Town.
(b) No person, firm or corporation shall drive or move any truck or other
vehicle within the Town, the wheels of which carry onto or deposit on
any street or road in the Town mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
foreign matter of any kind.
(c) All owners of property in the Town shall maintain their property in such
a manner that no dirt, mud, stones or other material shall wash onto
any street or road in the Town as the result of rainfall or drainage.
(d) Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the excavation, building,
construction or development of any property shall take all possible
steps to avoid carrying or depositing mud, dirt or any other foreign
substance from the job site on to any street or road in the Town and the
person having supervision over the job shall immediately remove any
mud, dirt or any other foreign substance which might inadvertently or
otherwise be carried on to or deposited on to any street or road. A final
cleanup shall be accomplished no later than 5:00 p.m., prevailing time,
each work day. If any mud or dirt or any other foreign substance is
unavoidably washed on to any street or road in the Town, it shall be the
duty of the property owner to remove the same within 24 hours.
(a) Weight limitations. Any person operating a vehicle or combination upon
a road or highway or bridge in violation of Section 509.01 is guilty of a
summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine
of $75 except that any person convicted of operating a vehicle with a
gross weight in excess of a posted weight shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $150 plus $150 for each 500 pounds, or part
thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the maximum allowable weight.
15.Editor's Note: This section was repealed 9-24-1996 by Ord. No. 1037.
 509.02 CHARTER  509.99
C:209
Article 513
ILLEGALLY PARKED AND ABANDONED VEHICLES
 513.01. Impounding illegally parked vehicles. [Ord. 106, passed
10-14-1955]
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to remove and impound, or to order
the removal and impounding of, any vehicle parked on any of the streets
or public property of the Town in violation of the provisions of this Traffic
Code or regulations authorized by it. However, no vehicle shall be removed
or impounded except in strict adherence to the provisions of this section.
(b) Damaging roadways. Whoever violates any provision of Section 509.02
is guilty of a summary offense and shall upon conviction be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $300.
(c) Littering, mud deposit. Whoever violates any provision of Section
509.03 is guilty of a summary offense and shall upon conviction be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300. Each day a violation is
committed or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
(a) Garage. No vehicle shall be impounded in any garage beyond the
territorial limits of the Town nor in any garage which has not, in
advance, posted a bond in the amount of $5,000 to be filed with the
Town Secretary, for the indemnifying of the owner of any such
impounded vehicle against the loss thereof, or any injury or damage
thereto, while in the custody of the pound keeper.
(b) Towing and storage charges. Any bonded garage shall have, in advance,
filed with the Town Secretary, its fixed charges for towing and storage.
No charges may be made in excess thereof until advance notice of a
change in rates is sent to the Town Secretary by the bonded garage.
(c) Chief of police to notify owner of impounded vehicles. Within 12 hours
from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority granted by this
section, notice of the fact that such vehicle has been impounded shall
be sent by the Chief of Police to the owner of record of such vehicle.
Such notice shall designate the place from which the vehicle was
removed, the reason for its removal and impounding, and the pound in
which it was impounded.
(d) Effect of payment of towing and impounding charges without protest.
The payment of any towing and impounding charges, authorized by this
section, unless such payment was made "under protest", shall be final
and conclusive, and shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the
money so paid.
(e) Effect of payment of charges under protest. In the event that any towing
and impounding charges are paid "under protest", the offender shall be
 509.99 MCCANDLESS CODE  513.01
C:210
 513.02. Storage of abandoned or junked vehicles.16
 513.99. Penalty. [Ord. 335, passed 2-26-1962]
Any person violating any provision of Section 513.02 shall, be fined not less
than $5 nor more than $50 for the first offense, and not less than $10 nor
more than $100 for each subsequent offense, and in default of payment shall
be imprisoned for not more than 30 days. All fines collected upon conviction
or upon forfeiture of jail shall be paid to the Town.
Article 517
MOTORCYCLES; SCOOTERS; AND BICYCLES WITH MOTORS
 517.01. Operation of motorcycles, scooters and bicycles with
motors. [Ord. 604, passed 6-24-1972]
From and after the effective date of this section (Ordinance 604, passed
June 24, 1972) no person shall operate any motorcycle, motor scooter or
bicycle with motor attached on private property other than that of the
operator of such vehicle, unless written permission has been secured from
the owner of the property upon which the vehicle is being operated.
entitled to a hearing before a magistrate or court of record having
jurisdiction, in which case such defendant shall be proceeded against
and shall receive such notice as is provided by the Vehicle Code in other
cases of summary offenses, and shall have the same rights as to appeal
and waiver of hearing.
(f) Records of vehicles removed and impounded. The Chief of Police shall
keep a record of all vehicles impounded and shall be able at all
reasonable times to furnish the owners or agents of the owners thereof
with information as to the place of storage of such vehicles.
(g) Owner or operator of vehicle remains liable for fine or penalty. The
payment of towing and storage charges shall not operate to relieve the
owner or operator of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for
the violation of any law or ordinance on account of which the vehicle
was removed and impounded.
(h) Restrictions upon removal of vehicles. No vehicle shall be removed
under the authority of this section if, at the time of the intended removal
thereof, the owner or person for the time being in charge of such
vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention to remove
such vehicle immediately.
(i) Authority of other police officers. Any powers delegated by this section
to the Chief of Police shall be construed to be delegated to any police
officer on duty in the absence of the Chief.
16.Editor's Note: Former  513.02 was repealed 10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 1401.
 513.01 CHARTER  517.99
C:211
 517.99. Penalty. [Ord. 604, passed 6-24-1972]
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be fined not more than $100.
Part 7 - General Offenses Code
Article 701
ANIMALS
 701.01. Definitions. [Ord. 637, passed 11-26-1973]
Definitions of some of the terms used in this article are as follows:
APPROVED VACCINE  Chick embryo or phenolized tissue rabies vaccine
is to be know as "approved" if its manufacture and efficiency is approved
by the United States Department of Agriculture or the United States
Department of Health, Education and Welfare. "Approved vaccine" also
means any other rabies vaccine approved by those agencies.
EXPOSED TO RABIES  Any dog or other animal whether licensed or
vaccinated for rabies protection or not, which has been bitten, been fighting
with, or has consorted with an animal known or suspected to have rabies.
OWNER  Any person, group of persons, firm or corporation owning,
keeping or harboring a dog or dogs, or other animals.
 701.02. Reporting animal bites. [Ord. 637, passed 11-26-1973]
 701.03. Quarantine of biting animal. [Ord. 637, passed
11-26-1973]
(a) Anyone who treats a person who has received a bite or laceration
caused by an animal shall immediately report such injury to the Police
Department. The report should give the name, age, sex and address of
the patient, date of occurrence, name and address of the animal's
owner, if known, along with a description of the animal as to breed, sex,
age, color and history of vaccination.
(b) The Police Department or Town authorities shall investigate the biting
incident and notify the animal owner, using the quarantine notice
provided by the Allegheny County Health Department, that the animal
must be quarantined for not less than 10 days following the evening of
the day of the bite.
(c) Following the investigation of each biting incident, the Police
Department or other Town authorities shall send a report to the
Allegheny County Health Department of the incident.
(a) The owner of any dog, cat or other animal which bites any person,
regardless of the circumstances or whether the animal is vaccinated for
 517.99 MCCANDLESS CODE  701.03
C:212
 701.04. Dog vaccination. [Ord. 637, passed 11-26-1973; Ord. 820,
passed 6-22-1981]
rabies protection or not, shall report the incident to the Police
Department and shall confine the animal, either within an enclosure at
home, a veterinary hospital or by restraining by a leash composed of a
chain or other indestructible material, for a period of not less than 10
days following the evening of the day of the bite.
(b) Any such animal which should die during the ten-day quarantine period
shall not be destroyed. Instead, the head shall be removed and
submitted within 12 hours following the animal's death to a qualified
official laboratory for examination. A full description of the animal's
breed, sex, age, vaccination, if any, owner's name, address and
telephone number, and the name, address and telephone number of the
person or persons bitten shall be submitted to the laboratory.
(a) Dogs to be Vaccinated.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or own any dog
over six months of age within the legal confines of the Town of
McCandless unless such dog has been vaccinated against rabies
with an approved vaccine, by a veterinarian licensed to practice
veterinary medicine.
(2) Every person keeping, harboring or having any dog over six months
of age in the Town shall cause such dog to be vaccinated with
approved rabies vaccine by a licensed veterinarian as aforesaid on
or before the latest of the following dates:
A. One year after vaccination with tissue phenolized vaccine.
B. Three years after vaccination with chick embryo vaccine.
C. Thirty days after first acquiring such a dog or 30 days after the
dog reaches six months of age.
D. Thirty days after the effective date of this ordinance.
E. Thirty days after bringing such dog into the legal boundaries of
McCandless Township.
(b) Re-vaccination of dogs.
(1) Every person keeping, harboring or having a dog within the limits
of the Town, which has been vaccinated with an approved chick
embryo vaccine, shall cause such dog to be re-vaccinated within a
period of not more than 36 months after such prior vaccination.
(2) Every person keeping, harboring or having a dog within the Town,
which has been vaccinated with tissue phenolized vaccine, shall
cause such dog to be re-vaccinated within a period of not more than
12 months after such prior vaccination.
 701.03 CHARTER  701.04
C:213
 701.05. Impounding. [Ord. 637, passed 11-26-1973]
 701.06. Animals exposed to rabies. [Ord. 637, passed 11-26-1973]
Any dog, cat or other pet animal which has been exposed to rabies shall
either:
 701.07. Hunting. [Ord. 315, passed 5-22-1961]
(c) Certificate of vaccination. Any veterinarian who vaccinates a dog with
approved rabies vaccine shall issue to the owner of such dog a
vaccination tag to be worn by such dog at all times and a certificate
stating the name and address of the owner, the kind of vaccine used and
the name of the manufacturer and manufacturer's serial, or lot number
of the vaccine, the date of vaccination, the breed, age, color and sex of
the vaccinated dog, and the year and serial number of the vaccination
tag. A carbon copy of the certificate shall be kept on file by Town
authorities.
(a) Any dog, cat or other pet animal which exhibits clinical symptoms
suggestive of rabies shall, after written certification by Town
authorities, be impounded for 10 days at impounding facilities approved
by the Town, at the owner's expense, for clinical observation.
(b) All veterinarians in the Town shall report at once all suspected cases of
rabies to the Town authorities.
(a) Be immediately killed in some humane manner; or
(b) Be put in strict isolation in a kennel or animal hospital for a period of six
months; or
(c) If no previous vaccination has been given within a period of three years
with chick embryo vaccine, or within one year with tissue phenolized
vaccine, post exposure treatment shall be administered and the animal
shall be confined in a kennel for three months. Post exposure treatment
shall consist of the administration of anti-rabies serum followed by one
to three doses of chick embryo vaccine within seven days, or 14
injections of tissue phenolized vaccine; or
(d) If the animal has been vaccinated previously within one year with tissue
phenolized vaccine, or within three years with chick embryo vaccine,
the animal shall be re-vaccinated and restrained by a leash or confined
at home for a period of 30 days.
(a) On and after the effective date of this section (Ordinance 315, passed
May 22, 1961) no person shall hunt wild birds or wild animals, by any
method, within the limits of the Town, except that nothing in this clause
shall be construed to prevent any person from trapping animals in such
manner as may be permitted by the Game Laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
 701.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  701.07
C:214
 701.08. Dogs, cats and other animals, regulations and
prohibitions. [Ord. 1029, passed 2-26-1990]
 701.99. Penalty. [Ord. 315, passed 5-22-1961; Ord. 637, passed
11-26-1973; Ord. 1029, passed 2-26-1990]
(b) Hunting, for the purposes of this section, is the conduct or activity of
any person, which, under the Game Laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, requires the open display of a hunting license.
(a) Any dog, cat or other animal which does any of the following is hereby
declared to be a nuisance: [Amended 8-26-2019 by Ord. No. 1491]
(1) Is kept in a manner so as to create offensive odors or unsanitary
conditions which are a menace to the health, comfort or safety of
the public; or
(2) Habitually barks, howls, screeches, yelps or bays, thereby
disturbing the quiet of any person or the community; or
(3) Scratches, digs or defecates upon any lawn, tree, shrub, plant,
building or any other public or private property other than the
property of the owner or person in charge or control of such
animal.
(b) No person shall keep or harbor a dog, cat or other animal in a manner
which constitutes a nuisance. No person shall permit a dog, cat or other
animal to commit a nuisance upon any school grounds or other public
property or upon any private property other than that of the owner or
person in charge of such animal; provided, however, if the owner or
person in charge of such animal immediately removes all feces
deposited by such animal and disposes of same in a sanitary manner,
such type of nuisance shall be considered abated.
(c) Any person with defective eyesight or hearing who relies upon a dog
specifically trained for such purposes shall be exempt from compliance
with this section.
(a) Any person violating any provision of Sections 701.01 through 701.06
shall be fined not more than $300.
(b) Any person violating any provision of Section 701.07 shall be fined not
more than $100 and, in default of payment, shall be imprisoned for not
more than 30 days. All fines collected upon conviction or upon
forfeiture of bail shall be paid to the Town Treasurer.
(c) Any person violating any provision of  701.08 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to 30 days' imprisonment or to pay a fine not to
exceed a maximum of $500, according to the following schedule:
[Amended 8-26-2019 by Ord. No. 1491]
(1) Upon the first violation: $50.
 701.07 CHARTER  701.99
C:215
Article 702
WILD OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS
 702.01. Purpose. [Ord. 1262, passed 1-28-2002]
The Town Council of the Town of McCandless finds that the harboring
of wild or dangerous animals within the Town may be offensive to other
residents of the Town so as to constitute a public nuisance and may pose a
threat to the safety of its inhabitants. No wild or dangerous animal shall be
kept within the Town except as permitted by this article.
 702.02. Wild or dangerous animals. [Ord. 1262, passed
1-28-2002]
(2) Upon the second violation: $100.
(3) Upon the third violation: $200.
(4) Upon the fourth violation: $300.
(5) Upon the fifth violation: $400.
(6) Upon the sixth and any subsequent violation(s): $500.
(a) Definitions.
ANIMAL  All non-human vertebrate and invertebrate species,
whether wild or domestic, commonly considered to be part of the
animal kingdom.
HARBOR  To keep or contain upon private property or to permit
another to keep or contain upon private property.
OWNER  Includes every person, firm or corporation having a right
of property in any animal which is kept harbored, or cared for within
the Town of McCandless for a period of seven or more days as well as
every person, firm or corporation occupying any premises within the
Town which permits any animal to remain on or about its premises for
a period of seven or more days.
TOWN OFFICIAL OR AGENT  Person, persons or entity, designated
by the Town Manager to enforce the provisions of this article.
WILD OR DANGEROUS ANIMAL  Any animal which is wild, fierce,
dangerous, noxious, venomous or naturally inclined to do harm. Wild
animals, however domesticated, shall also include but not be limited to:
Amphibians: All venomous amphibians.
Bear (Ursidae): All bear, including grizzly bears, brown bears, black
bears, etc.;
 701.99 MCCANDLESS CODE  702.02
C:216
Cat Family (Felidae): All except commonly accepted domestic catsincluding
lions, pumas, panthers, mountain lions, leopards, jaguars,
ocelots, margays, tigers, wild cats, etc.;
Crocodilians: All alligators, caimans, crocodiles, gavials, etc.;
Dog Family (Canidae): All except domesticated dogs-including wolf,
fox, coyote, dingo or domesticated dogs bred with a wolf, fox, coyote,
dingo, etc.;
Porcupine (Erethizontidae): All porcupines, etc.;
Primates (Hominidae): All sub-human primates, etc.;
Raccoons (Procynidae): All raccoons, civets, opossums, armadillos,
etc.;
Reptiles: All venomous and constricting snakes, venomous lizards,
and all other venomous reptiles, etc.;
Spiders: All venomous spiders;
Weasels (Mustelidae): All including weasels, skunks, mink, wolverine,
badgers, otters, ermine, mongoose, etc.
(b) Keeping of wild or dangerous animals prohibited.
(1) No person shall keep or harbor a wild or dangerous animal in any
place other than a zoological park, veterinary hospital or clinic,
humane society, or circus, sideshow, amusement show or facility
used for educational or scientific purposes, which provides cages,
fences and other protective devices adequate to prevent such
animal from escaping or injuring the public, or causing a health
hazard due to fecal matter, or otherwise.
(2) Any person keeping or harboring a wild or dangerous animal as
registered herein shall conspicuously display a warning sign that
there is a wild or dangerous animal on the premises.
(c) Disposition and impoundment. Any person who keeps a wild or
dangerous animal in contravention of this section must dispose of the
animal by removal of the animal from the Town or turning it over to the
Town as directed by the Town Official or agent. The Town Official or
agent is authorized to release the animal to a zoological park, or to
dispose of the animal in some humane manner. The cost of removal and/
or placement at a park or other facility is to be borne by the owner.
(d) Wild or dangerous animals owned at the time of the effective date of
this article. Any owner of a wild or dangerous animal shall at the time of
enactment of this section register said wild or dangerous animal with
the Town and shall provide:
(1) An annual fee of $20 per wild or dangerous animal, which shall be
paid by the owner or possessor of such animal to register it with the
Town. A copy of this registration is to be filed with the Police
Department.
 702.02 CHARTER  702.02
C:217
 702.99. Penalty. [Ord. 1262, passed 1-28-2002]
Any person violating any provision of Sections 702.01 through 702.03 shall
be fined not more than $500, or be imprisoned 90 days or both. Each day's
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Article 705
HEALTH, SAFETY AND SANITATION
 705.01. Definitions. [Ord. 3, passed 11-1-1946; Ord. 553, passed
4-27-1970]
GARBAGE  Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER  "Garbage," "refuse" and "rubbish" as defined herein and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
PUBLIC OR COMMON NUISANCE  That which is set up, maintained
or continued so as to be injurious to health or an obstruction to the use
of property by interfering with the repose, health, safety or life of any
considerable number of persons.
REFUSE  All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH  Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
WATERS OF THE STATE  Includes all streams and springs and all bodies
of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within the
boundaries of the Town.
(2) Upon the death, sale, adoption, exchange, transfer or disposal of
said wild or dangerous animal, the animal shall not be replaced.
(e) Any owner of a wild or dangerous animal registered under this section
shall maintain insurance coverage that provides general liability
insurance issued by an insurer authorized to do business in this
Commonwealth insuring the owner for any personal injury caused by
the wild or dangerous animal.
(f) Sworn law enforcement officers are empowered to enforce provisions of
this article.
 702.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  705.02
C:218
 705.02. Litter on occupied private property. [Ord. 553, passed
4-27-1970]
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the Town, whether owned by such person or not, except that the
owner or person in control of private property may maintain private
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place or upon any private property.
 705.03. Owner to maintain premises. [Ord. 1310, passed
10-25-2004; Ord. 1401, passed 10-24-2011]
(a) The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter. However, this section shall not
prohibit the storage of litter in private receptacles for collection.
Whenever "litter", meaning garbage, refuse and rubbish, and all other
waste material, is deposited at the curb or on the side of the road for
pick-up by the authorized garbage, refuse and rubbish collector, it shall
not be placed at the curb or side of the road before 7:00 p.m. on the
day prior to the pick-up. Any metal or plastic garbage cans which are
to be dumped by the collector and left at the curb or side of the road
for re-use by the owner shall be taken back from the curb or edge of
the road by the owner no later than 7:30 p.m. on the day of the pick-up.
The purpose of these regulations is to encourage residents of the Town
to maintain their property in such a manner that the Town will be both
healthful and attractive. If litter is allowed to accumulate on private
property for a period of longer than 14 days and upon written notice by
the Town, the Town may pickup the litter and invoice the owner of the
property for the costs of same.
(b) All lawn areas shall be maintained free from plant growth in excess of
10 inches, excluding cultivated: trees, shrubs, flowers, ornamental
grasses and gardens.
Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a violation of this
ordinance.
The owner or person having charge of the property shall be served with
a Notice of Violation. Such notice shall consist of a letter describing
the violation and be mailed by certified mail or be served in person. In
the event the owner or agent having charge of the property cannot be
located or refuses the service of the Notice of Violation, the property
shall be posted with the Notice of Violation for a period of seven days.
After notice is served in accordance with the above and upon failure to
comply with the Notice of Violation, any duly authorized employee of
the Town of McCandless or contractor hired by the Town of McCandless
shall be authorized to enter upon the property to cut, destroy and
remove the plant growth in violation thereof. The cost of the cutting,
 705.02 CHARTER  705.03
C:219
destroying and removal of such plant growth shall be paid by the owner
or agent responsible for the property.
The owner or agent will be invoiced for the costs of such cutting,
destroying and removal of the weeds. In the event the owner or agent
cannot be located or refuses service of the invoice, the property shall
be posted with the invoice for a period of 14 days.
(c) Failure to pay the invoice as described in (a) or (b) above within 30 days
of notice or posting shall result in a citation being filed. Upon receipt of
a judgment in favor of the Town, the Town may proceed with the filing
of a lien in the amount of the judgment.
(d) Except as provided for elsewhere in the Code, the parking or storage of
junked vehicles on residential property is prohibited. In particular, the
Town finds that the following conditions, each such condition deeming a
vehicle "junked" for purposes of this section, pose a threat to the public
health, safety and welfare:
(1) Broken windshields, mirrors or other glass with sharp edges;
(2) One or more flat or open tires or tubes which could permit vermin
harborage.
(3) Missing doors, windows, hood, trunk, or other body parts which
could permit animal harborage or entry of children.
(4) Any body parts with sharp edges including holes resulting from
rust.
(5) Missing tires resulting in unsafe suspension of the motor vehicle.
(6) Upholstery which is torn or open that could permit animal and/or
vermin harborage.
(7) Sharp objects protruding from the chassis.
(8) Broken headlamps, tail lamps, side lamps or other vehicle body
parts with sharp edges which are inherently dangerous and could
permit the harborage of vermin.
(9) Broken vehicle frame suspended from the ground in an unstable
manner.
(10) Leaking or damaged oil pan or gas tank which could cause fire or
explosion.
(11) Leaking battery.
(12) Any condition enabling entrapment within the vehicle including but
not limited to open trunks.
(13) Damaged floor boards, trunk, trunk floor, fire wall or truck bed with
holes or sharp edges.
 705.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  705.03
C:220
 705.04. Litter on vacant lots. [Ord. 553, passed 4-27-1970]
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the Town whether owned by such person or not.
 705.05. Privies, septic tanks, etc. [Ord. 3, passed 11-1-1946]
 705.06. Kitchen and laundry drainage. [Ord. 3, passed 11-1-1946]
No kitchen or laundry water shall be discharged or be permitted to
discharge or flow into any gutter, street, road, highway, alley, lane or public
place.
(14) Damaged bumpers pulled away from the perimeter of the vehicle.
(15) Broken grill with protruding edges.
(16) Vehicle suspended on unstable supports.
(a) No privy, urinal, cesspool, septic tank or other receptacle for human
excrement shall be constructed, maintained or used which directly or
indirectly drains or discharges over, upon or across the surface of the
ground, into any gutter, street, road, highway, alley or lane, or into any
waters of the State.
(b) All privies, urinals, cesspools, septic tanks or other receptacles for
human excrement shall be cleaned at sufficiently frequent intervals to
prevent the contents from overflowing.
(c) The transportation of human excrement shall be effected in water-tight
containers with tight fitting covers. Containers shall be thoroughly
cleaned after each use.
(d) No human excrement removed from privies, urinals, cesspools, septic
tanks or other receptacles shall be dumped, spread or deposited upon
any lands within the limits of the Town; except that human excrement
may, with the owner's permission, be dumped, spread, or deposited
upon tillable lands used exclusively for farming and providing such
lands are not planted for a period of two years thereafter, to crops
consumed directly by human consumption.
(e) No privy, cesspool, septic tank or other receptacle for the human
excrement shall be constructed, maintained or used upon premises
which has access to a public sewer or which is accessible to a sewer
system from which sewage is lawfully discharged into the waters of the
State.
(f) No privy, urinal, toilet or other receptacle of human excrement shall be
constructed, maintained or used in any room, or have direct connection
with any room wherein any kind of exposed foods or foodstuffs are
prepared, stored or handled.
 705.03 CHARTER  705.07
C:221
 705.07. Garbage and rubbish. [Ord. 3, passed 11-1-1946]
 705.08. Objectionable establishments and industrial wastes. [Ord.
3, passed 11-1-1946]
(a) No owner, lessee, tenant, agent or occupier of any land within the limits
of the Town shall use or permit his, her or their lands to be used for the
dumping, accumulating or disposal of any garbage, rubbish,
inflammable or other waste materials of any kind, nor shall any building
or buildings be erected or machinery installed upon such land for the
disposal of such garbage, rubbish, inflammable materials or other
waste materials.
(b) No garbage, offal, dead animals, decaying matter, waste material or
other waste substance of any kind shall be thrown or deposited in any
ravine, ditch or gutter; on any street, road, highway, lane or alley, into
any waters of the State, or be permitted to remain exposed upon the
surface of the ground.
(c) In built-up sections of the Town manure shall not be allowed to
accumulate in or near stables, piggeries or roosts for a period of more
than three days unless it is adequately protected against the breeding
of flies.
(d) Manure shall not be allowed to accumulate in any place where it can
prejudicially affect any source of drinking water.
(e) The carcass of any dead animal shall be removed and disposed of by
burial, incineration or other proper method within 24 hours after death.
If the carcass is buried, it shall be placed so that every part shall be
covered by at least two feet of earth and at a location not less than 100
feet from any well, spring, stream or other surface waters, and in a
place not subject to overflow.
In all cases of death from communicable disease, the carcass if disposed
of by burial, shall first be thoroughly enveloped in unslaked lime.
Proper disposal shall be made by the owner of the animal or by the
owner of the property on which the dead animal is found. Where the
owner of the animal is unknown and the carcass is found upon any
street, road, highway, lane, alley or other public place, it shall be
removed and disposed of by direction of Council at Town expense.
(a) No person, partnership, firm or corporation maintaining a slaughter
house, rendering works, depository of dead animals, glue works,
tannery, wool-washing establishment, paper mill, by-product coke oven,
dye works, oil refinery, dairy, creamery, cheese factory, milk station or
similar establishment, or engaged in the manufacture of gas, chemicals,
explosives, fertilizers or similar products; or in the business of soap
making, fish oil extraction, bone boiling or similar occupation shall
allow any noxious exhalation, odors or gases that are deleterious or
detrimental to public health to escape into the air, or any substance that
 705.07 MCCANDLESS CODE  705.08
C:222
 705.09. Water supply. [Ord. 3, passed 11-1-1946]
No owner or occupant of any premises shall maintain any well, spring,
cistern or other source of water used for drinking or household purposes
and to which the public has or may have access and which is polluted or
which is so situated or constructed that it may become polluted in any
manner that may render such water supply injurious to health.
 705.10. Enforcement; nuisance abatement. [Ord. 3, passed
11-1-1946]
 705.99. Penalty. [Ord. 553, passed 4-27-1970; Ord. 1273, passed
7-15-2002]
is deleterious or detrimental to public health to accumulate upon the
premises or be thrown or allowed to be discharged into any street,
roadway or public place; or be thrown or allowed to be discharged into
any stream or other waters of the State.
(b) All slaughter houses, rendering works, bone boiling establishments,
depositories for dead animals, disposal works, piggeries and similar
establishments handling organic matter shall have an adequate water
supply for the purpose of keeping the place clean and sanitary. All floors
shall be constructed of concrete or other impervious material and shall
have adequate provision for drainage to a cesspool or to a sewer or
treatment works approved by the State Department of Health.
(a) It shall be the duty of the Town Manager to enforce the provisions of
Sections 705.05 through 705.08 in the name of the Town and secure
compliance with the requirements thereof.
(b) In addition to any penalty, a violation of any provision of Sections
705.05 through 705.08 shall be deemed to be a nuisance, and such
nuisance may be abated in the manner now provided by law.
(a) Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of Section
705.02 through 705.04 shall be deemed guilty of a summary offense
and shall be fined not more than $300. Each day a violation is
committed or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
(b) Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provision of
Sections 705.05 through 705.09 shall be deemed guilty of a summary
offense and, shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense. Each
day that any person, firm, partnership or corporation continues to
violate or fails to comply with any requirement of such sections shall be
considered a separate offense.
(c) Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provision of
Section 705.091 shall be deemed guilty of a summary offense and shall
be fined an amount not to exceed $500 for each offense, plus any costs
 705.08 CHARTER  705.99
C:223
Article 709
WEAPONS
 709.01. Discharging firearms prohibited. [Ord. 316, passed
5-22-1961]
On and after the effective date of this section, no person shall discharge
or shoot any firearm, air gun, spring gun or other implement which impels
with force a pellet or projectile of any kind, or discharge or shoot an arrow,
within the limits of the Town, except as provided in Section 709.02.
 709.02. Exceptions. [Ord. 316, passed 5-22-1961; Ord. 1188,
passed 8-25-1997]
The prohibition contained in Section 709.01 shall not apply to the following:
 709.03. Ranges; permit; fee. [Ord. 316, passed 5-22-1961;
amended 10-22-2018 by Ord. No. 1480]
incurred by the Town for cleanup and remediation of the violation.
Each day that any person, firm, partnership or corporation continues to
violate or fails to comply with any requirement of Section 705.091 shall
be considered a separate offense.
(a) Any person who discharges or shoots a firearm or other dangerous
weapon in defense of his property or person or in defense of the person
of another.
(b) Any person who discharges or shoots a firearm or other dangerous
weapon in the performance of his official duty as a police officer or
other properly authorized and empowered representative or employee
of a municipality or governmental agency.
(c) Any person who discharges or shoots a firearm as a member of a club or
other group when firing upon a supervised range.
(d) Any person who discharges or shoots an arrow on the range or ranges
provided by Allegheny County authorities in North Park or on a
privately owned and supervised range.
(e) Any person who discharges or shoots an arrow when hunting deer in
North Park whenever such hunting has been approved by the Board of
Commissioners of Allegheny County and subject to all of the conditions
and restrictions imposed upon that hunting by the Commissioners of
Allegheny County, and provided further that those conditions and
restrictions are approved by the Town Council of the Town of
McCandless.
(a) Any individual, corporation or other legal entity desiring to operate a
commercial range, a range open to the public or a members-only range,
 705.99 MCCANDLESS CODE  709.03
C:224
for the discharge of firearms, bow-and-arrow shooting, weapon
throwing or other similar activity, shall be required to first obtain a
permit from the Chief of Police. The applicant may seek either a tenday
permit or an annual permit. No permit under this section shall be
required for ranges operated by or on behalf of a governmental agency.
(b) The Chief of Police shall issue the permit for a firearm shooting range if
the applicant demonstrates compliance or agrees to comply, to the
satisfaction of the Chief of Police, with the following:
(1) Use. The proposed use as a firing range has received all required
governmental approvals, including, without limitation, zoning
approval from the Town.
(2) Supervision. On-site supervision is required at all times by an adult
who is an experienced range safety officer with a valid certification
from a nationally recognized organization. Current certificates for
range safety officers shall be on display in a conspicuous location in
the premises and shall be available for public inspection. The range
safety officer shall be responsible for the conduct of the range
employees and the conditions of safety and order in the place of
business and on the premises.
(3) Instruction. On-site instruction shall be given only by firearms
instructors certified within the prior five years by an approved
organization or government. Current certificates for firearms
instructors shall be on display in a conspicuous location in the
premises and shall be available for public inspection.
(4) Minors. Minors shall not be allowed in the range unless
accompanied by an adult at all times. This shall not be interpreted
to prohibit minors from participating in a firearm safety class which
is supervised by an adult instructor.
(5) Ammunition. No ammunition shall be used in the range that
exceeds the certified design and construction specifications of the
range.
(6) Storage. Firearms and ammunition that are stored on the premises
and are not for retail sale shall be stored in a gun safe or other
secure locking device or in a room that is secure from unauthorized
access when the range is closed for business. Firearms and
ammunition that are stored on the premises and are for retail sale
shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations applicable to
licensed firearms dealers, including, without limitation, 18
Pa.C.S.A.  6113, as amended, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
(7) Shooter requirements.
A. All shooters must complete a firearm training program given in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Game Commission or a
 709.03 CHARTER  709.03
C:225
nationally recognized organization or show a valid hunting
permit or gun permit before they are allowed to discharge
firearms on the site.
B. All shooters must complete a site-specific orientation and
safety program developed by the applicant and approved by
the Town's Chief of Police before they are allowed to discharge
firearms on the site.
(8) Alcohol prohibition. The consumption of alcoholic beverages or
other controlled substances shall not be permitted on the site. The
applicant's staff shall obtain training certificates from the Town's
Chief of Police regarding field sobriety training prior to the opening
of the facility to the public.
(9) Customer safety. The applicant and safety officers shall prohibit
and shall ensure that none of its customers:
A. Discharge a firearm from any location on the range other than
an established shooting station on the firing line.
B. Discharge a firearm at any target other than a target placed on
a target mounted and approved by the applicant.
C. Operate, manipulate or discharge a firearm in negligent
disregard for the safety of other persons present at or near the
range. This is specifically intended to include loading a
firearm, operating or manipulating a loaded firearm, or
discharging a firearm anywhere on the firing range while
another person is downrange.
D. Are intoxicated or use or possess an intoxicating beverage or
controlled substance on the range.
(10) Activities. All activities associated with the range shall take place
within the range.
(11) Hours of operation. Outdoor firearms shooting ranges may operate
only from 8:00 a.m. until sunset Monday through Saturday and
from 12:00 noon to sunset Sunday.
(c) The Chief of Police shall issue the permit for a bow-and-arrow shooting,
weapon throwing or other similar range if the applicant demonstrates
compliance or agrees to comply, to the satisfaction of the Chief of
Police, with the following:
(1) Use. The proposed use as an archery/throwing weapons range has
received all required governmental approvals, including, without
limitation, zoning approval from the Town.
(2) Supervision. On-site supervision is required at all times by an adult
who is an experienced safety officer. The safety officer shall be
responsible for the conduct of the range employees and the
 709.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  709.03
C:226
conditions of safety and order in the place of business and on the
premises.
(3) Minors. Minors shall not be allowed in the range unless
accompanied by an adult at all times.
(4) Alcohol. The consumption of alcoholic beverages or other
controlled substances shall not be permitted on the site. The
applicant's staff shall obtain training certificates from the Town's
Chief of Police regarding field sobriety training prior to the opening
of the facility to the public.
(5) Customer safety. The applicant shall prohibit and shall be
responsible for ensuring that none of its customers:
A. Shoot or throw a weapon from any location on the range other
than an established shooting station on the shooting/throwing
line.
B. Shoot or throw a weapon at any target other than a target
placed on a target mounted and approved by the applicant.
C. Operate, manipulate, shoot or throw or discharge a weapon in
negligent disregard for the safety of other persons present at
or near the range. This is specifically intended to include
handling or manipulating a weapon, or shooting or throwing a
weapon, anywhere on the firing range while another person is
downrange.
D. Are intoxicated or use or possess an intoxicating beverage or
controlled substance on the range.
(d) The Chief of Police may add reasonable additional conditions if he/she
deems such reasonable additional conditions necessary to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the general public and citizens of the
Town.
(e) In the event the applicant fails to comply with any of the conditions set
forth above, the Chief of Police may revoke the permit. Notice of the
revocation shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail to the address
listed on the permit application.
(f) Any denial or revocation of a permit by the Chief of Police may be
appealed to the Town Council of the Town of McCandless pursuant to
the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A.  551 et seq., as amended.
(g) Annual permits shall be issued at a charge of $100; and temporary
permits, valid for a period of 10 days only, shall be issued at a charge of
$25. The Council may amend the permit fees by resolution.
 709.03 CHARTER  709.99
C:227
 709.99. Penalty. [Ord. 316, passed 5-22-1961]
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be fined not more than
$100, and in default of payment shall be imprisoned not more than 30 days.
All fines collected upon conviction or upon forfeiture of bail shall be paid to
the Town Treasurer.
Article 713
PUBLIC NUISANCE ACTIVITIES
 713.01. Purpose, policy and authority. [Ord. 724, passed
7-25-1977]
Council finds that the crass commercial exploitation of explicit sexual
conduct through the public exhibition of lewd films, the display and/or sale
of lewd publications, and the use of so-called massage parlors and model
studios for purposes of lewdness, assignation or prostitution, constitutes
a debasement and distortion of a sensitive key relationship of human
existence, central to family life, community welfare and the development
of human personality; is indecent and offensive to the senses and to public
morals and interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property,
in that such interferes with the interest of the public in the quality of life and
total community environment, the tone of commerce in the Town, property
values and the public safety; and that the continued operation of such
activities is detrimental to the best health, safety, convenience, good morals
and general welfare of the Town and of the residents, citizens, inhabitants
and businesses thereof. Council hereby declares such activities to be a
public nuisance, and herein establishes procedures for the abatement
thereof. This article shall apply to all existing establishments which are
presently engaged in the type of activity herein declared to be a public
nuisance and all of those commenced hereafter.
 713.02. Definitions. [Ord. 724, passed 7-25-1977]
COMMUNITY STANDARDS  The standards of the community from which
the jury is drawn or would be drawn if it were the trier of the fact.
KNOWLEDGE or KNOWLEDGE OF SUCH NUISANCE  Having actual
or constructive knowledge of the contents and character of the patently
offensive sexual conduct or demonstration which appears in the film,
publication or actual or constructive knowledge of the acts of lewdness,
assignation or prostitution which occur on the premises. A person shall
be deemed to have constructive knowledge of the character of the subject
matter or live conduct if he has knowledge of facts which would put a
reasonable and prudent man on notice as to the suspect nature of the
matter.
LEWD MATTER  Any matter which taken as a whole appeals to the
prurient interest in sex, which portrays sexual conduct in a patently
 709.99 MCCANDLESS CODE  713.02
C:228
offensive way, and which, taken as a whole, does not have serious value. In
determining whether or not a matter is lewd the trier of the fact must find:
MASSAGE  Any method of treating the superficial soft parts of the human
body, for remedial, hygenic or other purposes, consisting of rubbing,
stroking, kneading, or any similar treatment, accomplished by hand or by
the use of any instrument.
MASSAGE PARLOR  Any building or structure or portion thereof, located
within the Town, which is open to members of the general public, with or
without the payment of a fee, at which massage services are offered.
MATTER  A motion picture film or a publication, or both.
MODEL STUDIO 
That the average person, applying contemporary community standards
would find that the matter, taken as a whole appeals to the prurient
interest; and
(a)
That the matter depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual
conduct specifically defined by this article or authoritatively construed
by the courts of this Commonwealth as being a portrayal of patently
offensive sexual conduct as that phrase is used in the definition of lewd
matter; and
(b)
(c) That the matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious value.
Any premises on which there is conducted the business of furnishing
figure models who pose in the nude for the purpose of being observed
or viewed by any person or of being sketched, painted, drawn,
sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted for persons
who pay a fee, or other consideration or compensation, or a gratuity, for
the right or opportunity so to depict the figure model, or for admission
to, or for permission to remain upon, or as a condition for remaining
upon the premises; or
(a)
Any premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing
or providing or procuring, for a fee or other consideration or
compensation or gratuity, figure models who pose in the nude to be
observed or viewed by any person or to be sketched, painted, drawn,
sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted.
(b)
Exception. The words "model studio" do not include:
Any studio which is operated by any state college or junior college,
public school, or any governmental agency wherein the person,
firm, association, partnership or corporation operating it has met
the requirements established by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact
authorized thereunder to issue and confer, a diploma or honorary
diploma; or
(1)
(c)
 713.02 CHARTER  713.02
C:229
MOTION PICTURE FILM  Includes any:
PATENTLY OFFENSIVE  So offensive on its face as to affront current
standards of decency.
PATENTLY OFFENSIVE SEXUAL CONDUCT  Includes any of the following
described sexual conduct if depicted or described in a patently offensive
way:
Any premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing,
providing or procuring figure models solely for any studio
described in subsection (3)A. hereof.
(2)
Any studio operated by a tax exempt, non-profit corporation
devoted to the development of art and its appreciation.
(3)
(a) Film or plate negative;
(b) Film or plate positive;
(c) Film designed to be projected on a screen for exhibition;
Films, glass slides or transparencies, either in negative or positive
form, designed for exhibition by projection on a screen;
(d)
Video tape or any other medium used to electronically reproduce
images on a screen.
(e)
An act of sexual intercourse, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including genital-genital, anal-genital, or oral-genital intercourse,
whether between human beings or between a human being and an
animal.
(a)
Sado-masochistic abuse, meaning flagellation or torture by or upon a
person who is nude or clad in under garments or in a revealing costume
or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically
restrained on the part of one so clothed.
(b)
Masturbation, excretory functions and lewd exhibition of the genitals
including any explicit, close-up representation of a human genital organ
or spread-eagle exposure of female genital organs.
(c)
Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the clothed or
unclothed pubic areas or buttocks of a human male or female, or the
breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the same
or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparant
sexual stimulation or gratification.
(d)
A device designed and marketed as useful primarily for stimulation of
the human genital organs.
(e)
(f) Male or female genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
(g) Covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
 713.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  713.02
C:230
PRURIENT INTEREST  A shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex
or excretion, which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor
in description or representation of such matters. If it appears from the
character of the material or the circumstances of its dissemination that the
subject matter is designed for an especially susceptible audience or clearly
defined deviant sexual group, the appeal of the subject matter shall be
judged with reference to such audience or group.
PUBLICATION  Includes any book, magazine, article, pamphlet, writing,
printing, illustration, picture, sound recording or a motion picture film
which is displayed in an area open to the public offered for sale or exhibited
in a coin-operated machine.
SALE  A passing of title or right of possession from a seller to a buyer for
valuable consideration, and shall include, but is not limited to, any lease or
rental arrangement or other transaction wherein or whereby any valuable
consideration is received for the use of, or transfer of possession of, lewd
matter.
SERIOUS VALUE  Serious literary or artistic or political or scientific
value.
STANDARDS OF DECENCY  Community standards of decency.
 713.03. Lewd films and theaters declared a public nuisance;
abatement. [Ord. 724, passed 7-25-1977]
 713.04. Business places where lewd publications traded or
possessed declared a public nuisance; abatement. [Ord. 724, passed
7-25-1977]
(a) Any and every place in the Town where lewd films are publicly exhibited
or possessed for the purpose of such exhibition; and any and every
place in the Town where a lewd film is publicly or repeatedly exhibited,
or possessed for the purpose of such exhibitions, is a public nuisance.
(b) Any and every lewd film which is publicly exhibited or possessed for
such purpose at a place which is a public nuisance under subsection (a)
hereof is a public nuisance per se.
(c) From and after service on the theater, or its manager, or acting
manager or person then in charge of such place, of a true and correct
copy of this article and a true and correct copy of the resolution and
order of summary abatement provided for in Section 713.07 hereof, all
moneys paid thereafter as admission price to such exhibitions are also
declared to be a public nuisance, as personal property used in
conducting and maintaining a declared public nuisance.
(a) Any and every place in the Town in which lewd publications constitute a
part of the stock in trade is a public nuisance.
(b) Any and every lewd publication possessed at a place which is a public
nuisance under subsection (a) hereof is a public nuisance per se.
 713.02 CHARTER  713.04
C:231
 713.05. Massage parlors or model studios used for lewdness,
assignation or prostitution, declared a public nuisance; abatement.
[Ord. 724, passed 7-25-1977]
 713.06. Knowledge of nuisance presumed from notice of
abatement order; responsibility of parties; abatement of such
nuisances. [Ord. 724, passed 7-25-1977]
 713.07. Action to be taken by Council. [Ord. 724, passed
7-25-1977]
Upon a specific finding that a public nuisance, as defined in any provision
of Sections 713.03 to 713.05 exists in the Town, Council, in applying the
provisions of this article to such nuisance, shall provide for the following by
resolution:
(c) From and after service on the place, or its manager, or acting manager
or person then in charge of such place, of a true and correct copy of this
article and a true and correct copy of the resolution and order of
summary abatement provided for in Section 713.07, all valuable
consideration received for the sale of such lewd publications is also
declared to be a public nuisance, as personal property used in
conducting and maintaining a declared public nuisance.
(a) Every massage parlor or model studio, which, as a regular course of
business, is used for the purposes of lewdness, assignation or
prostitution, and every such massage parlor or model studio in or upon
which acts of lewdness, assignations or prostitution, are held or occur,
is a public nuisance which shall be enjoined, abated and prevented.
(b) From and after service on the place, or its manager, or acting manager
or person then in charge of such place, of a true and correct copy of this
article and a true and correct copy of the resolution and order of
summary abatement provided for in Section 713.07 hereof, all moneys
or other valuable consideration paid for services rendered to customers
are also declared to be a public nuisance, as personal property used in
conducting and maintaining a declared public nuisance.
(a) Upon and after receiving notice through service of a true and correct
copy of this article and of a true and correct copy of the resolution and
order of summary abatement provided for in Section 713.07, any and
every person who owns, legally or equitably, leases, maintains,
manages, conducts or operates a place in the Town which is declared to
be a public nuisance as set forth and stated in any provision of Sections
713.03 to 713.05, is deemed to be a person who has knowledge of such
nuisance for the purpose of this article, and is, thereafter, responsible
for its maintenance, and shall be liable therefor.
(b) The places and subject matter declared to be public nuisances under
any provision of Sections 713.03 to 713.05 shall be abated as provided
for herein.
 713.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  713.07
C:232
(a) Declare the fact that such nuisance exists.
(b) Set forth the description or legal description and street address of the
place which constitutes the nuisance.
(c) Set forth the evidentiary facts considered by Council in arriving at its
factual determination.
(1) In the case of a motion picture film or films, such shall include a
recitation of the particular sexual conduct and acts which Council
finds are lewd, and the basis for the finding by Council that:
A. Such film is publicly or repeatedly exhibited in the course of
business; or
B. Such film is publicly or repeatedly exhibited, or held for such
exhibition at the place declared to be a nuisance.
(2) In the case of a publication or publications, such shall include a
recitation of:
A. The particular publications or types of publications considered
by Council, and those which Council finds to be lewd;
B. The basis for the finding by Council that such publications are
displayed, sold or held for sale at any place found by Council to
be a public nuisance; and
C. The basis of the finding by Council that such publications
constitute a part of the stock in trade of such place of business
or other place.
(3) In the case of a massage parlor or model studio, such shall include
a recitation of:
A. The particular acts of lewdness, assignation or prostitution
which have occurred; and
B. The basis for the finding by Council that such acts occur in the
course of business.
(d) Order all persons described in Section 713.06(a) hereof to summarily
abate such public nuisance within 24 hours of service of an order on any
such persons, by terminating the exhibition, sale or possession for sale
of such lewd subject matter or by ceasing to use the place where the
nuisance is declared to exist or by terminating the use of such premises
for the purposes of lewdness, assignation or prostitution, or causing the
same to be terminated, and notifying the Manager and Council of
compliance therewith by sworn affidavit as ordered by the action of
Council in such resolution.
(e) Order the Town Attorney to proceed as directed in Section 713.09
hereof and do all things necessary to abate such public nuisance
through judicial proceedings and to conclude such proceedings as
 713.07 CHARTER  713.07
C:233
 713.08. Forfeiture to the general fund; cost of abatement and
manner of collection. [Ord. 724, passed 7-25-1977]
expeditiously as is permissible under the law, including requesting the
Court to advance such proceedings on the calendar of the Court.
(f) Inform and give notice to persons designated in Section 713.06(a)
hereof that:
(1) Council has determined that a public nuisance presently exists at
such place and address, and that, under Section 713.06(a) hereof
they are deemed to have knowledge thereof and are responsible
therefor;
(2) In the event the order of the Town is not complied with within 24
hours, Council shall order the Town Attorney, as provided for in
Section 713.09 hereof, to commence necessary legal proceedings
naming such persons as defendants in a civil action to abate the
same judicially under Section 713.07 hereof, and that under
Sections 713.08(a) and (b) hereof, the costs of abatement of such
civil abatement action filed including investigative costs, court
costs, attorney's fees and other expenses, are made a special
assessment against the parcel of land upon which such nuisance is
being maintained and, upon their determination in such court
action, will, by separate legal procedure, be made a lien against
such property and a personal obligation against any person,
persons, firm, association, partnership, corporation or other entity
deemed to be in violation of this article;
(3) All lewd motion picture films or lewd publications being used in
conducting and maintaining such public nuisance are contraband
and the subject of forfeiture; and
(4) From and after service on the place, or its manager, or acting
manager or person then in charge of such place, of a true and
correct copy of this article and a true and correct copy of such
resolution, any and all moneys paid as admission price to or for the
exhibition or exhibitions of such lewd motion picture films and
valuable consideration received for the sale of such lewd
publications, and all moneys or other valuable consideration
received for services rendered in such massage parlors or model
studios are a public nuisance, as personal property used in
conducting and maintaining such nuisance and, as such, are the
subject of forfeiture.
(g) Order that a true and correct copy of such resolution and a true and
correct copy of this article be delivered forthwith in any manner
normally used to effectuate personal service of process to all persons of
record having any legal or equitable interest in the real property, and to
the regular or acting manager or persons in charge of the place therein
declared a public nuisance.
 713.07 MCCANDLESS CODE  713.08
C:234
 713.09. Action to be taken by Town Attorney. [Ord. 724, passed
7-25-1977]
Upon a specific finding by resolution of Council of the fact that a public
nuisance exists at a particular location, the Town Attorney shall not later
than three days after passage of such resolution, commence legal
proceedings by the filing of a civil action seeking the following relief:
(a) Upon judgment for the Town in legal proceedings brought pursuant to
this article, an accounting shall be made by such defendant or
defendants of all moneys or valuable consideration received by them
from activities which have been declared to be a public nuisance under
Sections 713.03(c), 713.04(c) or 713.05(b) hereof. Such moneys or their
equivalent and any valuable consideration received shall be forfeited to
the General Fund of the Town or to the Town as property of the Town if
any valuable consideration received is not money.
(b) The cost of abatement shall include the following:
(1) Investigative costs;
(2) Court costs;
(3) Reasonable attorney's fees arising out of the preparation for, and
trial of the cause and appeals therefrom and other costs allowed on
appeal; and
(4) Printing costs of trial and appellate briefs and all other papers filed
in such proceeding.
(c) Such cost of abatement is hereby made a special assessment against
the parcel of land upon which such nuisance is maintained. Upon its
determination in a civil action, such shall, by separate legal proceeding,
be made a lien against such property and a personal obligation against
any person, persons, firm, association, partnership, corporation or
other entity and shall be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject
to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in the case of
delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws
applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes
shall be applicable to such special assessment.
(a) A declaratory judgment that the matter named by Council is lewd, as
defined herein.
(b) A declaratory judgment that the matter found to be lewd is or are public
nuisances per se under this article and such resolution.
(c) A declaratory judgment that each place named by Council is a public
nuisance under this article and such resolution.
(d) An accounting of all moneys paid as admission price to or for the
exhibition or exhibitions of such lewd motion picture films, and valuable
 713.08 CHARTER  713.09
C:235
 713.10. Severability. [Ord. 724, passed 7-25-1977]
If any court shall determine that any word, clause, phrase, sentence,
paragraph or subsection of this article is unconstitutional as worded, the
court shall first attempt to construe or interpret such unconstitutional
provision narrowly so as to enable the same to be constitutional. If the
court cannot so limit or construe such word or provision narrowly so as to
render the same constitutional, it shall strike or modify only the minimum
number of words, phrases, clauses, sentences or paragraphs as will be
absolutely necessary to render the remainder constitutional. In no case
shall a clause, phrase, word or other portion hereof render any other word,
clause, phrase, sentence, paragraph or section unconstitutional, but instead
shall be severed therefrom entirely, with the balance of this article in its
entirety remaining in full force and effect.
Article 715
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
 715.01. General. [Ord. 1418, passed 7-23-2012]
consideration received for the sale of such lewd publications, and all
moneys or other valuable consideration received for services rendered
in such massage parlors or model studios from and after the time the
persons maintaining such nuisance receive notice of the finding by
Council by resolution that the public nuisance exists, and a judgment
that such moneys or valuable consideration are a public nuisance under
this article.
(e) An order that all admission price moneys or valuable consideration
received and enumerated in the court-ordered accounting be forfeited
as contraband to the General Fund of the Town or as property
belonging to the Town.
(f) An injunction enjoining and restraining all persons responsible for
maintaining such nuisance from possessing or publicly exhibiting such
lewd motion picture films, or from selling or possessing for sale such
lewd publications, or from committing acts of lewdness, assignation or
prostitution, at any time in the future in the Town and such other
injunctive relief as the court may order.
(g) An order that the named lewd film and all lewd publications or copies or
reproductions thereof be forfeited as contraband under this article.
(h) Judgment for the Town for all costs therein expended, including
investigative costs, court costs, reasonable attorney's fees, and such
other expenses as are provided for herein.
(i) All other relief as the court may deem proper.
 713.09 MCCANDLESS CODE  715.01
C:236
 715.02. Applicability. [Ord. 1418, passed 7-23-2012]
(a) Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance
Code of The Town of McCandless, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
(b) Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing residential
and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and constitute
minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures,
equipment and facilities.
(c) Intent. This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent,
which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are
affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and
premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with
these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level
of health and safety as required herein. Repairs, alterations, additions
to and change of occupancy in existing buildings shall comply with the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
(d) Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code.
(a) General. The provisions of this code shall apply to all matters affecting
or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in Section 715.01.
Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify different
requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
(b) Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by
this code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or
premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in
good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any
service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this
section to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any
occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary
while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this
code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of
fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures.
Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner's
designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings,
structures and premises.
(c) Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a
structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with
the procedures and provisions of the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel,
modify or set aside any provision of the Town of McCandless Planning
and Zoning Code or Building Code.
(d) Existing remedies. The provisions in this code shall not be construed to
abolish or impair existing remedies of the Town or its officers or
 715.01 CHARTER  715.02
C:237
 715.03. Property maintenance inspection. [Ord. 1418, passed
7-23-2012]
 715.04. Duties and powers of the code official. [Ord. 1418, passed
7-23-2012]
 715.05. Approval. [Ord. 1418, passed 7-23-2012]
agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is
dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary.
(e) Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations
which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code
shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed
in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
(f) Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced
in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to
the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur
between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the
provisions of this code shall apply.
(a) General. The Town shall designate a code official to carry out the
provisions of this article.
(a) General. The code official shall enforce the provisions of this code.
(b) Inspections. The code official is authorized to engage such expert
opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues
that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority.
(c) Right of entry. The code official is authorized to enter the structure or
premises at reasonable times to inspect subject to constitutional
restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused
or not obtained, the code official is authorized to pursue recourse as
provided by law.
(d) Identification. The code official shall carry proper identification when
inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under
this code.
(e) Notices and orders. The code official shall issue all necessary notices or
orders to ensure compliance with this code.
(f) Department records. The code official shall keep official records of all
business and activities specified in the provisions of this code. Such
records shall be retained in the official records as long as the building
or structure to which such records relate remains in existence, unless
otherwise provided for by other regulations.
(a) Alternative materials, methods and equipment. The provisions of this
code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to
 715.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  715.05
C:238
 715.06. Violations. [Ord. 1418, passed 7-23-2012]
prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this
code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An
alternative material or method of construction shall be approved where
the code official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and
complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the
material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least
the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
(b) Testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the
provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not
conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate
claims for alternative materials or methods, the code official shall have
the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at
no expense to the Town.
(c) Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other
recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted
test methods, the code official shall be permitted to approve
appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved agency.
(d) Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the code official for
the period required for retention of public records.
(e) Material and equipment reuse. Materials, equipment and devices shall
not be reused unless such elements are in good repair or have been
reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper
working condition and approved.
(a) Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to
be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
(b) Notice of violation. The code official shall serve a notice of violation or
order in accordance with Section 715.07.
(c) Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of
violation or order served in accordance with Section 715.07 shall be
deemed guilty of a summary offense, and the violation shall be deemed
a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with,
the code official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in
equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the
removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in
violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made
pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction
on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which
the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
(d) Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this
code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements
thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and
 715.05 CHARTER  715.06
C:239
 715.07. Notices and orders. [Ord. 1418, passed 7-23-2012]
costs. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense. The fine shall be forwarded
to the Town of McCandless.
(e) Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the Town from
instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation,
or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or
to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building,
structure or premises.
(a) Notice to person responsible. Whenever the code official determines
that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe
that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner
prescribed in Sections 715.07 (b) and (c) to the person responsible for
the violation as specified in this code. Notices for condemnation
procedures shall also comply with Section 715.08(g).
(b) Form. Such notice prescribed in Section 715.07 (a) shall be in
accordance with all of the following:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include the address or lot and block of the property.
(3) Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice
is being issued.
(4) Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the
repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or
structure into compliance with the provisions of this code.
(5) Inform the property owner of the right to appeal.
(6) Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with
Section 715.06(c).
(c) Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if
a copy thereof is:
(1) Delivered personally;
(2) Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known
address; or
(3) If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a
copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the
structure affected by such notice.
(4) Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or
equipment under the provisions of Section 715.08, service shall be
 715.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  715.07
C:240
 715.08. Unsafe structures and equipment. [Ord. 1418, passed
7-23-2012]
made by publication of a copy of the notice one time in one
newspaper of general circulation published in the county.
(d) Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be
as set forth in Section 715.06(d).
(e) Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon
whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage,
lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another
until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have
been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee,
transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or
notice of violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the
code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee,
transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such
compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the
responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs
required by such compliance order or notice of violation.
(a) General. When a structure or equipment is found by the code official to
be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is
found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the
provisions of this code.
(b) Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be
dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the
occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to
protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such
structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed,
dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or
unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible.
(c) Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating
equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device,
flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or
within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such
equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or
occupants of the premises or structure.
(d) Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human
occupancy whenever the code official finds that such structure is
unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in
disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, Vermin or rat infested,
contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination,
sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by
this code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard
to the occupants of the structure or to the public.
 715.07 CHARTER  715.08
C:241
 715.09. Emergency measures. [Ord. 1418, passed 7-23-2012]
(e) Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one which was erected,
altered or occupied contrary to law.
(f) Closing of vacant structures. If the structure is vacant and unfit for
human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural
collapse, the code official is authorized to post a placard of
condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as
not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up
the premises within the time specified in the order, the code official
shall cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available
public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the
cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the
structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be
collected by any other legal resource.
(g) Notice. Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or
equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be in
accordance with Section 715.07(c). If the notice pertains to equipment,
it shall also be placed on the condemned equipment. The notice shall be
in the form prescribed in Section 715.07(b).
(h) Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply
with the notice provisions within the time given, the code official shall
post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the
word "Condemned" and a statement of the penalties provided for
occupying the premises, operating the equipment or removing the
placard.
(i) Placard removal. The code official shall remove the condemnation
placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation
and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person
who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval
of the code official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this
code.
(j) Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure condemned and
placarded by the code official shall be vacated as ordered by the code
official. Any person who shall occupy placarded premises or shall
operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible
for the premises who shall let anyone occupy placarded premises or
operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided
by this code.
(k) Abandoned and blighted property conservatorship act. Where, in
connection with any of the sections within this Property Maintenance
Code, an abandoned or blighted structure meets all of the conditions
set forth in the Abandoned and Blighted Property Conservatorship Act,
the Town may proceed with a petition for Conservatorship.
 715.08 MCCANDLESS CODE  715.09
C:242
 715.10. Demolition. [Ord. 1418, passed 7-23-2012]
(a) Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the code official, there is
imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which
endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen
and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there
is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the
proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or
vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation
of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby
authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to
vacate the premises forthwith. The code official shall cause to be posted
at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "This
Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the
Code Official." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such
structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the
required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing
the same.
(b) Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this code,
whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger
due to an unsafe condition, the code official shall order the necessary
work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such
structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein
described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be
taken as the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency.
(c) Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the code official shall
temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having
jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent
to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.
(d) Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the code official
shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required
work as expeditiously as possible.
(e) Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of
emergency work shall be paid by the Town. The Town Attorney of the
Town shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the
premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery
of such costs.
(f) Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply
with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon
petition directed to the appeals board, be afforded a hearing as
described in this code.
(a) General. The code official shall order the owner of any premises upon
which is located any structure, which in the code official's judgment is
so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous,
unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or
 715.09 CHARTER  715.10
C:243
 715.11. Means of appeal. [Ord. 1418, passed 7-23-2012]
 715.12. through  715.20. (Reserved)
 715.21. Scope and interpretation. [Ord. 1418, passed 7-23-2012]
occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to
demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of
being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to
demolish and remove at the owner's option; or where there has been a
cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more
than two years, to demolish and remove such structure.
(b) Notices and orders. All notices and orders shall comply with Section
715.07.
(c) Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a
demolition order within the time prescribed, the code official shall
cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an
available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private
persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged
against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be
a lien upon such real estate.
(d) Salvage materials. When any structure has been ordered demolished
and removed, the governing body or other designated officer under said
contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the
salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net
proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition
and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or
transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted,
for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If
such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so
state.
(a) Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the
code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the
right to appeal to the UCC Board of Appeals, provided that a written
application for appeal is filed within 20 days after the day the decision,
notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on
a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted
thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this
code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately
satisfied by other means.
(a) Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for
the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this chapter.
(b) Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the
future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and
 715.10 MCCANDLESS CODE  715.21
C:244
 715.22. General definitions. [Ord. 1418, passed 7-23-2012]
APPROVED  Approved by the code official.
BASEMENT  That portion of a building which is partly or completely
below grade.
BATHROOM  A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or
shower.
BEDROOM  Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping
purposes.
CODE OFFICIAL  The official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative.
CONDEMN  To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
DWELLING UNIT  A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
EASEMENT  That portion of land or property reserved for present or
future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the
property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above
a said lot or lots.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY  The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
EXTERMINATION  The control and elimination of insects, rats or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying,
fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest elimination methods.
GARBAGE  The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GUARD  A building component or a system of building components
located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that
minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.
neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the
singular.
(c) Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code
and are defined in the Uniform Construction Code, the International
Fire Code, the Town of McCandless Zoning Code, the Allegheny County
Department of Health Article 15, the International Mechanical Code,
the International Existing Building Code or the ICC Electrical Code, as
amended, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in
those codes.
(d) Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods
authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted
meanings such as the context implies.
 715.21 CHARTER  715.22
C:245
HABITABLE SPACE  Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces,
and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT  A room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet,
lavatory and bathtub or shower.
IMMINENT DANGER  A condition which could cause serious or lifethreatening
injury or death at any time.
INFESTATION  The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or
premises of insects, rats, Vermin or other pests.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE  A vehicle which cannot be driven upon
the public streets for reason including but not limited to being unlicensed,
wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved
under its own power.
LABELED  Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which has
been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally
recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization
concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the
production of the above-labeled items and by whose label the manufacturer
attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards.
LAWN  A stretch of open grass covered land, especially one that is mowed
and contains a structure.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET  To permit, provide or offer possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or
structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant
to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
NOXIOUS WEEDS  Those weeds and plants included under the noxious
weed control list of the Noxious Weed Control Law of Pennsylvania.
OCCUPANCY  The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is
utilized or occupied.
OCCUPANT  Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building.
OPENABLE AREA  That part of a window, skylight or door which is
available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the
outdoors.
OPERATOR  Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
OWNER  Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records
of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or
otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the
 715.22 MCCANDLESS CODE  715.22
C:246
estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate
of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PERSON  An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group
acting as a unit.
PREMISES  A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including
any structures thereon.
PUBLIC WAY  Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
ROOMING HOUSE  A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or
without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family
dwelling.
ROOMING UNIT  Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for
cooking purposes.
RUBBISH  Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, lawn trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE  An offense in which the prosecution in a
legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its
case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was
prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required
to do.
STRUCTURE  That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
TENANT  A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the
legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
TOILET ROOM  A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a
bathtub or shower.
VENTILATION  The natural or mechanical process of supplying
conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.
VERMIN  Animals or insects regarded as pests or nuisances, including but
not limited to those associated with the carrying of disease.
WORKMANLIKE  Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb,
level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
 715.23. through  715.29. (Reserved)
 715.30. General requirements. [Ord. 1418, passed 7-23-2012]
(a) Scope. The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum
conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of
structures, equipment and exterior property.
 715.22 CHARTER  715.30
C:247
 715.31. Exterior property areas. [Ord. 1418, passed 7-23-2012]
(b) Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures
and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as
otherwise provided for in this code. A person shall not occupy as owneroccupant
or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in
a sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the
requirements of this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming
unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a sanitary and
safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit,
housekeeping unit or premises which they occupy and control.
(c) Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof
or vacant land shall be maintained in a safe, secure and sanitary
condition as provided herein so as not to adversely affect the public
health or safety.
(a) Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a
safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the
exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean
and sanitary condition.
(b) Plant growth and weeds.
(1) All lawn areas shall be maintained free from plant growth in excess
of 10 inches excluding: cultivated trees, shrubs, flowers,
ornamental grasses and gardens. All Noxious Weeds shall be
prohibited. Upon failure to comply with this section, an owner or
person having charge of the property shall be served with a Notice
of Violation. Such notice shall consist of a letter describing the
violation and be mailed by certified mail or be served in person. In
the event the owner or agent having charge of the property cannot
be located or refuses the service of the Notice of Violation, the
property shall be posted with the Notice of Violation of seven days.
Thereafter, any duly authorized employee or the Town of
McCandless or contractor hired by the Town of McCandless shall
be authorized to enter upon the property to cut, destroy and
remove the plant growth in violation thereof. The cost shall be paid
by the owner or agent responsible for the property. The Owner or
agent shall be invoiced for the costs of such cutting, destroying and
removal of the weeds.
(2) Failure to pay the invoice as within 30 days of notice or posting
shall result in a citation being filed. Upon receipt of a judgment in
favor of the Town, the Town may proceed with the filing of a lien in
the amount of the judgment, plus costs and attorneys' fees as
permitted by law.
(c) Vermin harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept
free from Vermin harborage and infestation. Where Vermin are found,
they shall be promptly removed or exterminated by approved processes
 715.30 MCCANDLESS CODE  715.31
C:248
 715.32. Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. [Ord. 1418, passed
7-23-2012]
 715.33. Exterior structure. [Ord. 1418, passed 7-23-2012]
which will not be injurious to human health. After removal or
extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate Vermin
harborage and prevent reinfestation.
(d) Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other sections of the Town of
McCandless Code, no vehicle shall be parked or stored on any lawn,
landscaped or buffer areas.
(e) Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage,
mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on
any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving
or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said
surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair.
(a) Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition, and in good repair.
(b) Enclosures. Private swimming pools, containing water more than 24
inches in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at
least 48 inches in height above the finished ground level measured on
the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates and doors in such
barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching
device is less than 54 inches above the bottom of the gate, the release
mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate. Self-closing
and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will
positively close and latch when released from an open position of six
inches from the gatepost. No existing pool enclosure shall be removed,
replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a
safety barrier.
(a) Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free
from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the
imposed dead and live loads.
(b) Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and
free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so
as to prevent the entry of Vermin and other pests.
(c) Exterior walls. All exterior walls including building surfaces and siding
shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and
maintained in a weatherproof condition.
(d) Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not
have defects that admit rain. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall
be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions.
 715.31 CHARTER  715.33
C:249
 715.34. Rubbish and garbage. [Ord. 1418, passed 7-23-2012]
 715.35. through  715.40. (Reserved)
 715.41. Fire resistance ratings. [Ord. 1418, passed 7-23-2012]
(e) Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim,
wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good
repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
(f) Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not limited
to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes
and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly
anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all
exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements
and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
(g) Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck,
porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage
and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
(h) Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and
similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound,
and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic
application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar
surface treatment.
(i) Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
(j) Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, door and
frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight.
(k) Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and
holes.
(a) Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and premises
shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
(a) Fire resistance rated assemblies. The required fire resistance rating of
fire resistance rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and
floors shall be maintained.
(b) Opening protectives. Required opening protectives shall be maintained
in an operative condition. All fire and smokestop doors shall be
maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors
shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.
 715.33 MCCANDLESS CODE  715.42
C:250
 715.42. Fire protection systems. [Ord. 1418, passed 7-23-2012]
Article 717
POTTER PARK
 717.01. Naming. [Ord. 740, passed 6-26-1978]
The tract of ground donated to the Town of McCandless by Dr. Robert H.
Potter and Janet M. Potter, his wife, for a public park is hereby named and
designated as "Potter Park".
 717.02. Prohibitions. [Ord. 740, passed 6-26-1978]
The following are hereby prohibited within the confines of Potter Park:
 717.03. Hours. [Ord. 740, passed 6-26-1978]
Potter Park shall be open and shall be used only during the hours from dawn
to dusk.
 717.04. Posting notice. [Ord. 740, passed 6-26-1978]
Notice of the above prohibitions shall be prominently posted at the entrance
of Potter Park.
 717.99. Penalty. [Ord. 740, passed 6-26-1978]
Failure to comply with any provision of this article shall constitute a
summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $300.
Article 721
LOITERING
(a) General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an
alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be
maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the
International Fire Code.
(a) Alcoholic beverages.
(b) Swimming.
(c) Littering.
(d) Fires of any sort.
(e) Motor vehicles of any kind.
 715.42 CHARTER  721.01
C:251
 721.01. Obstructing free access prohibited. [Ord. 773, passed
7-23-1979]
No person or group of persons shall loiter by standing, sitting or lying on
any public street or sidewalk or at the entrance to or exit from any private
residence, any place of business, or any public park in such a manner as to
obstruct the free access by the Town residents and visitors to and from the
public streets, sidewalks, private residences, place of business and public
parks within the Town of McCandless.
 721.02. Order to desist; violation. [Ord. 773, passed 7-23-1979]
When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in
Section 721.01, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order
that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on
or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be
guilty of a violation of this article.
 721.99. Penalty. [Ord. 773, passed 7-23-1979]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof before a Justice of the Peace, be fined not more than $300, plus
costs of prosecution.
Article 725
NOISE
 725.01. Motor vehicle or all purpose vehicle noise. [Ord. 833,
passed 1-25-1982]
No person shall operate any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorbike,
snowmobile, trail bike or any other type of four or two wheel motor vehicle,
either on public highways or on private property which are not adequately
or properly equipped with mufflers in operating condition or which emit
loud, unusual or unnecessary noise so as to cause discomfort and
inconvenience to nearby residents of the Town and/or to visitors to the
Town.
 725.02. Prohibited noise; exceptions. [Ord. 1298, passed
3-22-2004]
No person or his/her agent, servant, employee, customer or invitee shall
cause to be made or continue any loud, unusual or unnecessary noise,
whether the same be by horns, bells, voice, hammering, grinding, singing,
music, radio, television, loud speaker, dance or any form or manner of noise
or sound whatsoever which either annoys, injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health or general welfare of nearby residents and/or visitors. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to any mechanical device,
apparatus or equipment used or connected with emergency public work
 721.01 MCCANDLESS CODE  725.02
C:252
and shall also not apply to the use of lawnmowers, chainsaws and other
mechanical or motorized tools commonly used on residential property,
provided the same shall, only be used during daylight hours, but not before
8:00 a.m., prevailing time, and shall not be used in the operation of any
business on the property. The provisions of this section shall also not apply
to noise created by (1) normal land development and construction activities
carried on during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., and (2) snow removal
equipment.
 725.99. Penalty. [Ord. 833, passed 1-25-1982]
Whoever violates this article shall, upon conviction thereof before a District
Magistrate, be fined not more than $300 for each violation and each day
such violation continues may be considered a separate offense.
Article 729
AIRCRAFT
 729.01. Prohibited landings and take offs. [Ord. 984, passed
4-25-1988]
No person, firm or corporation shall land any aircraft or take off any
aircraft, including helicopters, from any landing field located within 150
yards of any occupied dwelling house or residence within the Town.
 729.02. Exceptions. [Ord. 984, passed 4-25-1988]
The restriction on the landing or taking off of aircraft contained in this
article shall not apply to emergency medical service aircraft, military
aircraft or public safety aircraft whenever flight by such aircraft is
necessary for emergency purposes.
 729.99. Penalty. [Ord. 984, passed 4-25-1988]
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be considered a summary
offense and the violator shall be fined not more than $300 for each offense,
plus costs of prosecution. Each day that any person continues to violate this
article shall be considered a separate offense.
Article 730
FUGITIVE EMISSIONS
 730.01. Source premises. [Ord. 1033, passed 5-29-1990]
(a) General. No person shall operate, or allow to be operated, any source in
such a manner that emissions from any roadway, haul road, yard or
other premises located upon the source or from any material being
 725.02 CHARTER  730.01
C:253
 730.02. Parking lots and roadways. [Ord. 1033, passed 5-29-1990]
 730.03. Transport. [Ord. 1033, passed 5-29-1990]
No person shall transport, or allow to be transported, any solid or liquid
material outside the boundary line of any source in such manner that there
is any visible emission, leak, spill or other escape of such material during
transport.
 730.04. Construction. [Ord. 1033, passed 5-29-1990]
No person shall conduct, or allow to be conducted, any construction
activities in such manner that emissions from such activities:
transported within such source or from any source-owned access road,
haul road, or parking lot over five parking spaces:
(1) Are visible at or beyond the property line;
(2) Equal or exceed No. 1 on the Ringelmann Scale or an equivalent
opacity for a period or periods aggregating more than three
minutes in any sixty-minute period; or
(3) Equal or exceed No. 3 on the Ringelmann Scale or an equivalent
opacity at any time.
(b) Deposition on other premises. Visible emissions from any solid or liquid
material which has been deposited by any means from a source onto
any other premises shall be considered emissions from such source
within the meaning of subsection (a) hereof.
(a) General. No person shall maintain for use, or allow to be used, any
parking lot over 50 parking spaces or used by more than 50 vehicles in
any day or any roadway carrying more than 100 vehicles in any day or
15 vehicles in any hour in such manner that emissions from such
parking lot or roadway:
(1) Are visible at or beyond the property line;
(2) Equal or exceed No. 1 on the Ringelmann Scale or an equivalent
opacity for a period or periods aggregating more than three
minutes in any sixty-minute period; or
(3) Equal or exceed No. 3 on the Ringelmann Scale or an equivalent
opacity at any time.
(b) Deposition on other premises. Visible emissions from any solid or liquid
material which has been deposited by any means from a parking lot or
roadway onto any other premises shall be considered emissions from
such parking lot or roadway.
(c) Repairs. Subsection (a) hereof shall not apply during any repairs or
maintenance done to such parking lot or roadway.
 730.01 MCCANDLESS CODE  730.04
C:254
 730.05. Mining. [Ord. 1033, passed 5-29-1990]
No person shall conduct, or allow to be conducted, any mining activities in
such manner that emissions from such activities:
 730.06. Demolition. [Ord. 1033, passed 5-29-1990]
No person shall conduct, or allow to be conducted, any demolition activities
in such manner that emissions from such activities equal or exceed No. 1
on the Ringelmann Scale or an equivalent opacity for a period or periods
aggregating more than three minutes in any sixty-minute period.
 730.07. Fugitive emissions. [Ord. 1033, passed 5-29-1990]
(a) Equal or exceed No. 1 on the Ringel mann Scale or an equivalent
opacity for a period or periods aggregating more than three minutes in
any sixty-minute period; or
(b) Equal or exceed No. 3 on the Ringelmann Scale or an equivalent opacity
at any time.
(a) Are visible at or beyond the property line;
(b) Equal or exceed No. 1 on the Ringelmann Scale or an equivalent opacity
for a period or periods aggregating more than three minutes in any
sixty-minute period; or
(c) Equal or exceed No. 3 on the Ringelmann Scale or an equivalent opacity
at any time.
(a) With respect to any source of fugitive air contaminants identified in
Sections 730.01 through 730.06, inclusive, the Town Manager may by
order require the person responsible for such source to take all
reasonable actions to prevent fugitive air contaminants from becoming
air-borne, including, but not limited to, those actions listed in
subsection (c) hereof.
(b) The person responsible for a source of fugitive emissions shall take all
reasonable actions to prevent fugitive air contaminants from becoming
air-borne, including, but not limited to, those actions listed in
subsection (c) hereof. The person responsible includes the operator
actually causing the emissions, the owner of the equipment being used,
and the owner of the road or premises from which the emission comes.
(c) The Town Manager may issue an order to any person subject to
subsections (a) or (b) hereof, which order may require, but is not limited
to, such actions as:
(1) The use of asphalt, oil, water or suitable chemicals for dust control;
(2) The paving and maintenance of roadways, parking lots and the like;
 730.04 CHARTER  730.07
C:255
 730.99. Penalty. [Ord. 1033, passed 5-29-1990]
Whoever violates this article, shall upon conviction thereof before a District
Magistrate, be fined not more than three $300 for each violation and each
day such violation continues may be considered a separate offense.
Article 731
ESTABLISHMENT OF TOBACCO AND VAPING-FREE ZONES
IN TOWN PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
 731.01. Tobacco- and vaping-free zones. [Ord. 1464, passed
5-22-2017]
Smoking tobacco and the use of electronic cigarette devices (vaping) is
hereby prohibited in Town of McCandless parks and playgrounds, not
including parking areas, at Wall Park, Vestal Field Complex and Trail, Devlin
Park, Lorraine G. Rogers Soccer Field, Vincentian Recreation Complex and
Potter Park.
 731.99. Penalty. [Ord. 1464, passed 5-22-2017]
Whoever violates this article shall be immediately ejected from the park
and shall, upon conviction thereof before a District Magistrate, be fined not
more than $300 for each violation.
Part 9 - Streets, Utilities And Public Services Code
Article 901
STREET EXCAVATIONS
 901.001. Purpose. [Ord. 1332, passed 7-24-2006]
These regulations are adopted and implemented to achieve the following
general purposes and objectives:
(3) The prompt removal of earth or other material which has been
deposited by leaks from transport, erosion or other means;
(4) The adoption of work or other practices to minimize emissions;
(5) Enclosure of the source; and
(6) The proper hooding, venting and collection of fugitive emissions.
(d) It shall be a violation of this article giving rise to the remedies set forth
in Section 730.08 for any person to fail to comply with an order issued
pursuant to this section.
 730.07 MCCANDLESS CODE  901.001
C:256
 901.01. Definitions. [Ord. 659, passed 9-23-1974; Ord. 1332,
passed 7-24-2006]
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
EXCAVATION  All digging, trenching, tunneling, boring, driving or any
other means of disturbing an improved or unimproved area within the
street.
PERSON  Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association or
corporation.
STREET  Any public street, avenue, road, square, alley, highway or any
other public or private right-of-way or public grounds owned or maintained
by the Town of McCandless, and shall include all improved or unimproved
areas within these rights-of-way.
The singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the
feminine and the neuter.
 901.02. Permit required. [Ord. 1332, passed 7-24-2006]
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause an excavation in any street
within the Town of McCandless unless such person shall first have obtained
a permit as herein provided.
 901.03. Permit application; indemnity. [Ord. 1332, passed
7-24-2006]
(a) To regulate the opening, excavation and tunneling under streets and
rights-of-way of the Town of McCandless.
(b) To require a permit and payment of a fee.
(c) To provide for the protection, refilling, resurfacing and repairing of
excavations.
(d) To prescribe insurance and deposit requirements.
(e) To prescribe penalties for violations.
(a) Any person desiring to make an excavation in any street within the
Town of McCandless (Town) shall make application to the Town. Such
application shall include all information as required by the Town.
(b) The applicant covenants and agrees that the proposed work shall be
done in full compliance with the ordinances of the Town of McCandless
and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in relation to such
work, and that the applicant shall well and truly save, defend and keep
harmless the Town of McCandless from and indemnify it against any
and all actions, suits, demands, payments, costs and charges for or by
 901.001 CHARTER  901.03
C:257
 901.04. Insurance. [Ord. 1332, passed 7-24-2006]
 901.05. Fees. [Ord. 1332, passed 7-24-2006]
Before any permit for excavation in any street in the Town of McCandless is
issued, the applicant shall pay a permit and inspection fee as established by
resolution of Town Council.
 901.06. Bond as guarantee for surface restoration. [Ord. 1332,
passed 7-24-2006]
reason of the proposed excavation and all damages to persons or
property resulting in any manner therefrom, or occurring in the
prosecution of the work connected therewith, or from any other matter,
cause or thing relating thereto.
(c) Each applicant shall provide the Town of McCandless with three copies
of a drawing indicating the location and amount of work to be
performed.
(d) All street excavations will comply with the terms as set forth in the
"General Provisions and Specifications Regulating Street Excavations",
as adopted by resolution of Town Council. A copy of which will be given
to each applicant.
(a) Each applicant shall provide the Town of McCandless with an
acceptable certificate of insurance naming the Town as an additional
insured and indicating the applicant is insured against claims for
damages for personal injury, as well as claims for property damage
which may arise from or out of the performance of the work, whether by
it, his subcontractor, or any one directly or indirectly employed by the
applicant. Such insurance shall cover collapse, explosive hazards, and
underground work by equipment on the street, and shall include
protection against liability arising from all operations whether
completed or in progress.
(b) The amount of liability insurance for bodily injury in effect shall not be
less than $1,000,000 for each person, and for property damages not
less than $1,000,000 with an aggregate of not less than $2,000,000 for
each occurrence. Such certificates may be filed with the Town of
McCandless on an annual basis.
(a) Each applicant shall provide the Town of McCandless with a surety
bond written by a surety company authorized to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, cash or a certified check to guarantee
the restoration of the disturbed area of excavation as required by this
ordinance in an amount established by resolution of Town Council. Said
bond, deposit of cash or certified check shall be retained for one year
from the date of completion of the work. In the event the restoration of
the surface of the excavated street is deemed to be improper, faulty,
defective or not completed in a timely fashion, then in each case the
 901.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  901.06
C:258
 901.07. Emergencies. [Ord. 1332, passed 7-24-2006]
In the event of a leak, explosion or other accident to any subsurface pipe,
line, construction or apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person owning
or responsible for the same to commence an excavation to remedy such
condition before securing a permit provided that application for a permit
shall be made immediately and not later than the last business day
thereafter, and that all other provisions of this ordinance are fully complied
with. If any such emergency condition shall not be immediately attended
to by the owner or person responsible for such pipe, line, construction or
apparatus, the Town of McCandless may proceed to do the work necessary
to remedy the situation and the owner or person responsible will be charged
for such work on the basis of cost incurred by the Town.
 901.08. Collecting payment for emergency work. [Ord. 1332,
passed 7-24-2006]
Payment for any work done by or for the Town of McCandless shall be made
by the person made liable therefore under the provisions hereof within 30
days after being invoiced for same. Upon the failure to pay such charges,
the charges shall be collectible by the Town of McCandless in the manner
provided by law.
 901.99. Penalty. [Ord. 1332, passed 7-24-2006]
Any person, whether as principal, employee or agent, violating or assisting
in the violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon
conviction thereof before any Magisterial District Justice in the Town of
McCandless, pay a fine of $500, and in default of the payment of such
fine and costs of prosecution including attorney's fees and costs, shall be
imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
permit holder shall be given a ten-day written notice by the Town of
McCandless to make such repair or restoration as may be required.
Upon the failure of the permit holder to comply with the terms of
the notice, the Town of McCandless is hereby authorized to have such
repair or restoration completed and to charge the cost thereof to the
permit holder. Any subsidence or any other defect which can be
attributed to improper restoration within one year of the completion
of the work shall be considered to be the responsibility of the permit
holder and the permit holder shall be required to correct improper
restoration as set forth in this ordinance. At the expiration of the one
year, the Town of McCandless shall return or refund to the permit
holder the bond, cash, or certified check or that portion of the same to
which the permit holder is entitled.
(b) A public utility shall be permitted to file one continuing form of security
for street opening work done within the Town of McCandless. Such
security is to be in the minimum amount as established by resolution of
Town Council.
 901.06 CHARTER  901.99
C:259
Article 902
DELIBERATE DEPOSIT OF SNOW ON STREETS OR
ROADWAYS
 902.01. Definitions. [Ord. 1283, passed 3-24-2003]
The following words, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
PERSON  Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association or
incorporation. The singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter.
STREET  Any public street, avenue, road, square, alley, highway, roadway,
or other public way of the Town.
 902.02. Deliberate deposit of snow on streets or roadways. [Ord.
1283, passed 3-24-2003]
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited snow or ice upon the
streets and roads located in the Town of McCandless. Violators shall include
the person owning or occupying the property from which the snow or ice is
deposited on the street or road as well as the person who actually deposits
the snow or ice on the street or road.
 902.99. Penalty. [Ord. 1283, passed 3-24-2003]
Failure to remove such deposits upon demand shall be a summary offense
and shall result in a fine of $150.
Article 903
RIGHTS-OF-WAY, TELECOMMUNICATION PROVIDERS
 903.01. Definitions. [Ord. 1240, passed 3-26-2001]
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the
terms used in this article shall be as follows:
APPLICANT  The person who has applied for a right-of-way permit or a
construction permit.
APPLICATION  The form prescribed by the Town which the applicant must
complete in order to obtain a right-of-way permit.
CONSTRUCTION  The building, erection, alteration or installation in,
on or under a right-of-way. It does not include maintenance or repair of
equipment in a right-of-way or a single line extension from equipment in the
right-of-way.
 901.99 MCCANDLESS CODE  903.01
C:260
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT  The document that must be obtained before a
person may perform construction in a right-of-way.
EMERGENCY  A condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life
or health, or significant loss of property.
EQUIPMENT  Any tangible property located or proposed to be located in
a right-of-way, including, but not limited to, wires, lines, cables, conduits,
pipes, supporting structures or other facilities.
IN  When used in conjunction with rights-of-way means over, above, in,
within, on or under a right-of-way.
MAINTENANCE  Repair work of a minor nature that will keep an existing
condition from failure or decline.
PERMIT HOLDER  The person obtaining a right-of-way permit.
PERSON  Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or other business entity.
RESTORE or RESTORATION  The process by which a right-of-way is
returned to a state that is as good or better as its condition before
construction.
RIGHT-OF-WAY  The surface and space in, on, above and below any real
property in which the Town has an interest in law or in equity, including,
but not limited to, any public street, boulevard, avenue, road, highway,
easement, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, river, tunnel,
viaduct, bridge, park, green space, or any other place.
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT or PERMIT  A written authorization granted
by the Town to an applicant for use of the rights-of-way in the Town for
wires, lines, pipes, cables, conduits, pipes, supporting structures and other
facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES  The services offered to customers
involving the transmission of video, data and/or voice communications and/
or content, both active and interactive, and associated usage.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM  A system used or to be used to
provide telecommunication services.
UNDERGROUND EQUIPMENT  All equipment that is located wholly or
partially underneath a right-of-way.
 903.02. Requirement of a right-of-way permit. [Ord. 1240, passed
3-26-2001]
(a) No person shall enter upon or occupy any right-of-way for the purpose
of installing, constructing, maintaining or operating a
telecommunications system without first having obtained a right-of-way
permit. Any person maintaining or operating a telecommunications
system as of the effective date of this article shall also obtain a right-ofway
permit.
 903.01 CHARTER  903.02
C:261
 903.03. Application for a right-of-way permit. [Ord. 1240, passed
3-26-2001]
(b) Before a right-of-way permit is issued, the holder of or applicant for
right-of-way permit shall have applied for any and all regulatory
approvals, permits or authorizations from the appropriate federal and
state authorities, if required. Upon the request of the Town, the
applicant shall submit written evidence of its applications for or receipt
of all such approvals, permits or authorizations.
(c) Nothing in this article shall be construed as a waiver of any ordinances
or regulations of the Town or the Town's right to require prospective or
current right-of-way permit holders to secure and remit payment for
any and all required permits or authorizations.
(a) A right-of-way permit shall only be granted after an applicant has
completed an application in the form that has been prescribed by the
Town, which form may be revised from time to time. Upon request, an
applicant shall be provided with a copy of the then current application
for a right-of-way permit. The application shall request information
regarding the applicant's proposed or actual physical use and
occupation of the rights-of-way. Specifically, the application shall
request: (1) a brief description of the telecommunications service or
services to be offered or provided in or through the Town; (2) specific
information regarding the equipment it proposes to place or currently
maintains in the right of way; (3) the expected physical burden that
such equipment will place or does place on the rights-of-way; and (4)
whether the equipment will or does have a detrimental effect on public
safety as it relates to the rights-of-way. If the completed application
does not fully provide such requested information, the Town may
request such additional information as is necessary to enable it to make
a determination regarding the physical use and occupation of the
rights-of-way by the applicant. The application may request less
information from a permit holder applying for a renewal of a right-ofway
permit.
(b) Upon submission of a fully completed application to the Town and the
accompanying fee, the Town shall review the application as follows. The
Town shall grant or deny such applications within 45 days. If the Town
fails to grant or reject such application within the time period specified
above, the application shall be deemed approved. In each case, the
Town shall review the application to determine whether such use would
have a detrimental effect on public safety as it relates to the rights-ofway
or would place an undue physical burden on the rights-of-way.
(c) In considering an application, the Town may use such outside experts as
it deems necessary. In the event the Town deems it necessary to employ
an outside expert to advise the Town with respect to a particular
application, the reasonable costs of such expert shall be borne by the
applicant.
 903.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  903.04
C:262
 903.04. Duration and suspension of right-of-way permit. [Ord.
1240, passed 3-26-2001]
 903.05. Requirement for a construction permit. [Ord. 1240,
passed 3-26-2001]
(a) The right-of-way permit shall be issued for a period of one year. Permit
holders may apply for a renewal of a right-of-way permit prior to its
expiration. The Town may suspend such right-of-way permit in the event
any one or more of the following has occurred:
(1) The permit holder shall have caused damage to Town property or
the right-of-way without the prior consent of the Town (except in
the case of an emergency) and without completing proper
restoration.
(2) The permit holder or the permit holder's equipment in the right of
way has had a detrimental effect on public safety as it relates to the
rights-of-way.
(3) The permit holder failed to pay any of the fees required under this
article.
(4) The permit holder failed to comply with construction standards in
accordance with the provisions contained in Section 903.08.
(5) The permit holder failed to indemnify, hold harmless and insure the
Town in accordance with the provisions contained in Section
903.09.
(b) If the Town has reason to believe that one or more of the above events
has occurred, it shall notify the permit holder in writing. The permit
holder shall have 30 days to cure the violation, unless the Town
reasonably determines that the event is an emergency, in which case
the Town may impose a shorter time period to cure the violation.
(a) Except in the case of an emergency, before commencing any
construction in the rights-of-way, a person shall submit to the Town
detailed plans of the proposed construction activity. Such plans shall
include the type of construction activity, the equipment proposed to be
installed or erected, the specific locations of the construction activity
and the scheduled beginning and ending dates of all planned
construction. Such plans shall also include the name(s), address(es) and
experience of any and all subcontractors whom applicant intends to
utilize. Such information may be submitted concurrently with an
application for a right-of-way permit.
(b) Upon submission of all such information required in subsection (a)
above, the Town shall review such information and either grant or deny
a construction permit with 45 days. If the Town fails to grant or deny
the construction permit within such time period, the permit shall be
deemed granted. In each such case, the Town shall review the
 903.04 CHARTER  903.05
C:263
 903.06. Fees and expenses. [Ord. 1240, passed 3-26-2001]
information provided herein to determine whether such construction
would have a detrimental impact on public safety as it relates to the
rights-of-way. The Town may impose conditions on the construction
permit regulating the times, locations, and manner of construction to
preserve effective traffic flow, prevent hazardous road conditions and/
or minimize noise impacts.
(a) Each new applicant for a right-of-way permit shall include with its
application an application fee in the amount of $500. This fee is directly
related to the Town's costs in reviewing the application (excluding
expert costs) and managing the rights-of-way with respect to each
permit holder. Such costs in managing the rights-of-way include, but
are not limited to, inspection costs, administrative costs, costs of
maintaining the rights-of-way and costs of degradation of streets and
right-of-way property. This fee will not be refunded in the event the
application is denied. If the application is granted, the application fee
will apply to the full term of the right-of-way permit of one year. If the
applicant applies for a construction permit concurrently with the
application for a right-of-way permit, then the application fee contained
herein shall apply to both the right-of-way permit and the construction
permit.
(b) Each existing permit holder applying for a renewal of its right-of-way
permit shall include with its application an annual fee in the amount of
$300. This fee is directly related to the Town's costs in managing the
rights-of-way with respect to each permit holder. Such costs include,
but are not limited to, inspection costs, administrative costs, costs of
maintaining the rights-of-way and costs of degradation of streets and
right-of-way property.
(c) Each applicant for a construction permit shall include with its
application an application fee in the amount of two $200. This fee is
directly related to the Town's costs in reviewing the application and
determining time, place and manner of restrictions on the construction
activity. If the application for a construction permit is denied, this fee
shall not be refunded. An escrow account shall be established to pay for
any costs incurred by the Town for the review of an application by
outside sources. The amount of such escrow shall be established by
resolution of Town Council. If the application is granted, then the
applicant shall pay, within 30 days of the presentation of a statement,
for any other actual costs incurred by the Town. Such actual costs
include, but are not limited to, costs of disruption and rerouting of
traffic, inspection costs and administrative costs.
(d) Extraordinary expenses. In addition to the fees set forth above, a permit
holder shall pay, within 30 days of the presentation of a statement, any
extraordinary or unusual expenses reasonably incurred by the Town as
a result of the permit holder's use of the rights-of-way, provided that the
Town notifies the permit holder of the expected expenses prior to them
 903.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  903.06
C:264
 903.07. Management of the rights-of-way. [Ord. 1240, passed
3-26-2001]
 903.08. Construction standards. [Ord. 1240, passed 3-26-2001]
being incurred and provides the permit holder with an opportunity to
mitigate such expenses. Examples of extraordinary or unusual costs
include, but are not limited to, the cost of obtaining and operating a
backhoe, dump truck or other heavy equipment used to repair the rightof-
way, overtime or special pay for police officers or other emergency
services. The statement of such expenses presented to the permit
holder shall be directly related to the Town's actual costs.
(e) In the event that payment of any of the fees identified above is not made
upon submission of the application or by the date due, the applicant or
permit holder shall pay a late payment penalty of simple interest at 10%
annual percentage rate of the total amount past due. Such penalty shall
be in lieu of any other monetary penalty. Acceptance of payment under
this Section shall not in any way limit or waive the Town's right to
suspend or terminate the permit according to the terms of this article.
(a) The Town shall have the right to limit the placement of new or
additional equipment in the right-of-way if there is insufficient space to
reasonably accommodate all requests to occupy and use the rights-ofway.
The Town shall consider requests for occupying and using the
rights-of-way in the order of receipt of fully completed applications for
right-of-way permits. The Town shall strive, to the extent possible, to
accommodate all requests, but shall be guided by the physical condition
of the right-of-way and whether such use would have a detrimental
effect on public safety as it relates to the right-of-way.
(b) The Town shall have the right to monitor the telecommunications
systems and the equipment related thereto located in the rights-of-way
in order to prevent interference between and among such systems and
equipment.
(c) A permit holder shall allow the Town to make inspections of any part of
the permit holder's telecommunications system located in the rights-ofway
at any time upon three days' notice, or, in case of an emergency,
upon demand.
(a) Whenever a permit holder or any of its subcontractors shall disturb any
pavement, sidewalk or other public property in order to perform any
underground activities, the permit holder will full comply by registering
with Pennsylvania's "One Call" system pursuant to 73 P.S.  176 et seq.
Such permit holder shall provide the Town with GPS information
showing planned locations and reference points for equipment to be
installed. Each permit holder shall perform construction activity in a
manner consistent and in compliance with the detailed plans it
submitted to the Town and all applicable federal, state and local laws
and regulations.
 903.06 CHARTER  903.08
C:265
 903.09. Liability and indemnification. [Ord. 1240, passed
3-26-2001]
(b) Whenever a permit holder or any of its subcontractors shall cause
damage to the right-of-way or to Town property in the right-of-way, the
permit holder shall restore such right-of-way or property within 30
days, weather permitting.
(c) The telecommunications system shall not endanger or interfere with
the safety of persons or property within the Town. All operating,
maintenance, construction and repair personnel shall be thoroughly
trained in the safe use of all equipment and in the safe operation of
vehicles. Such personnel shall follow all safety procedures required by
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. The permit
holder shall routinely inspect and maintain all areas of the
telecommunications system so that conditions that could develop into
safety hazards shall be corrected before they become a hazard.
(d) Except in the case of an emergency, at least three days prior to the
commencement of any construction activity, permit holder shall notify
nearby residents of such construction activity in a manner which is
satisfactory to the Town. The name of the permit holder shall be clearly
disclosed to such residents.
(e) All construction activity shall be performed in an orderly and
workmanlike manner, and in close coordination with public utilities
serving the Town following accepted industry construction procedures
and practices.
(f) All wires, cables and other equipment shall be installed, where possible,
parallel with electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable
configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundles with due
respect to engineering considerations.
(g) All wires, cables and other equipment shall be installed underground
where required by municipal ordinance or regulation consistent with
the same requirement being imposed on all other similarly situated
companies, including public utilities.
(a) A permit holder shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify and hold
harmless the Town, its elected and appointed officials, employees and
agents, at all times against any and all claims for personal injury,
including death, and property damage arising out of the permit holder's
use or occupancy of the rights-of-way. A permit holder shall defend any
actions or proceedings against the Town in which it is claimed that
personal injury, including death, or property damage was caused by the
permit holder's use or occupancy of the rights-of-way. The obligation to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be limited to,
the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages,
attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs of
indemnification. A permit holder shall not be required to indemnify and
 903.08 MCCANDLESS CODE  903.09
C:266
 903.10. Reporting requirements. [Ord. 1240, passed 3-26-2001]
 903.11. Sale or transfer of rights of permit holder. [Ord. 1240,
passed 3-26-2001]
A right-of-way permit may be transferred or assigned, upon 30 days' written
notice to the Town, provided that the transferee/assignee agrees in writing
to comply with all of the obligations and requirements contained in this
article.
 903.12. Performance bond. [Ord. 1240, passed 3-26-2001]
A permit holder shall be required, prior to construction, to obtain a
performance bond in a reasonable amount set by the Town based upon the
construction cost of the equipment to be installed in the rights-of-way and
the extent of the disturbance of such rights-of-way. The performance bond
shall ensure the permit holder's faithful performance of its construction
obligations. The Town shall reduce or cancel the bond requirement when
construction is completed to the Town's satisfaction.
 903.13. Termination. [Ord. 1240, passed 3-26-2001]
hold the Town harmless for claims caused by the Town's negligence,
gross negligence or willful misconduct.
(b) A permit holder shall at all times during the life of a permit carry and
require its subcontractors to carry liability, property damage, worker's
disability, and vehicle insurance in such form and amount as shall be
determined by the Town as set forth in the permit. A permit holder shall
name the Town as an additional insured on its liability insurance
policies. All required insurance coverage shall provide for 30 days'
notice to the Town in the event of material alteration or cancellation of
such coverage prior to the effective date of such material alteration or
cancellation.
(a) A permit holder shall annually provide the Town, upon application for
renewal of the permit, or upon request, the current maps of the
horizontal and vertical locations of its existing installations and a
summary of all additions and deletions of equipment in the rights-ofway,
unless no changes have occurred in the previous year. If no
changes have occurred in the previous year, permit holder shall so
inform the Town.
(b) A permit holder shall submit to the Town such reasonable information
directly related to the permit holder's use and occupation of the rightsof-
way as the Town may request. All information provided to the Town
shall be maintained by the Town as proprietary and confidential if such
information is designated in good faith as such prior to the time it is
provided to the Town.
 903.09 CHARTER  903.13
C:267
 903.14. Removal. [Ord. 1240, passed 3-26-2001]
(a) In addition to all other rights and powers reserved by the Town, the
Town reserves the right to terminate a permit and all rights and
privileges of a permit holder for any of the following reasons:
(1) A permit holder fails, after 30 days' prior written notice, to comply
with any of the provisions of the permit or this article.
(2) A permit holder becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its
debts, or is adjudged bankrupt;
(3) All or part of a permit holder's facilities are sold under an
instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemed by the permit
holder within 90 days from such sale;
(4) A permit holder attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in
its conduct or relations with the Town under the permit;
(5) The Town condemns all of the property of a permit holder within
the Town by the lawful exercise of eminent domain;
(6) The permit holder abandons the telecommunication system.
(b) No termination shall be effective unless and until the Town Council
shall have adopted a resolution setting forth the cause and reason for
the termination and the effective date, which resolution shall not be
adopted without 30 days' prior notice to permit holder and an
opportunity for the permit holder to be heard before the Town Council
on the proposed resolution.
(a) Upon expiration or termination of the permit, if the permit is not
renewed, the permit holder shall, upon 60 days' prior written notice to
the permit holder, remove its equipment from the rights-of-way and
shall restore said areas. If such removal is not completed within six
months of such notice, the Town may deem any property not removed
as abandoned and the Town may remove it at the former permit holder's
expense. In the event that the permit holder installed and/or operated
any underground conduit or pipe which is six inches or more in
diameter, permit holder shall fill said conduit or pipe with material in a
manner satisfactory to the Town.
(b) During the term of the permit, if the permit holder decides to abandon
or no longer use all or part of its telecommunications system, it shall
provide the Town with written notice of its decision at least 30 days
prior to such decision, which notice shall describe the equipment and
its location. The Town shall have the right to require the permit holder
to remove the equipment upon 60 days' prior written notice to the
permit holder. If such removal is not completed within six months of
such notice, the Town may remove it at the permit holder's expense.
 903.13 MCCANDLESS CODE  903.15
C:268
 903.15. Police powers. [Ord. 1240, passed 3-26-2001]
The Town, by granting any permit under this article, does not waive, lessen,
impair or surrender the lawful police powers vested in the Town under
applicable federal, state and local laws pertaining to the regulation or use
of the rights-of-way.
 903.16. Severability. [Ord. 1240, passed 3-26-2001]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this article
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision, and such holding shall not render this article invalid.
 903.17. Equal application. [Ord. 1240, passed 3-26-2001]
The provisions of this article shall be imposed upon and enforced against all
persons requiring a permit from the Town.
 903.99. Penalty. [Ord. 1240, passed 3-26-2001]
If the Town has reason to believe that the permit holder violated any of
the terms of this article, it shall notify the permit holder in writing of the
nature of the violation and the section of this article which it believes has
been violated. The permit holder shall have 20 business days to cure the
violation. If the nature of the violation is such that it cannot be fully cured
within such time period, the Town may, in its reasonable judgment, extend
the time period to cure. If the violation has not been cured within the time
period allowed, it shall be subsequently punishable by a fine of up to $100
per day until the violation is cured.
Article 905
DRIVEWAYS
 905.01. Permit. [Ord. 1420, passed 8-27-2012]
No person shall construct, relocate, replace or change in grade the portion
of a private driveway within the right-of-way for and onto public roads until
he/she has complied with this article and secured a permit from the Town
office, which permit shall be signed by the Town Manager or his designee.
The Town shall issue a permit to any person complying with this article and,
who, in addition, fulfills the following requirements:
(a) Provides and submits to the Town a plan, in writing, complying with the
Town of McCandless Standards for Construction (latest edition)
showing the location, size, grade and drainage of the driveway; and
(b) Pays a permit fee as may be established by the Town for the issuance of
such permit; and
 903.15 CHARTER  905.01
C:269
 905.02. Definitions. [Ord. 100, passed 6-17-1955; Ord. 1420,
passed 8-27-2012]
Words and phrases used in this article shall have the following definitions:
PERMIT  That instrument authorized by Council and signed by the Town
Manager or his/her designee, evidencing compliance with Sections 905.01
and 905.04. Such permit must show the name of the property owner, the
location of the property and the person doing the work.
PERSON  Any individual, partnership, limited liability corporation, limited
liability partnership, corporation, association or governmental body. The
singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the
feminine and neuter.
PRIVATE DRIVEWAY  A private lane or roadway, not dedicated to public
use, and providing access from private buildings or lands to public roads.
PUBLIC ROAD  Any road, street, alley or highway opened in whole or in
part and dedicated for public use by recording, order of court or by other
legal act under the laws of this Commonwealth. It includes that unopened
portion created of the road width as recorded or otherwise created which
does not lie within the traveled cartway of the road.
 905.03. Special requirements. [Ord. 1420, passed 8-27-2012]
The Town Manager is hereby authorized to make special requirements in
writing to carry out the intent of this article on any application for a permit
under this article.
 905.04. Liability. [Ord. 100, passed 6-17-1955]
Nothing in this article shall be construed to create a liability on the part of
the Town to any person erecting a driveway in compliance with this article.
The Town may remove, change or destroy any private driveway or parts
thereof lying in a public road in the same manner, and with no greater
liability than existed before this article was enacted.
 905.99. Penalty. [Ord. 1420, passed 8-27-2012]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon summary
conviction thereof be fined not more than $1,000 for each offense and,
in default of the payment of such fine and costs of prosecution, shall be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed more than 60 days.
Article 907
OBJECTS AND SIGNS IN RIGHT-OF-WAY
(c) Shows agreement to comply with written instructions and requirements
made by the Town in addition to specifications and drawings provided
by the applicant.
 905.01 MCCANDLESS CODE  907.01
C:270
 907.01. Objects in right-of-way. [4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 148617]
 907.02. Signs in public right-of-way and on Town property.
[4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 1486]
 907.03. Declaration of nuisance; sign removal, storage and
return. [4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 1486]
(a) No trees, bushes, shrubs or hedges or similar vegetation may be
planted or allowed to grow so that any part is closer than three feet
from the cartway of any Town streets, boulevards, highways, avenues,
alleys, roads, or other public ways, or allowed to infringe on a clear
sight triangle as necessary to ensure safe and efficient vehicular traffic
and ingress and egress on streets within the Town.
(b) No sign, object or structure may be built or placed or permitted to
remain closer than three feet from the cartway of any Town streets,
boulevards, highways, avenues, alleys, roads, or other public ways or
within the above clear sight triangle. For the purpose of this article, the
term "sign," unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning, shall mean any surface, fabric or device bearing lettered,
pictorial or sculptured matter designed to convey information visually
and exposed to public view, or any structure including a billboard or
poster panel designed to carry such visual information.
(c) Public transit shelters may be permitted at public transit stops if the
location and installation have been approved by the Town of
McCandless.
(a) Unless a permit has been issued and is valid in accordance with the
provisions contained elsewhere in this Code, all signs are prohibited:
(1) On any utility poles or structures within the public right-of-way
lines.
(2) On property of the Town of McCandless, except at official voting
sites on dates established for local municipal, state or federal
elections.
(a) Public nuisance. Any violation of this article is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
(b) Sign removal procedure. Any sign found to violate  907.01(b) or 907.02
may be removed by any Town employee duly authorized by the Town
Manager or his/her designee, subject to the enforcement procedures
contained herein. If the sign is located upon a state or county right-ofway,
the Town may remove the sign with the permission of the state or
county.
17.Editors Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. 907, Objects in
Road Right-of-Way, adopted 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 1316.
 907.01 CHARTER  907.03
C:271
 907.04. Enforcement. [4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 1486]
Persons who violate this article shall be given two written warnings and
a reasonable opportunity, not to exceed seven days, to abate the violation
prior to the Town seeking the remedies and penalties set forth in this article
and otherwise available under law, unless the violation constitutes a danger
to the health and/or safety of the public, in which case the Town shall have
the right to immediately abate the violation. In such cases, in addition to
any other remedy provided by this article or available under law, the Town
may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit
the continuation of any violation.
 907.99. Penalty. [4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 1486]
Subject to the procedures set forth in  907.04 (Enforcement), any violation
of the provisions of this article shall be considered a summary offense, and
the violator shall be fined not more than $300 for each offense, plus costs
of prosecution. Each violation and each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
Article 909
STREET ACCEPTANCE AND DEDICATION
 909.01. Procedure. [Res. 16-75, passed 11-24-1975]
In the case of private roads which have never been taken over by the Town
of McCandless or its predecessor, the Township of McCandless, and where
the owners of the property abutting such road petition the Town to take over
the road as a Town road, the following policy is hereby established:
(c) Sign notice, storage and return. Upon removal of any sign in violation of
 907.01(b) or 907.02, a designated employee of the Town shall keep a
record of the location from which the sign was removed. Further, a
reasonable attempt shall be made to contact the owner by telephone. If
such attempt is successful, the owner shall be notified of the removal
and of the location where the sign may be retrieved. If telephone
contact is not achieved, written notice of the violation and the retrieval
location may, but is not required to, be provided. In either case, the
Town shall store any removed sign for at least 10 days. After expiration
of the ten-day period, the Town shall be permitted to destroy or discard
any sign.
(a) The petition to take over such road, whether by deed, or right of way or
by acceptance in accordance with a dedication recited in a recorded
plan, shall be signed by 100% of the property owners on such road.
(b) The petition must contain a provision that the petitioners will waive any
claims for damages and also provide that any necessary easements for
drainage will be granted to the Town without cost. The petitioners must
 907.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  909.01
C:272
all agree to execute a deed or right of way 50 feet in width if the road
cannot be taken over by simple acceptance of a dedication in a recorded
plan.
(c) The petitioners shall post with the Town, in cash, the estimated
engineering fee for a preliminary study to determine the estimated
construction cost of the project and will be given credit in accordance
with the amount posted by each property owner against the final
assessment if the road is constructed.
(d) Upon receipt of the preliminary study and the estimated construction
cost, the Town shall advise the petitioners thereof and it will then be
determined whether the petitioners wish to commit themselves to the
completion of the project.
(e) Assuming approval by the petitioners, the Town shall then take over the
road by ordinance either by acceptance of a dedication on a recorded
plan or after receiving a deed or right of way from all of the property
owners and will thereafter maintain the road as a Town road.
(f) The Town shall employ an engineer to proceed with final drawings and
specifications, shall secure bids and shall let the contract for the street
improvement. The Town shall install a permanent-type road with
concrete curbs in accordance with Town specifications for road
construction in new subdivision plans. Authority for such action shall be
contained in an ordinance directing the paving, draining and curbing of
the road in question and establishing the grade thereof.
(g) When the improvement has been completed, the total cost of the project
shall be computed, and the Town shall pay one-third of the cost from
general Town funds and the abutting property owners shall be assessed
the remaining two-thirds of the cost of the improvement.
(h) In assessing the abutting property owners, the Town shall use a front
foot assessment with the following exceptions:
(1) Average lot width shall be used if the lot is quite irregular in shape.
(2) Lots having only flankage (the side yard as contrasted to the street
upon which the residence faces) shall be assessed on the same
front foot basis as other lots for all distance over 100 feet, but for
the first 100 feet only one-third of the flankage will be assessed at
the aforementioned two-thirds of the cost of the project.
(i) Notice of assessments shall be given the affected property owners by
the Town Attorney, and, if the assessments are not paid within 30 days,
they shall be liened in accordance with law. A 5% penalty is set by law
and a 6% interest rate is also set by law, and runs from the time of the
completion of the improvement. However, in an effort to aid residents in
their desire to secure permanent roads, an installment plan may be
arranged between the affected individual and the Town Attorney,
whereby no interest will be charged except in the case of delinquency in
 909.01 CHARTER  909.01
C:273
 909.02. Previously adopted roads. [Res. 16-75, passed
11-24-1975]
In those instances where property owners abut a road presently maintained
and previously adopted as a Town (or Township) road, the abutting property
owners may petition the Town Council to install a new, permanent road in
accordance with current Town specifications for roads in new subdivisions
provided the petition is signed by 100% of the residents along such road
and provided that all the petitioners will waive any claims for damages,
will assure the granting of necessary drainage easements to the Town
without cost to the Town and provided further that the necessary cost is
advanced for a preliminary engineering study. The Town shall make the
preliminary study, and if all the petitioners are in agreement as to the
cost estimate, construction of the permanent road together with necessary
drainage facilities and concrete curbs and gutters will proceed and the
manner of assessment and payment of such assessment will be as set for in
Section 909.01.
Article 911
SIDEWALKS
 911.01. Definition. [Ord. 743, passed 8-28-1978]
SIDEWALK  Includes all paved pedestrian pathways situated within public
street rights of way and abutting private or public property.
 911.02. Purpose. [Ord. 743, passed 8-28-1978]
The purpose of this article is to insure that sidewalks are adequately
maintained and kept in a state of good repair in order to reduce or
an installment payment, at which time interest will then be charged
in full. A semi-annual or annual installment payment plan may be
arranged as follows:
(1) If the amount of the assessment is $300 or less, payment must be
made within one year. Payments may be made in two installments
(one-half presently and one-half in a lump sum at any time within
one year), or in three installments (one-third presently, one-third
within six months and one-third within one year).
(2) If the amount of the assessment is $301 to $600, the maximum time
for payment is two years, based upon a semi-annual or annual
installment arrangement whereby an appropriate proportionate
amount is paid.
(3) If the amount of the assessment is $601 or over, the maximum time
for payment is three years, on a semi-annual or annual installment
basis as previously mentioned, with an appropriate installment
being presently paid.
 909.01 MCCANDLESS CODE  911.02
C:274
otherwise eliminate any condition that would constitute a hazard to or
result in possible injuries to the pedestrian public.
 911.03. Duty of property owner. [Ord. 743, passed 8-28-1978; Ord.
1329, passed 3-27-2006]
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the abutting property to keep
the sidewalk immediately in front of or along any portion of his property
in good order and repair, and at all times free and clear of all obstruction
to safe and convenient passage. This shall include keeping and maintaining
such sidewalks free and clear of all dirt, trash and similar debris, including
the removal of snow and ice, and also includes keeping and maintaining the
sidewalk free of any merchandise, sign or other unauthorized structure or
appurtenance.
 911.04. Notice of violation; noncompliance; cost recovery. [Ord.
743, passed 8-28-1978; Ord. 1329, passed 3-27-2006]
In the event a property owner fails to properly maintain the sidewalk in
front of his property in accordance with Section 911.03, a notice of violation
shall be issued by the Town and sent to the property owner by registered or
certified mail. The property owner shall take the steps necessary to correct
such violation(s) within a reasonable period of time but in no case shall any
violation remain uncorrected for a period of more than 30 days from the
date of receipt of the notice of violation. Failure to comply shall subject the
property owner to the penalties contained in Section 911.99. If the property
owner continues to fail to comply with such notice, the government unit
with control over the street (whether in fee or by easement) may make
the necessary repairs, remove any obstructions or eliminate any hazard to
pedestrian safety. In the event that the government unit making the repairs
is not the Town, the Town may reimburse that government unit for the cost
of the same. When the Town has incurred the costs or reimbursed another
government unit for such costs, those costs, together with a penalty of 10%,
shall be paid by the delinquent property owner and be collected by an action
of assumpsit, or the Town Council may file a municipal lien against the
property.
 911.05. Sidewalk specifications. [Ord. 743, passed 8-28-1978; Ord.
804, passed 10-27-1980]
 911.06. Intergovernmental cooperation. [Ord. 1329, passed
3-27-2006]
(a) Installation, repair or replacement of sidewalks or sections thereof shall
be in accordance with current Town specifications. These specifications
shall be made available to the property owner to insure that the proper
requirements are met.
(b) Sidewalks installed along County or State roads shall meet the
specifications established by the County or State.
 911.02 CHARTER  911.06
C:275
 911.99. Penalty. [Ord. 743, passed 8-28-1978]
Each property owner or agent who violates any provision of this article
shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $300.
Article 912
FLOODPLAIN CONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
REQUIREMENTS
 912.01. Statutory authorization. [Ord. 1440, passed 8-25-2014]
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act of 1978, delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of
its citizenry. Therefore, the Town Council of the Town of McCandless
(hereinafter Town) does hereby order as follows.
 912.02. General provisions. [Ord. 1440, passed 8-25-2014]
(a) The Town may, at its sole discretion, enter into sidewalk agreements
with other government units owning streets within the Town to provide
for enforcement of Section 911.04 against property owners with
sidewalks abutting or contained within such streets. Such agreements
may obligate the Town to reimburse such government unit for any costs
it incurs in making the necessary repairs, removing any obstructions or
eliminating any hazard to pedestrian safety in regards to sidewalks.
(b) Any agreements entered into by the Town pursuant to the authorization
set forth in this Article shall be approved by resolution of the Town
Council and shall be in a form approved by the Town Attorney.
(c) No sidewalk agreement shall constitute a waiver of the Town's
governmental immunity for any reason whatsoever.
(a) Intent. The intent of this article is to:
(1) Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
(2) Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
(3) Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
(4) Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its
governmental units, and its residents, by preventing excessive
development in areas subject to flooding.
(5) Comply with federal and state floodplain management
requirements.
 911.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  912.02
C:276
 912.03. Administration. [Ord. 1440, passed 8-25-2014]
(b) Applicability.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or
corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any
construction or development anywhere within the Town unless a
Permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
(2) A Permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing
buildings or structures.
(c) Abrogation and greater restrictions. All prior Ordinances are hereby
repealed in whole or in part to the extent inconsistent herewith.
However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and
effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive. If there is
any conflict between any of the provisions of this article, the more
restrictive shall apply.
(d) Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or
phrase of this article shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such a decision shall not affect the remaining portions of
the article, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this
purpose the provisions of this article are hereby declared to be
severable.
(e) Warning and disclaimer of liability.
(1) The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this
article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods
may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or
natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by
debris. This article does not imply that areas outside any identified
floodplain areas, or that land uses permitted within such areas will
be free from flooding or flood damages.
(2) This article shall not create liability on the part of the Town or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made
there under.
(a) Designation of the floodplain administrator. The Land Use
Administrator within the Planning Office is hereby appointed to
administer and enforce this ordinance and is referred to herein as the
Floodplain Administrator.
(b) Permits required. A Permit shall be required before any construction or
development is undertaken within any designated floodplain or
floodway area or any area within 50 feet of the top of bank of a stream
area of the Town.
 912.02 CHARTER  912.03
C:277
(c) Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
(1) The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a Permit only after it has
been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be
in conformance with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator
shall review the application for the permit to determine if all other
necessary government permits required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the
Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as
amended); the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as
amended); and the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33, U.S.C.
1344. No permit shall be issued until this determination has been
made.
(3) In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
Development/Permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
issues can be addressed before the permit is issued.
(4) During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or
other authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine
that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the permit application and with all applicable
municipal laws and ordinances. He/she shall make as many
inspections during and upon completion of the work as are
necessary.
(5) In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises
or development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation
of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the
provisions of this ordinance.
(6) In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work
does not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws
and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator
shall revoke the Permit. The Town shall seek any legal means
necessary to remedy the violation.
(7) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all
records associated with the requirements of this ordinance
including, but not limited to, permitting, inspection and
enforcement.
(8) The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of
the 34 PA Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest
revisions thereof.
 912.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  912.03
C:278
(d) Application procedures and requirements.
(1) Application for such a Permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Town. Such
application shall contain the following:
A. Name and address of applicant.
B. Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
C. Name and address of contractor.
D. Site location including address.
E. Listing of other permits required.
F. Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost,
including a breakout of flood-related cost and the market value
of the building before the flood damage occurred where
appropriate.
G. A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
(2) If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for
Permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient
detail and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to
determine that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage and conform with the requirements of this and
all other applicable codes and ordinances;
B. All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage; and
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
D. Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement.
E. Building materials are flood-resistant.
F. Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been
used.
G. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
 912.03 CHARTER  912.03
C:279
(3) Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any
other pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
A. A completed Permit Application Form.
B. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of
one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
1. North arrow, scale, and date;
2. Topographic contour lines, if available;
3. The location of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, and other improvements, including the location
of any existing or proposed subdivision and development;
4. The location of all existing streets, drives, and other access
ways; and
5. The location of any existing bodies of water or
watercourses, identified floodplain areas, and, if available,
information pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of
water including direction and velocities.
C. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
1. The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed
building based upon North American Vertical Datum of
1988;
2. The elevation of the base flood;
3. Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34
PA Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
D. The following data and documentation:
1. If available, information concerning flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other
factors associated with a base flood; and
2. Detailed information concerning any proposed flood
proofing measures and corresponding elevations.
3. Documentation, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of
any proposed development when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the
base flood elevation more than one foot at any point on the
property and no increase at any point off the property.
 912.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  912.03
C:280
4. A document, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, which states that the proposed
construction or development has been adequately
designed to withstand the pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces associated with the base flood.
Such statement shall include a description of the type
and extent of flood proofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
5. Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
Section 912.05(c)(5), Storage, and Section 912.05(d),
Development Which May Endanger Human Life, including:
(A) The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in Sections 912.05(c)(5) and
912.05(d) which are intended to be used, produced,
stored or otherwise maintained on site.
(B) A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or
spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed
in Section 912.05(d) during a base flood.
6. The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
7. Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan
meeting the requirements of the Department of
Environmental Protection, to implement and maintain
erosion and sedimentation control.
(4) Applications for Permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to
the municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator and an
escrow in an amount established by Town Resolution and an
amount sufficient to cover the cost of engineering reviews and
where necessary engineering inspections.
(e) Review of application by others. A copy of all plans and applications for
any proposed construction or development in any identified floodplain
area to be considered for approval may be submitted by the Floodplain
Administrator to any other appropriate agencies and/or individuals
including the Town engineer. (e.g. planning commission, municipal
engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
(f) Changes. After the issuance of a Permit by the Floodplain
Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to the application,
permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted
with the application without the written consent or approval of the
 912.03 CHARTER  912.03
C:281
Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any such change shall be in
writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain
Administrator for consideration.
(g) Placards. In addition to the Permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
issue a placard which shall be displayed on the premises during the
time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of
the Permit the date of its issuance and be signed by the Floodplain
Administrator.
(h) Start of construction.
(1) Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin
within 180 days after the date of issuance and shall be completed
within 12 months after the date of issuance of the Permit or the
permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing,
by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start of construction
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it
include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages
or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first, alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
(2) Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is
submitted by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and
reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such
a request.
(i) As built drawing. An as built drawing is required after completion of the
project. An occupancy permit will be issued by the Floodplain
Administrator after the Town engineer indicates the project is
completed as designed. The drawing shall show at a minimum:
(1) The base flood elevation.
(2) All buildings in the development.
(3) Lowest floor elevation.
(4) Lowest adjacent ground elevation to structure.
(5) Topography in one foot increments as applicable.
 912.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  912.03
C:282
(6) Streets and street elevations as applicable.
(j) Enforcement.
(1) Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized municipal representative determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this article, or of any regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, the Floodplain Administrator shall give notice of such
alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
A. Be in writing;
B. Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
C. Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for
the performance of any act it requires;
D. Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case
may require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall
be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or
agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by
any other method authorized or required by the laws of this
State;
E. Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will
effect compliance with the provisions of this article.
(2) Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this article or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall pay a
fine to the Town, of not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution
with each day of violation constituting a separate offense. In
addition to the above penalties all other actions are hereby
reserved including an action in equity for the proper enforcement
of this article. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation
of, or noncompliance with, this article shall not excuse the violation
or noncompliance or permit it to continue and all such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time.
(k) Appeals.
(1) Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of
this article, may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal
must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision,
determination or action of the Floodplain Administrator on forms
supplied by the Town.
 912.03 CHARTER  912.03
C:283
 912.04. Identification of floodplain areas. [Ord. 1440, passed
8-25-2014]
(2) Upon receipt of such appeal the Zoning Hearing Board shall hear
the case at its next regularly scheduled meeting but not less than
30 days after receiving the appeal. The applicant shall post the
notice of appeal in a conspicuous location on the property. Notice of
the time and place at which the appeal will be considered shall be
given to all parties.
(3) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board
may seek relief there from by appeal to court, as provided by the
laws of this State including the Pennsylvania Floodplain
Management Act.
(a) Identification. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of the Town, classified as special flood hazard areas
(SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated September 26, 2014 and
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or
the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data
developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study and,
(2) Any Community Identified Flood Hazard Areas.
The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and
amendments are hereby adopted by the Town and declared to be a part of
this article.
(b) Description and special requirements of identified floodplain areas. The
identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
(1) The Floodway Area/District Identified as Floodway in the FIS which
represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by
more than one foot at any point. This term shall also include
floodway areas which have been identified in other available
studies or sources of information, such as PADEP's definition for
un-studied streams, for those special floodplain areas where no
floodway has been identified in the FIS.
A. Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill,
new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development shall be permitted unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
 912.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  912.04
C:284
B. No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
(2) The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone
on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base
flood elevations have been provided.
A. The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS
prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been
provided and a floodway has been delineated.
(3) The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no
1% annual chance flood elevations have been provided. For these
areas, elevation and floodway information from other Federal,
State, or other acceptable source shall be used when available.
Where other acceptable information is not available, the elevation
shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on the
boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site.
In lieu of the above, the Town may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality.
(c) Changes in identification of area. The identified floodplain area may be
revised or modified by the Town where studies or information provided
by a qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision.
However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the
FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six
months after the date such information becomes available, a community
shall notify the FEMA of the changes by submitting technical or
scientific data. See Section 912.05(a)(2) for situations where FEMA
notification is required.
(d) Boundary disputes. Should a dispute concerning any identified
floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be made by the
Town Engineer and any party aggrieved by this decision or
determination may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code rules governing Zoning Hearing Board
applications shall be applicable. The burden of proof shall be on the
appellant.
(e) Jurisdictional boundary changes. Prior to development occurring in
areas where annexation or other corporate boundary changes are
 912.04 CHARTER  912.04
C:285
 912.05. Technical provisions. [Ord. 1440, passed 8-25-2014]
proposed or have occurred, the community shall review flood hazard
data affecting the lands subject to boundary changes. The community
shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas subject to
annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or exceed those
in CFR 44 60.3.
(a) General.
(1) Alteration or Relocation of Watercourse.
A. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities
which may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have
been first obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
B. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the
activity will not reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of
the watercourse in any way.
C. In addition, the FEMA and Pennsylvania Department of
Community and Economic Development, shall be notified prior
to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
(2) When a community proposes to permit the following
encroachments: any development that causes a rise in the base
flood elevations within the floodway; or any development occurring
in Zones A1-30 and Zone AE without a designated floodway, which
will cause a rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation;
or alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to
installing culverts and bridges), the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR
Part 65.12):
A. Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
B. Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of
map change and prior to approving the proposed
encroachments, a community shall provide evidence to FEMA
of the adoption of floodplain management ordinances
incorporating the increased base flood elevations and/or
revised floodway reflecting the post-project condition.
C. Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final
map revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance
with 44 CFR Part 67.
 912.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  912.05
C:286
(3) Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed
within any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict
compliance with the provisions contained in this article and any
other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
(4) Within any Identified Floodplain Area (See Section 912.04(b)), no
new construction or development shall be located within the area
measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse.
(b) Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
(1) Residential structures.
A. In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or
substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation.
B. In A Zones, where there are no Base Flood Elevations specified
on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to,
or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in
accordance with Section 912.04(b)(3).
C. The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in
the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most
recent revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 PA Code
(Chapters 401-405 as amended) shall be utilized.
(2) Non-residential structures.
A. In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or
substantial improvement of a non-residential structure shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or
above, the regulatory flood elevation, or be designed and
constructed so that the space enclosed below the regulatory
flood elevation:
1. Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water
and,
2. Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy:
B. In A Zones, where there no Base Flood Elevations are specified
on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
completely floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation determined in accordance with Section 912.04(b)(3).
 912.05 CHARTER  912.05
C:287
C. Any non-residential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing
Regulations" published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other
equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such
floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect which states
that the proposed design and methods of construction are in
conformance with the above referenced standards.
D. The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in
the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most
recent revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 PA Code
(Chapters 401-405 as amended) shall be utilized.
(3) Space below the lowest floor.
A. Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding
basements) which will be used solely for the parking of a
vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other
than a basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow
for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters for the purpose
of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term
"fully enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
B. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
1. A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space.
2. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
3. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvements as
defined in this ordinance, must comply with all ordinance
requirements that do not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a specific
ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the
National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of
Historic places must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior
or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from
 912.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  912.05
C:288
ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
(5) Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building
need not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall
comply, at a minimum, with the following requirements:
A. The structure shall not be designed or used for human
habitation, but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to
the storage of tools, material, and equipment related to the
principal use or activity.
B. Floor area shall not exceed UCC standards.
C. The structure will have a low damage potential.
D. The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of flood waters.
E. Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the
regulatory flood elevation.
F. Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc. are prohibited.
G. Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
H. The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation
or movement and shall be designed to automatically provide
for the entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
1. A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space.
2. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
3. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters.
(c) Design and construction standards. The following minimum standards
shall apply for all construction and development proposed within any
identified floodplain area:
(1) Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
A. Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
 912.05 CHARTER  912.05
C:289
B. Consist of soil or small rock materials only - Sanitary Landfills
shall not be permitted;
C. Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
D. Be no steeper than one vertical to three horizontal, feet unless
substantiated data, justifying steeper slopes are submitted to,
and approved by the Floodplain Administrator, Town Engineer
and Town Council;
E. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to show that the
fill will not adversely affect properties or cause an increase in
flood elevations on any properties other than the property
under consideration not exceeding one foot; and
F. All provisions of the Town grading ordinance must be met.
(2) Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of storm water runoff in a safe and efficient
manner. The system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and
provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall
also be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto
adjacent properties in accordance with the Town Stormwater
Management Ordinance.
(3) Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
A. All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer
facilities and systems shall be located, designed and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the
infiltration of flood waters.
B. Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to
prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into flood waters.
C. No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with
all State and local regulations for such systems. If any such
system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid
impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a flood.
D. The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
#348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages and
The International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be
utilized.
(4) Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
(5) Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the Regulatory Flood Elevation.
 912.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  912.05
C:290
(6) Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life,
and not listed in subsection (d), Development Which May Endanger
Human Life, shall be stored at or above the Regulatory Flood
Elevation or flood proofed to the maximum extent possible.
(7) Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of flood water.
(8) Anchoring.
A. All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
B. All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar
objects or components located below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent
flotation.
(9) Floors, walls and ceilings.
A. Wood flooring used at or below the Regulatory Flood Elevation
shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the
flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing
structural damage to the building.
B. Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
C. Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be designed and constructed of materials that are "waterresistant"
and will withstand inundation.
D. Windows, doors, and other components at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be made of metal or other
"water-resistant" material.
(10) Paints and adhesives.
A. Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of "marine" or "water-resistant" quality.
B. Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
C. All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a
"marine" or "water-resistant" paint or other finishing material.
(11) Electrical components.
 912.05 CHARTER  912.05
C:291
A. Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the base flood elevation.
B. Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
(12) Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and
ventilating units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility
equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the Regulatory
Flood Elevation.
(13) Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be
designed to prevent the infiltration of flood waters into the system
and discharges from the system into flood waters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the
event that flood water infiltration occurs.
(14) Uniform construction code coordination. The Standards and
Specifications contained 34 PA Code (Chapters 401-405), as
amended and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to
the above and other sections and sub-sections of this ordinance, to
the extent that they are more restrictive and supplement the
requirements of this article.
International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Secs. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: Secs. R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix AE101,
Appendix E and Appendix J.
(d) Development Which May Endanger Human Life.
(1) In accordance with the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act,
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or
substantially improved structure which:
A. Will be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances; or,
B. Will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a
supply of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume,
of any of the following dangerous materials or substances on
the premises; or,
C. Will involve the production, storage, or use of any amount of
radioactive substances; shall be subject to the provisions of
this section, in addition to all other applicable provisions. The
following list of materials and substances are considered
dangerous to human life:
 912.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  912.05
C:292
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Sodium
Sulfur and sulfur products
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticides)
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
(2) Within any Floodway Area, any structure of the kind described in
subsection (a)(1), above, shall be prohibited.
(3) Within any Identified Floodplain Area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in subsection (a)(1),
above, shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
(4) Where permitted within any Identified Floodplain Area, any new or
substantially improved structure of the kind described in
subsection (a)(1), above, shall be:
A. Elevated, or in the case of a non-residential structure elevated
or designed, and constructed to remain completely dry up to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation,
B. Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood.
 912.05 CHARTER  912.05
C:293
Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations (U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, June 1972 as amended March 1992), or with some
other equivalent watertight standard.
(e) Special requirements for subdivisions. All subdivision proposals and
development proposals containing at least 50 lots or at least five acres,
whichever is the lesser, in Identified Floodplain Areas where base flood
elevation data are not available, shall be supported by hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood elevations
and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a Conditional
Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
(f) Special requirements for manufactured homes.
(1) Within any Floodway Area/District, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
(2) Within any Identified Floodplain Areas, manufactured homes shall
be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the
top-of-bank of any watercourse.
(3) Where permitted within any Identified Floodplain Area, all
manufactured homes meeting Town requirements, and any
improvements thereto, shall be:
A. Placed on a permanent foundation.
B. Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
C. Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
D. Have all ductwork and utilities including HVAC/heat pump
elevated to the Regulatory Flood Elevation.
(4) Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance
with the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer and Town requirements. Where the applicant cannot
provide the above information, the requirements of Appendix E of
the 2009 International Residential Building Code or the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development's Permanent
Foundations for Manufactured Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or
latest revision thereto shall apply and 34 PA Code Chapter 401-405.
(5) Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto
 912.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  912.05
C:294
 912.06. Activities requiring special permits. [Ord. 1440, passed
8-25-2014]
and 34 PA Code, as amended where appropriate and/or applicable
to units where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot
be provided or were not established for the units(s) proposed
installation.
(g) Special requirements for recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles in
Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
(3) Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in
subsection (f) hereof.
(a) General. In accordance with the administrative regulations
promulgated by the Department of Community and Economic
Development to implement the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management
Act, the following activities shall be prohibited within any Identified
Floodplain Area unless a Special Permit has been issued by the Town:
(1) The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
A. Hospitals.
B. Nursing homes.
C. Jails or prisons.
D. Assisted Living Facilities.
E. Daycare of any type.
F. Stormwater Management BMP Facilities.
(2) The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
(b) Application requirements for special permits. Applicants for Special
Permits shall provide five copies of the following items:
(1) A written request including a completed Permit Application Form.
(2) A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
(3) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
 912.05 CHARTER  912.06
C:295
A. North arrow, scale and date;
B. Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet;
C. All property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of
the site expressed in acres or square feet;
D. The location of all existing streets, drives, other access ways,
and parking areas, with information concerning widths,
pavement types and construction, and elevations;
E. The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural
and man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed
activity or development;
F. The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and
spot elevations concerning the base flood elevation, and
information concerning the flow of water including direction
and velocities;
G. The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and
any other improvements; and
H. Any other information which the municipality considers
necessary for adequate review of the application.
(4) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing
the following:
A. Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building
elevations, as appropriate;
B. For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any
other floor;
C. Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors
associated with the base flood;
D. Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
E. Cross section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
 912.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  912.06
C:296
F. Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways including existing and proposed grades; and
G. Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
(5) The following data and documentation:
A. Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he
represents;
B. Certification from a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect that the proposed
construction has been adequately designed to protect against
damage from the base flood;
C. A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the
development during the course of a base flood, including a
statement concerning the effects such pollution may have on
human life;
D. A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete
and accurate description of the effects the proposed
development will have on base flood elevation and flows;
E. A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete
and accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose
buoyant materials or debris that may possibly exist or be
located on the site below the base flood elevation and the
effects such materials and debris may have on base flood
elevation and flows;
F. The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development;"
G. Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control;
H. Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a
permit for any activity regulated by the Department of
 912.06 CHARTER  912.06
C:297
Environmental Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166;
and
I. An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which
the site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of
a base flood.
(c) Application review procedures. Upon receipt of an application for a
Special Permit by the Town the following procedures shall apply in
addition to those of Section 912.03:
(1) Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying
documentation shall be forwarded to the Allegheny County
Department of Economic Development certified mail for its review
and recommendations. Copies of the application shall also be
forwarded to the Town engineer for review and comment.
(2) If an application is received that is incomplete, the Town shall
notify the applicant in writing, stating in what respect the
application is deficient.
(3) If the Town decides to disapprove an application, it shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
(4) If the Town approves an application, it shall file written notification,
together with the application and all pertinent information, with
the Department of Community and Economic Development, by
registered or certified mail, within five working days after the date
of approval.
(5) Before issuing the Special Permit, the Town shall allow the
Department of Community and Economic Development 30 days,
after receipt of the notification by the Department, to review the
application and decision made by the Town.
(6) If the Town does not receive any communication from the
Department of Community and Economic Development during the
thirty-day review period, it may issue a Special Permit to the
applicant.
(7) If the Department of Community and Economic Development
should decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify the Town
and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval,
and the Town shall not issue the Special Permit.
(d) Special technical requirements.
(1) In addition to the requirements of Section 912.05, the following
minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed
development requiring a Special Permit. If there is any conflict
between any of the following requirements and those in Section
 912.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  912.06
C:298
 912.07. Existing structures in identified floodplain areas. [Ord.
1440, passed 8-25-2014]
912.05 or in any other code, ordinance, or regulation, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
(2) No application for a Special Permit shall be approved unless it can
be determined that the structure or activity will be located,
constructed and maintained in a manner which will:
A. Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and
any occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new
structures shall be designed, located, and constructed so that:
1. The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood without any lateral movement or damage to either
the structure itself, or to any of its equipment or contents
below the BFE.
2. The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
3. The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any
time during the base flood.
B. Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Town and the Department of Community and Economic
Development.
(a) Existing structures. The provisions of this article do not require any
changes or improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures.
However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the
provisions of subsection (b) hereof shall apply.
(b) Improvements. The following provisions shall apply whenever any
improvement is made to an existing structure located within any
Identified Floodplain Area:
(1) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any
increase in BFE.
(2) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within AE Area/District without floodway that would,
 912.06 CHARTER  912.07
C:299
 912.08. Variances. [Ord. 1440, passed 8-25-2014]
together with all other existing and anticipated development,
increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
(3) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement, of
any kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or
more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial
improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with
the provisions of this article.
(4) The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 PA
Code, as amended and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
(5) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than
50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to
the greatest extent possible.
(6) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
article.
(a) General. If compliance with any of the requirements of this article
would result in an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder,
developer or landowner, the Town may, upon request, grant relief from
the strict application of the requirements.
(b) Variance procedures and conditions. Requests for variances shall be
considered by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
procedures contained in Section 912.03(k) and the following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any Floodway Area/District that would cause
any increase in the BFE.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway that
would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE than one foot at any point.
(3) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated by Special Permit (Section 912.06) or to Development
Which May Endanger Human Life (Section 912.05(d)).
(4) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(5) In granting any variance, the Town shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in
 912.07 MCCANDLESS CODE  912.08
C:300
 912.09. Definitions. [Ord. 1440, passed 8-25-2014]
order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to
achieve the objectives of this article.
(6) Whenever a variance is granted, the Town shall notify the applicant
in writing that:
A. The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
B. Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(7) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Town shall consider, at
a minimum, the following:
A. That there is good and sufficient cause.
B. That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
C. That the granting of the variance will.
1. Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense,
2. Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(8) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Town. In addition, a report of all variances
granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to
the FEMA.
Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the 1%
annual chance flood.
(a) General. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in
this article shall be interpreted so as to give this article its' most
reasonable application.
(b) Specific definitions.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE  A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD  A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood" or 1%
annual chance flood).
 912.08 CHARTER  912.09
C:301
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE  The volume of water resulting from a
Base Flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually
expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE)  The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT  Any area of the building having its floor below ground
level on all sides.
BUILDING  A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to the construction,
reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings
or other structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets,
and other paving; utilities; filling, grading and excavation; mining;
dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; and
the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION  A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION  The preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD  A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)  The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS)  The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles,
the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map,
and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA  A relatively flat or low land area which is subject
to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream,
river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
 912.09 MCCANDLESS CODE  912.09
C:302
FLOODPROOFING  Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY  The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES  Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR  The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood resistant partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the
lowest floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and
built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable non-elevation
design requirements of this article.
MANUFACTURED HOME  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational
and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION  A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation that have been certified
either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior or
A.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
B.
(4)
 912.09 CHARTER  912.09
C:303
MINOR REPAIR  The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but
not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof,
the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement
of parts of a structure affecting the exit or exit access requirements;
nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or
relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader,
gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or
other work affecting public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION  Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after September 26, 2014 and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures. Any construction started
after June 18, 1980 and before September 26, 2014 is subject to the
ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the start
of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION  A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON  An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE  Is a structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974 or on or
after the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated
June 18, 1980, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required
to be compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance
Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE  Is a structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974 or
before the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated
June 18, 1980, and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with
the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE  A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck,
(3)
 912.09 MCCANDLESS CODE  912.09
C:304
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION  The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS  Flood related damages sustained by a structure
on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damages
occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA)  An area in the floodplain
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is
shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1 A30, AE, A99, or, AH.
SPECIAL PERMIT  A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and
subdivisions and substantial improvements to such existing parks,
when such development is located in all, or a designated portion of a
floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION  Includes substantial improvement and
other proposed new development and means the date the Permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days from the date of the permit and shall be completed within
12 months after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time
extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction
of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first, alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE  A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION  The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
(4)
 912.09 CHARTER  912.09
C:305
Article 913
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
distribution to heirs, or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development: Provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE  Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage" or "repetitive loss" regardless of
the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include
any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC)  The statewide building
code adopted by The Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable
to new construction in all municipalities whether administered by the
municipality, a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry.
Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, The Code adopted
The International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building
Code (IBC), by reference, as the construction standard applicable with
the State floodplain construction. For coordination purposes references
to the above are made specifically to various sections of the IRC and the
IBC.
VIOLATION  The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in 44 CFR  60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4),
or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
 912.09 MCCANDLESS CODE  912.09
C:306
DIVISION 1
General Provisions
 913.01. Findings and purpose. [11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 148118]
(a) The Town of McCandless finds that:
(1) Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater
resulting from development throughout a watershed increases
flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation,
overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers,
greatly increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control
stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood-control
efforts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater
recharge, threatens public health and safety, and increases nonpoint-
source pollution of water resources.
(2) A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, and
welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth, their
resources, and the environment.
(3) Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
(4) Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities
are required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from
their separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
(b) In order to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents of the Town of McCandless, as well as to protect, sustain, and
enhance the surface water and groundwater resources of the Town,
drainage and stormwater management practices shall be utilized as
directed herein to achieve the following goals and objectives:
(1) Accommodate site development and redevelopment in a manner
that protects public safety and that is consistent with (or
reestablishes) the natural hydrologic characteristics of each
watershed and sustains groundwater recharge, stream baseflows,
stable stream channel (geomorphology) conditions, the carrying
capacity of streams and their floodplains, groundwater and surface
water quality, and aquatic living resources and their habitats.
(2) Reduce and minimize the volume of stormwater generated.
18.Editors Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. 913, Stormwater
Management, adopted 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 1363.
 913.01 CHARTER  913.01
C:307
(3) Protect natural infiltration and groundwater recharge rates in
order to sustain groundwater supplies and stream baseflows.
(4) Maintain runoff characteristics of the site after completion of
development that are consistent with the carrying capacity and
stable channel conditions of the receiving streams.
(5) Protect water quality by removing and/or treating pollutants prior
to discharge to groundwaters and surface waters throughout the
Town, and protect, restore, and maintain the chemical, physical,
and biological quality of groundwaters and surface waters.
(6) Protect in-stream channels and geomorphology conditions of the
receiving streams, protect their flood-carrying capacity and aquatic
habitats, and reduce in-stream aggradation, degradation, and
scour.
(7) Reduce flooding impacts and prevent a significant increase in
surface runoff rates and volumes, predevelopment to postdevelopment,
which could worsen flooding downstream in the
watershed, enlarge floodplains, erode stream banks and create
other flood-related health-welfare-property losses; in general,
preserve and restore the natural flood-carrying capacity of streams
and their floodplains.
(8) Protect adjacent lands from adverse impacts of direct stormwater
discharges.
(9) Ensure effective long-term operation and maintenance of all
permanent stormwater management facilities.
(10) Maintain natural drainage patterns and encourage the use of
natural drainage systems.
(11) Treat and release stormwater as close to the source of runoff as
possible using a minimum of structures and maximizing reliance on
natural processes.
(12) Maintain the existing water balance in all watersheds,
subwatersheds, and streams in the Town and protect and/or restore
natural hydrologic characteristics and habitats wherever possible
throughout the watershed systems.
(13) Address certain requirements of the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) Phase II Stormwater Regulations.
(14) Reduce the impacts of runoff from existing developed sites
undergoing redevelopment while encouraging development and
redevelopment in urban areas and areas designated for growth.
(15) Meet water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.4a, to protect and maintain
 913.01 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.01
C:308
 913.02. Statutory authority. [11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1481]
 913.03. Applicability. [11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1481]
The standards contained herein shall apply to all regulated activities within
the Town. In addition, all local, county and state erosion and sedimentation
control approvals must be in place to proceed with any regulated activity.
"existing uses" and maintain the level of water quality to support
those uses in all streams and to protect and maintain water quality
in special-protection streams.
(16) Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
(a) Primary authority. The Town of McCandless is empowered to regulate
these activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864
(Act 167), 32 P.S.  680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water
Management Act."
(b) Secondary authority. The Town also is empowered to regulate land use
activities that affect stormwater runoff by the authority of the Act of
July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.19
(a) Activities regulated by this article include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Land development and redevelopment.
(2) Subdivision.
(3) Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious
surfaces (driveways, parking lots, etc.).
(4) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(5) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
(6) Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto.
(7) Any earth disturbances or any activities that involve the alteration
or development of land or removal of trees and vegetation in a
manner that may affect post-construction stormwater runoff.
(8) All stormwater runoff entering the Town's separate storm sewer
system.
(b) Redevelopments shall conform to the requirements contained in
 913.14(c)(3) when more than a 2,000-square-foot area of an existing
facility is reconstructed following the demolition or partial demolition of
that facility. The area determination shall be made using the footprint of
19.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S.  10101 et seq.
 913.01 CHARTER  913.03
C:309
 913.04. Erroneous permit. [11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1481]
Any permit or authorization issued or approval based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No
action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the municipality
purporting to validate such a violation.
 913.05. Waivers. [11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1481]
the area being reconstructed, including all impervious and semiimpervious
surfaces proposed in the reconstructed area and including
the increased area of any parking lot required to support the
reconstructed facility. The area of the parking lot required to support
the reconstructed facility shall be determined using the Town Zoning
Ordinance20 requirements for parking. The presence of existing
impervious or semi-impervious surfaces in predeveloped conditions
does not justify a waiver of this provision.
(a) If the municipality determines that any requirement under this article
cannot be achieved for a particular regulated activity, the municipality
may, after an evaluation of alternatives, approve measures other than
those in this article, subject to  913.05(b) and (c). The request for a
waiver or modification shall originate with the landowner, shall be in
writing, and shall accompany the stormwater management site plan
submission to the municipality. The request shall provide the facts on
which the request is based, the provision(s) of the ordinance involved
and the proposed modification. The designated plan reviewer shall
review the request to determine if it meets the requirements of this
article, including  913.05(b) and (c). If acceptable to the municipality
and the regulated stormwater activity involving earth disturbance is
less than one acre, the municipality may grant the waiver or
modification. If acceptable to the municipality and the regulated
stormwater activity involving earth disturbance is greater than or equal
to one acre, the municipality will send the request to the municipality's
choice of either the DEP as per  913.05(c).
(b) Waivers or modifications of the requirements of this article may be
approved by the municipality if enforcement will exact undue hardship
because of unique physical circumstances or preexisting site conditions
peculiar to the land in question, provided that the modifications will not
be contrary or detrimental to the public interest and will achieve the
intended outcome, and that the purpose of the article is preserved.
Hardship must be due to such unique physical circumstances or
preexisting site conditions and not the circumstances or conditions
generally created by the provisions of this article, and there is no
possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with
20.Editor's Note: See Part 13, Planning and Zoning Code.
 913.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.05
C:310
 913.06. Exemptions. [11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1481]
With the approval of Town Council, the following activities may be exempted
from on-site stormwater runoff control. An exemption shall apply only to
the requirement for on-site stormwater facilities and the preparation of a
stormwater management plan. All other stormwater management design
elements, such as a storm sewer system, road culverts, erosion and
sedimentation control, and runoff quality, shall be required. All exemption
requests must be filed with the Town Land Use Administrator and approved
by the Engineer.
the provisions of this article. Cost or financial burden shall not be
considered a hardship. Hardship cannot have been created by the
landowner or developer. Modification shall not substantially or
permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property. Modification may be considered if an alternative standard or
approach will provide equal or better achievement of the purpose of
this article.
(c) No waiver or modification of any regulated stormwater activity
involving earth disturbance greater than or equal to one acre may be
granted by the municipality unless that section is approved in advance
by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). If a response
from the DEP is not received within (Insert a number no less than 45
days,) the waiver or modification shall be deemed acceptable. Prior
DEP approval of the particular waiver or modification will constitute
approval for use of the particular waiver or modification for similar
circumstances or conditions.
(a) Regulated activities smaller than 400 square feet are exempt from the
requirements of this article to implement SWM BMPs, unless the
activity is found to be a significant contributor to pollution of the waters
of this commonwealth.
(b) Small project exemption: Activities having a disturbed area of less than
5,000 square feet are exempt from the peak rate control requirements
of this article.
(1) These projects shall comply with the water quality volume
standards contained in  913.14(c)(1) and the extended detention
requirement contained in  913.16(a)(1). The Small Project
Standardized SWM Guidance document provided in Appendix F21
was prepared to assist applicants in meeting this requirement for
individual lots only. The reduced site plan requirements contained
in the Small Project Standardized SWM Guidance document shall
apply.
(2) An erosion and sedimentation (E&S) control plan must be approved
by the Allegheny County Conservation District (ACCD).
21.Editor's Note: Appendix F is included as an attachment to this chapter.
 913.05 CHARTER  913.06
C:311
 913.07. Definitions. [11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1481]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AASHTO  American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials. The website home page for AASHTO is http://transportation1.org/
aashtonew/.
ACCD  Allegheny County Conservation District.
ACHD  Allegheny County Health Department.
ACT 167  The Storm Water Management Act (Act of October 4, 1978, P.L.
864, No. 167; 32 P.S.  680.1-680.17, as amended).
(3) An approved E&S plan is required to be on site.
(c) Emergency exemption: Emergency maintenance work performed for
the protection of public health, safety and welfare may be exempted
from the requirements in this article to obtain approval for a
stormwater management plan before commencement of the activity;
however, a written description of the scope and extent of any
emergency work performed shall be submitted to the Town within two
calendar days of the commencement of the activity. If the Town finds
that the work is not an emergency, then the work shall cease
immediately and may not resume until a written stormwater
management plan is submitted and approved.
(d) Maintenance exemption: any maintenance to an existing stormwater
management system made in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by the Engineer or the Town.
(e) Gardening: use of land for gardening for home consumption.
(f) Agricultural activities: agriculture, when operated in accordance with a
conservation plan, nutrient management plan or erosion and
sedimentation control plan approved by the Allegheny County
Conservation District, including activities such as growing crops,
rotating crops, tilling of soil and grazing animals. Installation of new or
expansion of existing farmsteads, animal housing, waste storage and
production areas having impervious surfaces that result in a net
increase in impervious surface of less than 1,000 square feet are
exempt from the requirement to submit a written stormwater
management plan.
(g) Forest management: forest management operations which are
consistent with a sound forest management plan as filed with the Town
Land Use Administrator and which follow the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection's management practices contained in its
publication Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Guidelines for
Forestry. Such operations are required to have an erosion and
sedimentation control plan.
 913.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.07
C:312
ACT 167 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN  The Girty's Run, Lowries
Run, and Pine Creek Stormwater Management Plan for managing
stormwater runoff adopted by the County of Allegheny as required by the
Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), as amended, and known as the
"Storm Water Management Act."22
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY  The work of producing crops, including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, and harvesting
crops, or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation
measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not
considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT  A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application for approval to engage in any regulated activity at a project site
in the Town.
AQUIFER  A geologic formation, group of formations, or part of a
formation that contains sufficient saturated, permeable material to yield
useful quantities of groundwater to wells and springs.
ATTENUATE  To reduce the magnitude of the flow rate by increasing the
time it takes to release a specified volume of runoff (for example the oneyear,
twenty-four-hour storm event). Attenuation is a method of reducing
the peak flow rates for post-development compared to the peak flow rates
in predevelopment.
BASEFLOW  The portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater;
the sustained discharge that does not result from direct runoff or from
water diversions, reservoir releases, piped discharges, or other human
activities.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP)  Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this article.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In this article, "nonstructural
BMPs or measures" refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas "structural BMPs or measures" are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands,
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CFS  Cubic feet per second.
22.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S.  680.1 et seq.
 913.07 CHARTER  913.07
C:313
CHANNEL  A natural or artificial watercourse that conveys, continuously
or periodically, flowing water.
CONCENTRATED STORM RUNOFF  Surface runoff from rainfall events,
which converges and flows primarily through water-conveyance features
such as swales, gullies, waterways, channels or storm sewers and which
exceeds the maximum specified flow rates of filters or perimeter controls
intended to control sheet flow.
CONSERVATION DESIGN  A series of holistic land development design
practices that maximize protection of key land and environmental
resources, preserve significant concentrations of open space and
greenways, evaluate and maintain site hydrology, and ensure flexibility
in development design to meet community needs for complementary and
aesthetically pleasing development. Conservation design encompasses the
following objectives: conservation/enhancement of natural resources,
wildlife habitat, biodiversity corridors and greenways (interconnected open
space); minimization of environmental impact resulting from a change in
land use (minimum disturbance, minimum maintenance); maintenance of a
balanced water budget by making use of site characteristics and infiltration;
incorporation of unique natural, scenic and historic site features into the
configuration of the development; preservation of the integral
characteristics of the site as viewed from adjoining roads; and reduction
in maintenance required for stormwater management practices. Such
objectives can be met on a site through an integrated development process
that respects natural site conditions and attempts, to the maximum extent
possible, to replicate or improve the natural hydrology of a site.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT  A conservation district, as defined in Section
3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3 P.S.  851(c)], that has the authority
under a delegation agreement executed with the DEP to administer and
enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102.
DEP  The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM  The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event, measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return period."
DETENTION BASIN  An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at
a predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely
shortly after any given rainfall event and are dry until the next rainfall
event.
DETENTION or TO DETAIN  The prevention of, or to prevent, the
discharge, directly or indirectly, of a given volume of stormwater runoff into
surface waters by temporary storage.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE)  See "project site."
 913.07 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.07
C:314
DISCHARGE 
DISTURBED AREA  An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
is occurring or has occurred.
DITCH  An artificial waterway for irrigation or stormwater conveyance.
DRAINAGE AREA  That land area contributing runoff to a single point and
that is enclosed by a ridge line.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM  All facilities and natural features used for the
movement of stormwater through and from a drainage area, including, but
not limited to, any and all of the following; conduits, pipes and appurtenant
features, channels, ditches, flumes, culverts, streets, swales, gutters as well
as all watercourses, water bodies and wetlands.
EARTH DISTURBANCE  A construction or other human activity which
disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing and
grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance; building
construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock
or earth materials.
EASEMENT  A right of use of a specified portion of land of another for a
specified purpose.
ENGINEER  A professional engineer duly appointed as the Municipal
Engineer and/or the Stormwater Management Engineer for the Town.
EPA  Environmental Protection Agency.
EROSION  The wearing away of land surface by water or wind which
occurs naturally from weather or runoff but is often intensified by human
activity.
EXISTING CONDITION  The dominant land cover during the five-year
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
FACILITY  Any residential or commercial building or impervious or semiimpervious
surface.
FEMA  Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FIRST-ORDER STREAM  The uppermost perennial tributary in a
watershed that has not yet confluenced with another perennial stream. The
confluence of two first-order streams forms a second-order stream.
FLOODPLAIN  Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source or delineated by applicable Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) maps and studies as being a special flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY  The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge
To release water from a project, site, aquifer, drainage basin or other
point of interest (verb).
(a)
The rate and volume of flow of water such as in a stream, generally
expressed in cubic feet per second (volume per unit of time) (noun).
(b)
 913.07 CHARTER  913.07
C:315
the 100-year flood. unless otherwise specified, the boundary of the floodway
is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In
an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the
100-year floodway, it is assumed - absent evidence to the contrary - that the
floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the
stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS  Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forestland. These include timber
inventory and preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber
harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD  The difference between the elevation of the design flow
in the emergency spillway (usually the 100-year peak elevation) and the
top elevation of the settled basin embankment (that is, top of berm). The
minimum freeboard shall be one foot.
GROUNDWATER  Water that occurs in the subsurface and fills or
saturates the porous openings, fractures and fissures of underground soils
and rock units.
HOTSPOT  An area where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater.
HYDROGRAPH  A graph of discharge versus time for a selected point in
the drainage system.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG)  Infiltration rates of soils vary widely
and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates.
Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their
minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged
wetting. The Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture defines the four groups and provides a list of
most of the soils in the United States and their group classification. The
soils in the area of the development site may be identified from a soil survey
report that can be obtained from local NRCS offices or Conservation District
offices. Soils become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D.
HYDROLOGY  The study of the properties, distribution, circulation and
effects of water on the Earth's surface, soil and atmosphere.
IMPERVIOUS COVER  See "impervious surface."
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE  A surface (area) which has been compacted or
covered with a layer of material so that it is resistant to infiltration by
water. It includes semipervious surfaces, such as compacted clayey soils,
as well as most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking
lots, and other similar surfaces. "Net increase of impervious surface refers
to the difference between the existing impervious coverage and the total
impervious surface proposed.
 913.07 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.07
C:316
INFILTRATION  Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolates
downward to recharge groundwater.
INTENSITY  The depth of accumulated rainfall per unit of time.
INTERMITTENT STREAM  A defined channel in which surface water is
absent during a portion of the year, as groundwater levels drop below the
channel bottom.
KARST  A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface,
underground drainage, and caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks, such
as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT)  Inclusive of any or all of the
following meanings:
LEVEL SPREADER  A low earthen berm constructed perpendicular to
the direction of slope and extending across the width of the slope for the
purpose of intercepting surface runoff and spreading it behind the berm
to enhance infiltration and reduce erosion and runoff from the slope. The
purpose of a level spreader is to prevent concentrated, erosive flows from
occurring and to spread out stormwater runoff uniformly over the ground
as sheet flow.
LOADING  The total amount (generally measured in pounds or kilograms
per acre per year) of material (sediment, nutrients, oxygen-demanding
material, or other chemicals or compounds) brought into a lake, stream or
water body by inflowing streams, runoff, direct discharge through pipes,
groundwater, the air (aerial or atmospheric deposition) and other sources
over a specific period of time (often annually).
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID)  Site design approaches and smallscale
stormwater management practices that promote the use of natural
systems for infiltration, evapotranspiration, and reuse of rainwater. LID can
be applied to new development, urban retrofits, and revitalization projects.
LID utilizes design techniques that infiltrate, filter, evaporate, and store
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1) A group of two or more buildings; or
The division or allocation of land or space between or among two
or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for
the purpose of, streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups, or other features;
(2)
(a)
(b) Any subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.23
(c)
23.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S.  10503 et seq.
 913.07 CHARTER  913.07
C:317
runoff close to its source. Rather than rely on costly large-scale conveyance
and treatment systems, LID addresses stormwater through a variety of
small, cost-effective landscape features located on-site.
MAINTENANCE  The action taken to restore or preserve the as-built
functional design of any facility or system.
MEADOW CONDITION  A natural ground cover with less than one viable
tree of a DBH of six inches or greater per 1,500 square feet within 10 years
of application; a cover condition for which SCS curve numbers have been
assigned or to which equivalent Rational Method runoff coefficients have
been assigned.
MS4  Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPALITY  The Town of McCandless.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) 
Created in 1972 under the Clean Water Act to authorize discharges to local
receiving waters only pursuant to governmental permits, in an effort to
reduce point-source and non-point-source pollutants.
NEW DEVELOPMENT  Any activity regulated by this article that is not
considered a redevelopment as defined in this article.
NOAA  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
NONSTRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES  Passive
site design approaches or regulatory approaches that positively impact
water quality and reduce or minimize the generation of stormwater runoff
without requiring the construction of specific or discrete stormwater
management control structures.
NRCS  Natural Resources Conservation Service.
OPEN CHANNEL  Any natural or man-made watercourse or conduit in
which water flows with a free surface.
OPEN VEGETATED CHANNEL  Also known as "swales," "grass channels,"
and "biofilters." These systems are used for the conveyance, retention,
infiltration and filtration of stormwater runoff.
PACD  Pennsylvania Association of Conservation Districts.
PADEP  Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PASTURE CONDITION  A ground cover of grassland or range with
continuous forage for grazing and greater than 75% ground cover and
lightly or only occasionally grazed; a cover condition for which the Soil
Conservation Service curve numbers have been assigned or to which
equivalent Rational Method runoff coefficients have been assigned.
PEAK DISCHARGE  The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENNDOT  Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
 913.07 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.07
C:318
PERCOLATION RATE  The rate of movement of water under hydrostatic
pressure through interstices of rock or soil. For stormwater analysis, it is
typically measured as a distance per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).
PERVIOUS AREA  Any area not defined as impervious.
PREDEVELOPMENT ASSUMPTION  The ground cover assumption used
when analyzing the stormwater runoff characteristics of a drainage area
prior to the proposed development.
PROJECT SITE  The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the Town are planned, conducted or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL  Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work
required by this article.
RAINFALL INTENSITY  The depth of accumulated rainfall per unit of
time.
RATE  Volume per unit of time.
RECEIVING WATERS  Any water bodies, watercourses or wetlands into
which surface waters flow.
RECHARGE  The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration
of rainfall, other surface waters, or land application of water or treated
wastewater.
REDEVELOPMENT  An existing developed property, as of or after the date
of adoption of this article, that is proposed for reconstruction involving the
demolition or partial demolition of the property.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES  Any earth disturbances or any activities that
involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that may affect
post-construction stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY  Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, Chapter
102, or the Clean Streams Law.24
RELEASE RATE PERCENTAGE  The percentage of predevelopment peak
rate of runoff from a watershed subarea (as delineated in the Act 167
watershed plan), which defines the allowable post-development peak
discharge from any development site in that subarea.
RETENTION BASIN  An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate. Retention basins may also be designed to permanently
retain additional stormwater runoff. Retention basins are designed to retain
a permanent pool of water during dry weather.
RETENTION or TO RETAIN  The prevention of direct discharge of
stormwater runoff into receiving waters or water bodies by temporary or
permanent containment in a pond or depression; examples include systems
24.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S.  691.1 et seq.
 913.07 CHARTER  913.07
C:319
which discharge by percolation to groundwater, exfiltration, and/or
evaporation processes and which generally have residence times of less
than three days.
RETURN PERIOD  The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time. For example,
the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to occur on
average once every 25 years.
RIPARIAN  Pertaining to anything connected with or immediately adjacent
to the banks of a stream or other body of water.
RIPARIAN BUFFER  An area of land adjacent to a body of water and
managed to maintain the integrity of stream channels and shorelines to:
RUNOFF  See "stormwater."
SCS  Soil Conservation Service.
SEDIMENT  Fragmented material that originated from weathering rocks
and decomposing organic material that is transported by, suspended in, and
eventually deposited in the streambed.
SEDIMENTATION  Occurs when sediment particles that have been
suspended within flowing water are deposited on the stream bottom or
floodplain.
SEMI-IMPERVIOUS SURFACE  A surface that allows a certain amount of
rainfall or runoff to be abstracted or infiltrated into the substratum of the
area. Gravel is considered a semi-impervious surface.
SHEET FLOW  A flow process associated with broad, shallow water
movement on sloping ground surfaces that is not channelized or
concentrated.
SLAMM  Source Loading and Management Model. This model is based on
small storm hydrology and pollutant runoff from urban land uses. Pollutant
sources are identified, and both structural and nonstructural stormwater
practices can be accounted for in the model.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA  Those areas identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) as floodway area (FW), flood fringe area (FF), and
general floodplain area (FA); where determined by the Town, identified
alluvial soils may be included as well.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS  The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Pennsylvania
Code Title 25 and the Clean Streams Law.25
Reduce the impact of upland sources of pollution by trapping, filtering
and converting sediments, nutrients and other chemicals; and
(a)
(b) Supply food, cover and thermal protection to fish and other wildlife.
25.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
 913.07 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.07
C:320
STORM EVENT  The storm of a specific duration, intensity, and frequency.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BMPs  Is abbreviated as "SWM BMPs" or
"BMPs" throughout this article.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ENGINEER  A professional engineer
hired or appointed by the Town for the review of stormwater-managementrelated
issues.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES  The designed and/or
constructed features which infiltrate, treat, collect, convey, channel, store,
inhibit, or divert the movement of stormwater; such practices include
structural and nonstructural practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN  The approved detailed
analysis, design, and drawings of the stormwater management system are
required for all construction. The plan prepared by the developer or his
representative indicates how stormwater runoff will be managed at the
development site in accordance with this article. "Stormwater management
site plan" will be designated as "SWM site plan" throughout this article.
STORMWATER or RUNOFF  Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES  Any
measures that require the design and construction of a facility to help
reduce or eliminate a non-point source of pollution and control stormwater.
STRUCTURE  Anything constructed or installed with a fixed location on
the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground.
SUBAREA (SUBBASIN)  A portion of the watershed (basin) that has
similar hydrological characteristics and drains to a common point.
SUBDIVISION  As defined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.26
SUBGRADE  The top elevation of graded and compacted earth underlying
roadway pavement.
SWALE  An artificial or natural waterway which may contain contiguous
areas of standing or flowing water only following a rainfall event, or is
planted with or has stabilized vegetation suitable for soil stabilization,
stormwater treatment, and nutrient uptake, or is designed to take into
account the soil erodibility, soil percolation, slope, slope length, and
contributing drainage area so as to prevent erosion and reduce the
pollutant concentration of any discharge.
SWMM  Stormwater Management Model. EPA developed this model for
analyzing stormwater quantity and quality associated with runoff from
urban areas. Both single event and continuous simulation can be performed
on catchments having storm sewers, or combined sewers and natural
drainage, for prediction of flows, stages and pollutant concentrations.
26.Editor's Note: See Part 13, Planning and Zoning Code.
 913.07 CHARTER  913.07
C:321
Information on SWMM is available at http://www.epa.gov/ceampubl/swater/
swmm/index.htm.
TOTAL SITE AREA (SITE AREA)  Total area of the parcel(s) being
developed.
USDA  United States Department of Agriculture.
USDOT FHWA  United States Department of Transportation, Federal
Highway Administration.
WATER BODY  Any natural or artificial pond, lake, reservoir, or other
area which ordinarily or intermittently contains water and which has a
discernible shoreline and receives surface water flow.
WATER TABLE  The uppermost level of saturation of pore space or
fractures by subsurface water in an aquifer. "Seasonal high water table"
refers to a water table that rises and falls with the seasons due either to
natural or man-made causes.
WATERCOURSE  A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, whether natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface
water.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH  Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WATERSHED  A region or land area drained by a river, watercourse, or
other surface water of this commonwealth to a downstream point.
WETLAND  Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas.
WETLANDS  Land areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater with a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions (wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas); or areas that are
defined and delineated in accordance with the Federal Manual for
Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands, dated January 10, 1989,
and as may be amended from time to time; or as further defined and
delineated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, or the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
WOODLAND CONDITION  A natural ground cover with more than one
viable tree of a DBH (diameter at breast height) of six inches or greater
per 1,500 square feet which existed within 10 years of application; a cover
 913.07 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.07
C:322
condition for which SCS curve numbers have been assigned or to which
equivalent rational method runoff coefficients have been assigned.
 913.08. Requirements. [11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1481]
(a) Standards and intent.
(1) The management of stormwater on site, both during and upon
completion of the disturbances associated with activities permitted
under  913.03, shall be accomplished in accordance with the
standards and criteria of this article. The design of any temporary
or permanent facilities and structures and the utilization of any
natural drainage systems shall be in full compliance with this
article.
(2) The intent of these design standards is to encourage
environmentally sound stormwater management practices that
provide necessary drainage facilities while protecting the
hydrologic characteristics and water quality of the site and
watershed. Developments shall be required to incorporate
stormwater management controls. Stormwater management
design shall blend into the natural environment and be
aesthetically integrated into the site design.
(b) Applicants shall refer to the Pennsylvania Storm Water Best
Management Practices Manual, as amended, Pennsylvania Handbook of
Best Management Practices for Developing Areas (PACD, 1998), the
2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual (MDE, 2000) or other
appropriate references for guidance in the design of stormwater
management facilities most appropriate to individual site conditions.
Objectives for design are to reduce the volume of stormwater
generated, infiltrate runoff at its source to the maximum extent
possible, achieve water quality improvement at the source or during
conveyance, and provide for peak flow attenuation. Applicants shall
examine design alternatives by viewing them in a series. In addition,
applicants are strongly encouraged to use structural and nonstructural
stormwater management practices that reduce or eliminate the need
for detention basins.
(c) All SWM design work must be completed by a qualified design
professional. All designs proposing the use of an SWM retention or
detention facility with outlet structure(s) shall be completed by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Pennsylvania.
(d) All development activity within a special flood hazard area designated
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) shall comply
with floodplain provisions of Article 134227 of the Town Code and this
paragraph. All development shall be designed to maintain the floodcarrying
capacity of the floodway such that the base flood elevations
27.Editor's Note: See now Art. 912, Floodplain Construction and Development Requirements.
 913.07 CHARTER  913.08
C:323
are not increased, either upstream or downstream, unless an approval
is received from PADEP. The natural conveyance characteristics of
the site and the receiving floodplain shall be incorporated into the
stormwater management practices proposed for the site.
(e) The stormwater management system shall not create an adverse impact
on stormwater quantity or quality in either upstream or downstream
areas. Off-site areas which discharge to or across a site proposed for
development shall be addressed in the stormwater management plan
prepared for the development. No stormwater management plan shall
be approved until it is demonstrated that the runoff from the project
shall not adversely impact downstream areas.
(f) Existing wetlands shall not be used to meet the minimum design
requirements for stormwater management or stormwater runoff quality
treatment, except when used as part of a treatment train that
incorporates a portion of the outer zone (filter strip) of the wetland's
riparian buffer as a stormwater outfall.
(g) All proposed stormwater management systems shall be designed to
prevent the pollution of groundwater resources by stormwater, promote
safety, minimize health hazards, preserve natural features and provide
infiltration and groundwater recharge where appropriate. Neither
submission of a plan under the provision herein nor compliance with
the provisions of these regulations shall relieve any person from
responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed
by law.
(h) Undue hardship. Waivers or modifications of the requirements of this
article may be approved by the Town if enforcement will exact undue
hardship because of unique physical circumstances or conditions
peculiar to the land in question, provided that the modifications will not
be contrary or detrimental to the public interest and will achieve the
intended outcome, and that the purpose of this article is preserved.
Hardship must be due to such unique physical circumstances or
conditions and not to circumstances or conditions generally created by
the provisions of this article. Cost or financial burden shall not be
considered a hardship. Modifications shall not substantially or
permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property. A request for modifications shall be in writing and accompany
the stormwater management site plan submission.
(i) Where watercourses traverse a development site, drainage easements
shall be provided conforming to the line of such watercourses. The
terms of the easements shall prohibit excavation, the placing of fill or
structures, except as needed for roadways, driveways and walkways, or
any alterations that may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within
any portions of the easement, and require the establishment and
protection of riparian buffers.
 913.08 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.08
C:324
(j) For all regulated activities, stormwater management BMPs shall be
designed, implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes
and requirements of this article and to meet all requirements under
Pennsylvania Code Title 25, the Clean Streams Law,28 and the Storm
Water Management Act.29
(k) Any regulated activity that may affect the stormwater flows toward or
onto a state or county highway right-of-way or facility shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained in accordance with the
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT) or Allegheny County, as the case may be.
(l) At the time of application for a building permit for any approved lot
created by a subdivision and/or improved as a land development
project, issuance of the permit shall be conditioned upon adherence to
the terms of this article.
(m) Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources (e.g.,
special-protection waters, cold water fisheries, recharge areas, water
supply reservoirs, etc.) may be subject to additional performance
criteria or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater
management practices.
(n) For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
article and to meet all requirements under Pennsylvania Code Title 25
and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design standards
are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program
Manual (E&S Manual), Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Protection, No. 363-2134-008, as amended and updated.
(o) No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Town shall
commence until the requirements of this article are met.
(p) Post-construction water quality protection shall be addressed as
required by the stormwater management requirements contained in
this article.
(q) Operations and maintenance of permanent stormwater BMPs shall be
addressed as required by  913.19.
(r) All best management practices (BMPs) used to meet the requirements
of this article shall conform to the state water quality requirements, and
any more-stringent requirements as required by the Town.
(s) Techniques described in Appendix B (Nonstructural Stormwater
Management Practices)30 of this article are encouraged, because they
28.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S.  691.1 et seq.
29.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S.  680.1 et seq.
 913.08 CHARTER  913.08
C:325
 913.09. Watercourses and stormwater collection systems.
[11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1481]
reduce the costs of complying with the requirements of this article and
the state water quality requirements.
(t) In selecting the appropriate BMPs or combinations thereof, the
applicant shall consider the following:
(1) Total contributing area.
(2) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
(3) Slope and depth to bedrock.
(4) Seasonal high water table.
(5) Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
(6) Erodibility of soils.
(7) Land availability and configuration of the topography.
(8) Peak discharge and required volume control.
(9) Stream bank erosion.
(10) Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality
problems.
(11) The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
(12) The nature of the pollutant being removed.
(13) Maintenance requirements.
(14) Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat.
(u) Transference of runoff from one DEP-designated Act 167 watershed to
another shall be prohibited unless approved by the Town.
(v) Completion of PA BMP Checklists 11, 12, and 13 satisfying the pollution
prevention requirements set forth in the BMP Manual.
(a) This section shall pertain to any and all persons making any change of
land in the Town that will block, close, impede, or divert any existing
drain or block, close, impede, or divert any watercourse or stormwater
collection system.
(b) The provisions of this section are established with the following
intentions:
30.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
 913.08 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.09
C:326
(1) Preventing the creation of swamps, bogs, pools of drainage flow,
stagnant water or other similar conditions that do, or threaten to,
injuriously affect the health and welfare of the residents of the
Town.
(2) Safeguarding the residents of the Town from consequences of flood
and stormwaters diverted from their accustomed courses.
(c) Prohibited acts.
(1) No person shall block, close, impede or divert any watercourse or
drain in the Town.
(2) No person shall cause discharge or drainage into a sewer line in or
into a drain or watercourse without first obtaining a written permit
from the Town.
(3) No person shall make any construction on or adjacent to any street,
alley or other public thoroughfare in the Town in such manner as to
block, partially block or bridge any gutter, drain or watercourse in
or adjacent to such street, alley or other public thoroughfare
without first obtaining a written permit from the Town.
(4) No one shall be permitted to direct or divert water onto or into a
public street or public street right-of-way so as to cause an
accumulation of water or ice which, in the opinion of the Town
Manager or Police Chief, constitutes a safety hazard.
(5) No person shall throw, drop, or deposit into any of the storm sewers
within the Town any garbage, refuse, rubbish, petroleum, chemical
products, liquid wastes, grass, tree or brush trimmings, or any
litter, as defined by Town ordinance.
(6) No person(s) shall permit material from an unpaved road or
unpaved driveway to enter a public road or public storm sewer.
(d) Permit; prerequisites. The Town shall issue a written permit authorizing
any installation or construction otherwise a violation of  913.09(c) only
after:
(1) All applicable permits from the PA DEP, U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, and the Allegheny County Conservation District have
been issued.
(2) The receipt of a dated request signed by the person desiring such
installation or construction. If such request contemplates the
installation of a sewer line, then such request shall set forth such
information as will adequately locate the beginning and end of the
sewer line, the type of sewer line to be used, the thickness of the
wall of the sewer line to be used, the material from which the sewer
line is constructed and the amount, contents and location of fill, if
any, that will be placed over the sewer line to be installed. The
request for any other installation or construction must set forth the
 913.09 CHARTER  913.09
C:327
proposed installation and/or construction in such detail as shall be
requested by the Town.
(3) The Town ascertains that the construction and/or installation
described above does not threaten to create any such condition as
is sought to be avoided by the intent of this article.
(4) The applicant has furnished such engineering plans, specifications
and information, or has agreed to reimburse the Town for the
preparation of such engineering plans, specifications and
information, as, in the opinion of the Town, may be required for a
proper evaluation of the particular installation or construction.
 913.09 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.09
C:328
DIVISION 2
Design Provisions
 913.10. Permit requirements by other government entities.
[11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1481]
 913.11. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities. [11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1481]
(a) All regulated earth disturbance activities shall be subject to permit
requirements by DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
(b) Work within natural drainageways, or waterways of the commonwealth,
shall be subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105 and
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 401 and 404 permitting.
(c) Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands,
shall be subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
(d) Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state
highway right-of-way, or require access from a state highway, shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT).
(e) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam shall be subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 105.
(a) No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Town shall
commence until the Town receives a copy of any required approvals
from the Conservation District or DEP for an erosion and sediment
control plan.
(b) The PADEP has regulations that require an erosion and sediment
control plan for any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or
more, under 25 Pa. Code  102.4(b).
(c) In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, a DEP NPDES construction
activities permit is required for regulated earth disturbance activities.
(d) Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or County
Conservation District must be provided to the Town.
(e) A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permits, as required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the
project site at all times.
 913.10 CHARTER  913.11
C:329
 913.12. Prohibited discharges and connections. [11-26-2018 by
Ord. No. 1481]
(f) Additional erosion and sediment control design standards and criteria
are recommended to be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed
and shall include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase to
maintain maximum infiltration capacity.
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until
the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has
achieved final stabilization.
(a) No person in the Town shall allow, or cause to allow, stormwater
discharges into the Town's separate storm sewer system and/or waters
of this commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater,
except:
(1) As provided in Subsection (b) below; and
(2) Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
(b) The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of this
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including dechlorinated water line and fire
hydrant flushings.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(5) Air-conditioning condensate.
(6) Water from individual residential car washing.
(7) Springwater from crawl space pumps.
(8) Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains.
(9) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(10) Lawn watering.
(11) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(12) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
 913.11 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.12
C:330
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(14) Rising groundwaters.
(c) In the event that the Town determines that any of the discharges
identified in  913.12(b) significantly contribute to pollution of waters of
the commonwealth, or is so notified by DEP, the Town or PADEP will
notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.
(d) Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
(e) All chemically treated swimming pool discharges, such as backwash
water, etc., are not permitted to be discharged into the Town's separate
storm sewer system.
(f) A direct connection of a swimming pool discharge line to the Town's
separate storm sewer system is prohibited.
(g) It is strongly encouraged that all swimming pool discharge water be
conveyed into the sanitary sewer system. In situations where swimming
pool discharge water which meets the state water quality requirements
as identified under Pa. Code Title 25, Chapter 93, is proposed to drain
to the Town's separate storm sewer system, the following protocol must
be used:
(1) The owner of the swimming pool must provide to the Town a hold
harmless agreement which shall release the Town from any liability
in the event that the swimming pool discharge results in
degradation of the watercourse into which the pool water is
discharged.
(2) A laboratory analysis must be provided to the Town prior to
authorizing a discharge of the pool waters to the Town's separate
storm sewer system. The analysis must be performed by a certified
and bonded laboratory in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
independent from the pool operator. The analysis must document
that the pool water meets the state water quality requirements as
identified under Pa. Code Title 25, Chapter 93, at the time of the
discharge.
(3) The owner of the swimming pool shall provide in the hold harmless
agreement that the owner will pay any fines levied against the
Town and expenses incurred by the Town in the event that the
swimming pool discharge is discovered to have negatively
impacted a waterway of the commonwealth, the receipt of a
certified laboratory analysis by the Town notwithstanding.
(h) Existing roof drain, underdrain, and sump pump discharges should be
directed to a lawn area or other pervious areas. However, this
discharge should not be directed toward structures on adjacent
properties. If required by the Town, the discharge shall be directed to a
 913.12 CHARTER  913.12
C:331
 913.13. Stormwater management plan. [11-26-2018 by Ord. No.
1481]
stone sump or infiltration BMP. If approved by the Town, the discharge
may also be directly connected to the storm sewer system.
(i) If a direct connection of roof drains or stormwater runoff is permitted
by the Town, the storm lateral shall be constructed in accordance with
the Town of McCandless Standard Design Criteria for Stormwater
Management and Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control (latest
edition). A cleanout shall be constructed near the right-of-way line
(approximately 10 feet from the edge of pavement) for municipal
inspection purposes. The Town reserves the right to access and inspect
the stormwater inspection port as deemed necessary for MS4
compliance documentation.
(j) Any private storm sewer must be equipped with BMPs to address runoff
quality if the development plan is not equipped with a regional
stormwater management facility containing BMPs. BMP measures shall
be privately owned and maintained and must be implemented on the
system on private property prior to the inspection port.
(k) The applicant must demonstrate that the stormwater discharge meets
state water quality requirements in accordance with  913.16 and Pa.
Code Title 25, Chapter 93.
(l) No person shall construct private facilities for stormwater management
purposes within the public right-of-way.
(m) If a storm lateral connection is proposed to traverse a property other
than that which it serves, a private easement agreement must be
recorded with Allegheny County. A copy of this agreement must be
provided to the Town prior to the issuance of a permit.
(a) For all regulated activities not eligible for exemptions pursuant to
 913.06 of this article, the applicant shall submit a stormwater
management plan and report prepared by a professional engineer,
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which shall contain, but
not be limited to, the following: (Final copies of all plans, specifications
and reports shall also be submitted to the Town in an electronic format,
preferably Adobe.pdf format.)
(1) A suitable map of the watershed for any and all named streams
within which the project is proposed (a United States Geological
Survey quadrangle map is usually sufficient) with existing and
proposed development areas presented on the map. The site must
also be shown on a watershed key map indicating the location of
the site within the applicable watersheds. See Appendix A.31
31.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
 913.12 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.13
C:332
(2) Suitable maps and drawings showing all existing natural and
constructed drainage facilities affecting the subject property.
(3) Hydrologic (watershed) and water feature boundaries, including all
areas flowing to the proposed project, existing streams (including
first-order and intermittent streams), springs, lakes, ponds, or
other bodies of water within the project area.
(4) Sufficient topographical information with elevations to verify the
location of all ridges, streams, etc. (two-foot contour intervals
within the project's boundaries and for proposed off-site
improvements; for slopes greater than 15%, five-foot contours are
acceptable).
(5) Notes pertaining to, and locations of, existing standing water, areas
of heavy seepage, springs, wetlands, streams, and hydrologically
sensitive areas. The water quality standards use designation
prescribed by 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 must also be provided on the
plan.
(6) General type of soils within the drainage areas with hydrologic soil
groups noted. The estimated permeability in inches per hour, and
location and results of all soil tests and borings (if needed), should
also be shown on the plan.
(7) 100-year flood elevations for any special flood hazard areas on or
within 100 feet of the property. For redevelopment sites, also show
the ten- and fifty-year flood elevations for any special flood hazard
areas on or within 100 feet of the property. The source of these
elevations shall also be shown on the plans.
(8) Description of current and proposed ground cover and land use.
The total area and percent of impervious cover shall be noted.
Current ground cover and land use should be based on the latest
aerial photography of the area.
(9) A wetland delineation report for the project site with a location
map identifying wetland areas if any were found.
(10) A plan of the proposed stormwater drainage system attributable to
the activity proposed, including runoff calculations, stormwater
management practices to be applied both during and after
development, and the expected project time schedule.
(11) The design computations for all proposed stormwater drainage
systems, including storm-drain pipes, inlets, runoff control
measures and culverts, drainage channels, and other features,
facilities, and stormwater management practices.
(12) A grading plan, including all areas of disturbance of the subject
activity. The total area of disturbance shall be noted in square feet
and acres. Topographic contours showing the existing and
 913.13 CHARTER  913.13
C:333
proposed final contours at an interval of two feet; in areas having
slope of greater than 15%, a five-foot contour interval may be used.
(13) A plan of the erosion and sedimentation procedures to be utilized
as required by Town ordinance and state regulations.
(14) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and peak flows)
on adjacent properties and on any other stormwater collection
system that may receive runoff from the project site and specifics of
how erosion and flooding impacts to adjacent properties will be
avoided or otherwise mitigated.
(15) A plan showing the proposed grading and projected house
locations to assure that upslope runoff will not be directed toward
new or existing homes. Drainage paths and slopes should be shown
on this plan to clearly convey the intent of the grading plan.
(16) An operation and maintenance plan consistent with the
requirements of  913.19. Such a plan should clearly explain how
the proposed facilities operate and the functions they serve.
(17) The name of the development, the name and address of the
property owner and applicant, and the name and address of the
individual or firm preparing the plan.
(18) A North arrow, submission date, graphic scale and revision dates as
applicable shall be included on each page of all plans submitted.
(19) Complete delineation of the flow paths used for calculating the
time of concentration for the predeveloped and post-developed
conditions.
(20) Construction details sufficient to completely express the intended
stormwater design components consistent with this article.
(21) Floodplain boundaries for the 100-year frequency storm are to be
shown for all waterways with a drainage area of 150 acres or
greater.
(22) A listing of all permits required for the site, providing the status of
the permit application(s) and approval(s).
(23) A signature block on the site plan must be provided for municipal
approval.
(24) The approved stormwater management site plan must be on site
throughout construction.
(25) A justification must be included if best management practices
(BMPs) other than green infrastructure and low-impact
development (LID) practices are being used to achieve volume,
rate, and water quality controls.
 913.13 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.13
C:334
(b) All adjacent property owners shall be notified of the project and its
stormwater and BMP installation. Legal proof of this notification must
be provided to the municipality.
 913.13 CHARTER  913.13
C:335

DIVISION 3
Stormwater Management Design Standards
 913.14. Design goals, principles and standards. [11-26-2018 by
Ord. No. 1481]
(a) Design goals. Applicants shall adhere to a holistic design process
incorporating the goals listed below. The objective is to achieve postdevelopment
hydrologic conditions that are consistent with the
predevelopment ground cover assumption for new development [refer
to  913.15(b)] and improve the runoff conditions for redevelopment
[refer to  913.14(c)(3)]. The design goals are:
(1) Minimize the volume of runoff that must be collected, conveyed,
treated and released by stormwater management facilities;
(2) Maintain the natural infiltration process and rate, and infiltrate
runoff at its source when appropriate;
(3) Remove and/or treat pollutants at the source or during conveyance;
(4) Provide for peak flow attenuation, as needed; and
(5) Attenuate runoff to protect the tributaries of the receiving stream.
(b) General principles. The following general principles apply to all
applicable activities pursuant to  913.03:
(1) Incorporate conservation design practices to minimize the amount
of stormwater generated on a site, encourage the disconnection of
impervious land cover, and maximize the use of pervious areas for
stormwater treatment and on-site rainfall infiltration.
(2) Infiltration of surface water runoff at its source is to be a
mechanism for stormwater management based on hydrologic soil
group (or infiltration testing). Infiltration practices include, but are
not limited to, those referenced in  913.16(b)(1) and as outlined in
the publications listed in  913.16. Infiltration practices shall
adhere to the following criteria:
A. In choosing methods of infiltration, preference shall be given to
a combination of surface and subsurface infiltration methods.
B. Applicants shall first consider minimum disturbance/minimum
maintenance techniques combined with site grading that
distributes runoff to reduce concentration. Next, applicants
shall consider depression areas combined with subsurface
infiltration practices followed by other subsurface measures,
including, but not limited to, porous paving and perforated
pipe storage.
C. The use of multiple infiltration features and facilities that
provide for the following is encouraged:
 913.14 CHARTER  913.14
C:337
1. Discourage concentration of flows;
2. Encourage disconnection of flows;
3. Infiltrate as close to the source of runoff as possible; and
4. Reduce visual impact.
D. Where high water tables, subsurface contamination, slope
stability concerns, or other site constraints preclude achieving
the required infiltration volume, additional conservation
design practices and alternative stormwater management
practices should be implemented to reduce to the maximum
extent practicable the total volume of stormwater released to
streams. The applicant shall follow the stormwater runoff
hierarchy of  913.16(a)(1).
E. Infiltration areas should be designed to maintain a broad and
even infiltration pattern which existed prior to development.
Such facilities should use the natural topography and
vegetation in order to blend in with the site. Infiltration designs
which do not provide this may be used if the applicant
demonstrates to the Town's satisfaction that alternative
approaches would be more effective and more harmonious
with their existing environment and as easily maintained.
F. Aboveground stormwater infiltration facilities should be as
shallow as possible while still achieving the requirements of
this article.
(3) Water quality improvement shall be achieved in conjunction with or
as part of infiltration practices. Water quality improvements shall
also be provided for drainage areas not otherwise addressed by
infiltration practices either at the source of runoff and/or during
conveyance away from the source of runoff.
(4) To reduce the need for large retention and/or detention basins
designed to satisfy the peak flow attenuation and extended
detention requirements, other innovative stormwater management
practices located close to the source of runoff generation shall be
considered, including a combination of practices (e.g., rooftop
storage, open vegetated channels, bioretention, pervious pavement
systems and infiltration trenches).
(5) When designing stormwater management facilities to satisfy the
peak flow attenuation and extended detention requirements (refer
to  913.14(c)(2)B), the effect of structural and nonstructural
stormwater management practices implemented as part of the
overall site design may be taken into consideration when
calculating total storage volume and release rates.
 913.14 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.14
C:338
(6) Site hydrology and natural infiltration patterns shall guide site
design, construction and vegetation decisions. All channels,
drainageways, swales, natural streams and other surface water
concentrations shall be considered and, where possible,
incorporated into design decisions.
(c) Minimum performance criteria.
(1) The following minimum performance standards shall apply to all
applicable activities, whether they are new development or
redevelopment, pursuant to  913.03(a):
A. Water quality treatment of stormwater runoff shall be provided
for all discharges prior to release to a receiving water body. If a
stormwater management practice does not provide water
quality treatment, then water quality best management
practices shall be utilized prior to the runoff entering the
stormwater management practice.
B. Water quality management shall be provided through the use
of structural and/or nonstructural stormwater management
practices. Water quality stormwater management practices
shall be designed to reduce or eliminate solids, sediment,
nutrients, and other potential pollutants from the site. It is
presumed that a stormwater management practice complies
with this requirement if it is:
1. Designed according to the specific performance criteria
outlined in  913.08(b);
2. Constructed in accordance with all permits and approved
plans and specifications; and
3. Maintained per an approved operation and maintenance
plan or agreement or, in lieu of that, in accordance with
customary practices.
C. Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher
potential for pollutant loadings (hotspots) may require the use
of specific structural stormwater management practices and
pollution prevention practices. In addition, stormwater from a
hotspot land use shall be provided with proper pretreatment
prior to infiltration. For the purpose of this article, the sites/
facilities listed in  913.14(c)(1)D below are considered
hotspots.
D. Certain industrial sites may be required to prepare and
implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan and file
notice of intent as required under the provisions of the EPA
industrial stormwater NPDES permit requirements. Other
industrial sites storing significant quantities of chemicals/
wastes should also prepare a prevention plan. Sites that are
 913.14 CHARTER  913.14
C:339
required by the EPA to prepare a plan include, but are not
limited to:
1. Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities;
2. Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities;
3. Fleet storage areas for buses, trucks, etc.;
4. Marinas (service and maintenance);
5. Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials.
E. Conveyance structures/channels shall be designed and
adequately sized so as to protect the properties receiving
runoff from impacts of flooding and erosion. Where necessary,
and to the maximum extent permitted under the Municipalities
Planning Code32 and Act 167, or any amendments thereto, a
drainage easement from adjoining properties shall be obtained
to ensure the drainageway and the property and shall also
establish the operation and maintenance requirements for the
drainageway.
F. All stormwater management practices shall have an operation
and maintenance plan pursuant to  913.19(c) of this article,
and if to be privately owned, an enforceable operation and
maintenance agreement per  913.19(d) of this article to
ensure the system functions as designed and to provide
remedies for system failure. A sample agreement may be found
in Appendix C of this article.33
G. Stormwater runoff generated from development and
discharged directly into a jurisdictional wetland or waters of
the United States and their adjacent wetlands shall be treated
by an approved stormwater management practice prior to
release into a natural wetland and shall not be used to meet the
minimum design requirements for stormwater management or
stormwater runoff quality treatment, except when used as part
of a treatment train that incorporates a portion of the outer
zone (filter strip) of the wetland's riparian buffer as a
stormwater outfall. In such instances, the discharge velocity
from the terminal end of a pipe or associated energy
dissipation practice shall not exceed two feet per second for
the two-year frequency storm event. Where such a
management strategy is used, all feasible methods shall be
used to convert concentrated flow to uniform, shallow sheet
flow before entering the outer zone of the wetland's riparian
buffer. In addition, it shall be demonstrated that such an
approach will not cause erosion.
32.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S.  10101 et seq.
33.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
 913.14 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.14
C:340
(2) The following minimum performance standards shall apply to all
applicable new development activities, pursuant to  913.03(a):
A. Water quality improvement shall be achieved in conjunction
with or as part of infiltration practices (if used). Water quality
improvements shall also be provided for drainage areas not
otherwise addressed by infiltration practices either at the
source of runoff and/or during conveyance away from the
source of runoff. Stormwater quality management practices
shall be designed to capture and treat stormwater runoff
generated by the one-inch rainfall event. Refer to
 913.16(a)(2) for water quality volume design standards and
assumptions. Stormwater quality management practice
selection, design and implementation shall be based upon
appropriate reference materials, as provided in  913.08(b).
B. The post-development peak discharge rate shall not exceed the
predevelopment peak discharge rate multiplied by the
"subbasin release rate percentage" (where determined in Act
167 watersheds) for the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-,
fifty- and 100-year twenty-four-hour storm events pursuant to
the predevelopment cover assumption described in
 913.15(b). Refer to Appendix A for release rate percentages
information.34
C. Facilities capable of attenuating rainfall runoff shall be
provided and shall be designed to attenuate the runoff volume
from the one-year twenty-four-hour storm event for at least 24
hours.
D. Stormwater shall be infiltrated and/or discharged within the
same drainage area of the stream receiving the runoff from the
development site prior to development.
E. Structural and nonstructural stormwater management
practices that make the best possible use of infiltration on site
shall be considered in all site designs, when appropriate.
(3) The following minimum performance standards shall apply to all
applicable redevelopment activities, pursuant to  913.03(b):
A. One of the following minimum performance standards shall be
accomplished. Selection of the performance standard shall be
whichever is most appropriate for the given site conditions:
1. Reduce the total impervious cover on the site (e.g., by
replacement of pavement with pervious planting areas or
green roof systems) by at least 25%, based on a
comparison of existing impervious cover to proposed
impervious cover; or
34.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
 913.14 CHARTER  913.14
C:341
2. Provide facilities designed to attenuate the runoff volume
from the one-year twenty-four-hour post-development
storm event for at least 24 hours; or
3. Provide facilities to ensure that the post-development peak
discharge rate shall not exceed the predevelopment peak
discharge rate multiplied by the "subbasin release rate
percentage" (where determined in Act 187 watersheds) for
the two-year and ten-year twenty-four-hour storm events.
A predevelopment cover CN of 71 and a time of
concentration of not less than 10 minutes shall be
assumed.
B. In addition to the minimum performance standards for
redevelopment areas in  913.14(c)(3) above, water quality
improvements shall be provided for drainage areas not
otherwise addressed by infiltration practices either at the
source of runoff and/or during conveyance away from the
source of runoff. Stormwater quality management facilities
shall be designed to capture and treat 0.25 inch of runoff from
all pavement areas (i.e., parking lots, pavements and
noncovered sidewalks). Roof area may be excluded from this
calculation.
(d) Volume controls.
(1) The green infrastructure and low-impact development practices
provided in the BMP Manual shall be utilized for all regulated
activities whenever possible. Water volume controls shall be
implemented using the Design Storm Method in Subsection (d)(1)A
or the Simplified Method in Subsection (d)(1)B below, or alternative
design criteria as allowed by Pa. Code Title 25, Chapter 102.
A. The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is
applicable as a method to any size of regulated activity. This
method requires detailed modeling based on site conditions.
The following shall be incorporated into the CG-1 method:
1. Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume
for all storms equal to or less than the two-year twentyfour-
hour duration precipitation.
2. At least the first one inch of runoff from the net increase in
impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed from
the runoff flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface
waters of this commonwealth. Removal options include
reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration. If the
developer provides justification that the listed removal
options are not feasible, and the designated plan reviewer
agrees, runoff shall be detained in a facility designed for a
twenty-four-hour to seventy-two-hour dewatering time in
an area with a dedicated stormwater system (not
 913.14 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.14
C:342
contributory to a combined sewer system) and shall be
detained in a facility designed for a seventy-two-hour
dewatering time in an area contributory to a combined
sewer system before discharge to local stormwater
systems or the environment.
3. For modeling purposes:
(A) Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas
must be considered meadow in good condition.
(B) 20% of existing impervious area, when present, shall
be considered meadow in good condition in the model
for existing conditions.
B. The Simplfied Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual) provided
below is independent of site conditions and should be used if
the Design Storm Method is not followed. This method is not
applicable to regulated activities greater than one acre or for
projects that require design of stormwater storage facilities.
For new impervious surfaces:
1. Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two
inches of runoff from the net increase in impervious
surfaces.
2. At least the first one inch of runoff from the net increase in
impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed from
the runoff flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface
waters of this commonwealth. Removal options include
reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration. If the
developer provides justification that the listed removal
options are not feasible, and the designated plan reviewer
agrees, runoff shall be detained in a facility designed for a
twenty-four-hour dewatering time in an area with a
dedicated stormwater system (not contributory to a
combined sewer system) and shall be detained in a facility
designed for a seventy-two-hour dewatering time in an
area contributory to a combined sewer system before
discharge to local stormwater systems or the environment.
3. Whenever possible, infiltration facilities should be
designed to accommodate infiltration of the entire
permanently removed runoff; however, in all cases, at least
the first 0.5 inch of the permanently removed runoff
should be infiltrated.
4. This method is exempt from the requirements of Section
304, Rate Controls.
 913.14 CHARTER  913.15
C:343
 913.15. Stormwater runoff calculation criteria. [11-26-2018 by
Ord. No. 1481]
In addition to the infiltration and water quality requirements of this article,
peak flow from those activities resulting in increases in impervious surface
and/or regrading and compaction shall be attenuated consistent with the
following stormwater calculation methods:
(a) The following design storms shall be used for analysis of the pre- and
post-development conditions. These values are applicable to the Soil
Cover Complex Method:
Return Period
(years)
24-Hour Storm
(inches)
1 2.00
2 2.35
5 2.92
10 3.30
25 3.91
50 4.48
100 4.92
The precipitation values for each frequency storm listed above were
abstracted from the precipitation frequency estimates developed by the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration as set forth in NOAA
Atlas 14, Volume 2 (NOAA June 2004). The NOAA data are available
from the Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center of the National
Weather Service.
(b) The following assumptions shall be used for runoff calculations:
(1) For new development sites, the ground cover used as the
predevelopment assumption for runoff calculations shall be as
follows:
A. Wooded sites shall use a ground cover of woodland in good
condition. Portions of a site having more than one viable tree of
a DBH [diameter at breast height (DBH) is the diameter of the
tree stem 4 1/2 feet above the ground] of six inches or greater
per 1,500 square feet shall be considered wooded where such
trees existed within 10 years of application. If there is evidence
of logging within the ten-year period, logged area shall be
considered as woodland in good condition.
B. Agricultural sites shall use a ground cover of pasture in good
condition.
 913.15 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.15
C:344
C. All other portions of a site shall use a ground cover of meadow
in good condition.
D. All watershed area(s) contributing to the point of interest,
including off-site area, shall be considered.
E. For redevelopment sites, see  913.14(c)(3).
(2) The runoff curve numbers listed in the table below shall be used in
developing the runoff calculations for the ground covers noted in
 913.15(b)(1). These values are referenced from Urban Hydrology
for Small Watersheds Technical Release No. 55 (USDA, 1986).
Coefficients for equivalent ground cover conditions shall be used if
a runoff method other than the Soil Cover Complex Method is used.
Ground Cover Hydrologic Soil Group Curve Numbers
A B C D
Woodland 30 55 70 77
Meadow 30 58 71 78
Grass 39 61 74 80
(3) Impervious cover shall have a curve number of 98.
(4) Gravel pavement shall have a curve number of 89.
(5) All new grass and lawn areas that are to be graded or disturbed
shall have a curve number of 80.
(6) Average antecedent moisture conditions, or AMC II, shall be used
(for the Soil Cover Complex Method only for example, TR-55,
TR-20).
(7) A Type II distribution storm (for the Soil Cover Complex Method
only for example, TR-55, TR-20).
(8) For time-of-concentration calculations, sheet flow lengths shall not
exceed 100 feet, and shallow, concentrated flow lengths shall not
exceed 1,000 feet.
(9) The kinematic "n" value in the sheet flow equation should be
applied as per the following table (values taken from TR-55):
Type Value
Impervious surfaces 0.011
Agricultural lands 0.17
Grass, lawn, or open space 0.24
Wooded areas 0.40
 913.15 CHARTER  913.15
C:345
(c) In all plans and designs for stormwater management systems and
facilities submitted to the Engineer for approval, stormwater peak
discharge and runoff shall be determined through the use of the NRCS
Soil Cover Complex Method as set forth in Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55 (USDA, 1986), with specific
attention given to antecedent moisture conditions, flood routing, time of
concentration, and peak discharge specifications included therein and
in the Hydrology National Engineering Handbook, Section 4, (USDA,
1985), both by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service. Note that when TR-55 is used for natural systembased
approaches and practices encouraged herein, calculations must
be performed on a detailed small subarea basis. Use of Technical
Release No. 20 and other methods listed in Table 1 is also acceptable.
The design professional's selection of a specific method shall be based
on the suitability of the method for the given project site conditions with
due consideration to the limitations of the method chosen. Table 1
herein summarizes the computational methods available.
Table 1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Plans
Method Source Applicability
TR-20 or commercial
package based on
TR-20
USDA  NRCS When use of full model
is desirable or
necessary
TR-55 or commercial
package based on
TR-55
USDA  NRCS Applicable for plans
within the model's
limitations
HEC  HMS U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers
When full model is
desirable or necessary
PSRM Penn State University When full model is
desirable or necessary
VT/PSUHM Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and Penn
State University
When full model is
desirable or necessary
HEC-1 U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers
When full model is
desirable or necessary
SWMM or commercial
package based on
SWMM
U.S. EPA Most applicable in
urban areas
Small Storm
Hydrology Method (as
included in SLAMM)
PV & Associates, or
the website
www.winslamm.com
Calculation of runoff
volume from urban
and suburban areas
(d) A Modified Rational Method analysis may be used for drainage areas
and/or development sites smaller than one acre when permitted by the
 913.15 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.15
C:346
 913.16. Standards for stormwater management practices.
[11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1481]
The Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual shall
serve as a guide for the design of stormwater management practices.
Additional design guidance may also be obtained from other related
sources, including the 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual, Volumes
I and II (MDE, 2000), Design of Stormwater Filtering Systems (CWP, 1996),
and the American Society of Civil Engineers Manual and Report on
Engineer. The term "Modified Rational Method" used herein refers to a
procedure for manipulation of the basic Rational Method techniques to
reflect the fact that storms with durations greater than the normal time
of concentration for a basin will result in a larger volume of runoff even
though the peak discharge is reduced. The methodology and model
chosen for use shall be well-documented as being appropriate for use in
this region, and all relevant assumptions, methodologies, calculations
and data used shall be provided to the Engineer for review. Information
on the Modified Rational Method is presented in the Recommended
Hydrologic Procedures for Computing Urban Runoff from Small
Watersheds in Pennsylvania (PADEP, 1982).
(e) Rainfall intensities used for the Modified Rational Method shall be
based on the precipitation frequency estimates developed by the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration as set forth in NOAA
Atlas 14.
(f) The Rational Method (that is, Q = CIA) shall be used for calculations of
the peak rate of runoff for the design of storm sewers and drainage
swales but not for the design of stormwater management facilities
where a full hydrograph is needed. The equation representing the
Rational Method is comprised of the following (in English units):
Q = Peak flow rate, cubic feet per second (CFS).
C = Runoff coefficient, dependent on land use/cover.
I = Design rainfall intensity, inches per hour.
A = Drainage area, acres.
(g) Runoff characteristics of off-site areas that drain through a proposed
development shall be considered and be based on the existing
conditions in the off-site area.
(h) Impervious Area Flash (IAF) analysis. An Impervious Area Flash (IAF)
analysis shall be conducted for all sites. The analysis requires that the
watershed impervious area be modeled without the pervious areas
within the watershed. The time of concentration for the watershed
should also be determined from the impervious areas only. If the IAF
results in a higher post-development peak runoff rate than the postdevelopment
watershed analysis, then this higher value must be used
for the final design of the stormwater management facility.
 913.15 CHARTER  913.16
C:347
Engineering Practice, No. 87, Urban Runoff Quality Management (ASCE,
1998), for the design of stormwater runoff quality control features for site
development. A list of references is provided with this article. The water
quality volume design measures used herein are partially based on the
methodology expressed in the Maryland Manual referenced above.
Pursuant to the design options recommended in the above documents, the
following standards shall be adhered to:
(a) Extended detention, water quality volume, infiltration and
nonstructural BMP credits criteria. The following sizing criteria shall be
followed at all sites required to meet the standards of this article:
(1) Extended detention.
A. Detain the one-year, twenty-four-hour design storm using the
SCS Type II distribution. Provisions shall be made so that the
one-year storm takes a minimum of 24 hours to drain from the
facility from a point where the maximum volume of water from
the one-year storm is captured (i.e., the maximum water
surface elevation is achieved in the facility). Release of water
can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the invert of the water
quality orifice is at the invert of the facility). The design of the
facility shall consider and minimize the chances of clogging
and sedimentation potential.
B. Detention basins shall detain the one-year storm event and
allow it to naturally infiltrate and recharge the groundwater
table if possible. All subsequent orifices and control structures
for the two-, ten-, twenty-five- and 100-year storm events shall
be placed above the maximum water surface elevation of the
one-year storm.
C. Flow from off-site areas must be considered as pass-through
flow if it is conveyed through the BMP and should be modeled
as "pre-developed conditions" for the one-year storm event
only.
(2) Water quality volume.
A. Treatment of the water quality volume (WQv) of stormwater
prior to its release to receiving waters or water bodies shall be
provided at all developments where stormwater management
is required. The WQv equals the storage volume needed to
capture and treat the runoff from storms of one inch or less.
Runoff from the first one inch of rainfall transports most of the
total pollutant load.
The WQv is based on the following equation:
WQv = [(P)(Rv)(A)]/12 (acre-feet)
Where:
 913.16 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.16
C:348
P = Rainfall depth in inches (set to one inch).
Rv = Volumetric runoff coefficient, 0.05 + 0.009(1),
where 1 is percent impervious cover.
A = Site area (acres).
B. The formula assumes approximately 5% runoff from pervious
surfaces and 90% runoff from impervious surfaces. A minimum
of 0.2 inch per acre of runoff volume shall be met at sites or in
drainage areas that have less than 15% impervious cover.
C. Drainage areas having no impervious cover and no proposed
disturbance during development may be excluded from the
WQv calculations. However, designers are encouraged to
incorporate water quality treatment practices for these areas.
D. Stormwater quality treatment. The final WQv shall be treated
by an acceptable stormwater management practice(s) from
those described in this section or as approved by the Town.
E. For new developments and redevelopments, infiltration is
considered an acceptable method of satisfying part or all of the
water quality volume.
F. For new developments, the WQv requirements of this section
shall be sized and designed in conjunction with the standards
under  913.16(a)(1).
G. As a basis for design, the following assumptions may be made:
1. Multiple drainage areas. When a project contains or is
divided by multiple drainage areas, the WQv volume shall
be addressed for each drainage area.
2. Off-site drainage areas. The WQv shall be based on the
impervious cover of the proposed site. Off-site existing
impervious areas may be excluded from the calculation of
the water quality volume requirements.
(3) Infiltration volume. Where possible, all of the water quality volume
should be treated using infiltration BMPs. The following calculation
shall be used to determine the minimum recharge goal for the site:
Recharge Volume (Rev), (acre-feet)
Fraction of WQv, depending on soil hydrologic group.
Rev = (S)(Ai)
Where:
S = Soil-specific recharge factor in inches.
Ai = The measured impervious cover.
 913.16 CHARTER  913.16
C:349
Hydrologic Soil Group
Soil-Specific Recharge Factor
(S)
A 0.40 inch of runoff
B 0.25 inch of runoff
C 0.10 inch of runoff
D 0.05 inch of runoff
A. Infiltrated volume may be subtracted from the total site WQv.
B. Infiltration should not be considered for sites or areas of sites
that have activities that may allow pollution to be infiltrated.
For example, the use of infiltration for the runoff of a service
station's paved lot would not be appropriate, although roof
water from the service station may be infiltrated.
C. Infiltration should only be used when, in the opinion of a
professional engineer, it will not contribute to slope instability
or cause seepage problems into basements or developed
downgradient areas.
D. If more than one hydrologic soil group is present at a site, a
composite recharge volume shall be computed based upon the
proportion of total site area within each hydrologic soil group.
E. All infiltration facilities shall be set back at least 20 feet from
all structures with subgrade elements (e.g., basements,
foundation walls).
F. All infiltration facilities shall be set back at least 20 feet from
all property lines and road rights-of-way.
G. A detailed, on-site infiltration test is required at the location of
all infiltration BMPs.
(4) Credits for use of nonstructural BMPs. The developer may obtain
credits for the use of nonstructural BMPs using the procedures
outlined below. Examples of nonstructural credit calculations are
provided in Appendix E.35
A. Volume Reduction Method No. 1: Natural Area Conservation.
1. A water quality volume reduction can be taken when
undisturbed natural areas are conserved on a site, thereby
retaining their predevelopment hydrologic and water
quality characteristics. Under this method, a designer
would be able to subtract the conservation areas from the
total site area when computing the water quality
protection volume. An added benefit is that the post-
35.Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
 913.16 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.16
C:350
development peak discharges will be smaller, and, hence,
water quantity control volumes will be reduced due to
lower post-development curve numbers or Rational
Formula "C" values.
2. Rule: Subtract conservation areas from total site area
when computing water quality protection volume
requirements.
3. Criteria:
(A) Conservation area cannot be disturbed during project
construction and must be protected from sediment
deposition. The conservation area shall be protected
with a safety fence until construction has been
completed. After construction, the area shall be
posted with signage indicating that it is a conservation
area.
(B) Shall be protected by limits of disturbance clearly
shown on all construction drawings.
(C) Shall be located within an acceptable conservation
easement instrument that ensures perpetual
protection of the proposed area. The easement must
clearly specify how the natural area vegetation shall
be managed and boundaries will be marked. [Note:
Managed turf (e.g., playgrounds, regularly maintained
open areas) is not an acceptable form of vegetation
management.]
(D) Shall have a minimum contiguous area requirement of
10,000 square feet.
(E) Rv is kept constant when calculating WQv.
(F) Must be forested or have a stable, natural ground
cover.
B. Volume Reduction Method No. 2: Stream Buffers.
1. This reduction can be taken when a stream buffer
effectively treats stormwater runoff. Effective treatment
constitutes treating runoff through overland flow in a
naturally vegetated or forested buffer. Under the proposed
method, a designer would be able to subtract areas
draining via overland flow to the buffer from total site area
when computing water quality protection volume
requirements. The design of the stream buffer treatment
system must use appropriate methods for conveying flows
above the annual recurrence (one-year storm) event.
 913.16 CHARTER  913.16
C:351
2. Rule: Subtract areas draining via overland flow to the
buffer from total site area when computing water quality
protection volume requirements.
3. Criteria:
(A) The minimum undisturbed buffer width shall be 50
feet from top of bank.
(B) The maximum contributing length shall be 150 feet for
pervious surfaces and 75 feet for impervious surfaces.
(C) The average contributing slope shall be 3% maximum
unless a flow spreader is used. In no case shall the
average contributing slope be greater than 10%.
(D) Runoff shall enter the buffer as overland sheet flow. A
flow spreader can be installed to ensure this.
(E) Buffers shall remain as naturally vegetated or forested
areas and will require only routine debris removal or
erosion repairs.
(F) Rv is kept constant when calculating WQv.
(G) Not applicable if overland flow filtration/groundwater
recharge reduction is already being taken.
C. Volume Reduction Method No. 3: Enhanced Swales.
1. This reduction may be taken when enhanced swales are
used for water quality protection. Under the proposed
method, a designer would be able to subtract the areas
draining to an enhanced swale from total site area when
computing water quality protection volume requirements.
An enhanced swale can fully meet the water quality
protection volume requirements for certain kinds of lowdensity
residential development (see Volume Reduction
Method No. 5). An added benefit is the post-development
peak discharges will likely be lower due to a longer time of
concentration for the site.
2. Rule: Subtract the areas draining to an enhanced swale
from total site area when computing water quality
protection volume requirements.
3. Criteria:
(A) This method is typically only applicable to moderateor
low-density residential land uses (three dwelling
units per acre maximum).
 913.16 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.16
C:352
(B) The maximum flow velocity for the water quality
design storm shall be less than or equal to 1.0 foot per
second.
(C) The minimum residence time for the water quality
storm shall be five minutes.
(D) The bottom width shall be a maximum of six feet. If a
larger channel is needed, use of a compound cross
section is required.
(E) The side slopes shall be 3:1 (horizontal:vertical) or
flatter.
(F) The channel slope shall be 3% or less.
(G) Rv is kept constant when calculating WQv.
D. Volume Reduction Method No. 4: Overland Flow Filtration/
Groundwater Recharge Zones.
1. This reduction can be taken when "overland flow filtration/
infiltration zones" are incorporated into the site design to
receive runoff from rooftops or other small impervious
areas (e.g., driveways, small parking lots, etc.). This can be
achieved by grading the site to promote overland
vegetative filtering or by providing infiltration or "rain
garden" areas. If impervious areas are adequately
disconnected, they can be deducted from total site area
when computing the water quality protection volume
requirements. An added benefit will be that the postdevelopment
peak discharges will likely be lower due to a
longer time of concentration for the site.
2. Rule: If impervious areas are adequately disconnected,
they can be deducted from total site area when computing
the water quality protection volume requirements.
3. Criteria:
(A) Relatively permeable soils (Hydrologic Soil Groups A
and B) should be present.
(B) Runoff shall not come from a designated hotspot.
(C) The maximum contributing impervious flow path
length shall be 75 feet.
(D) Downspouts shall be at least 10 feet away from the
nearest impervious surface to discourage
"reconnections."
 913.16 CHARTER  913.16
C:353
(E) The disconnection shall drain continuously through a
vegetated channel, swale, or filter strip to the
property line or structural stormwater control.
(F) The length of the "disconnection" shall be equal to or
greater than the contributing length.
(G) The entire vegetative "disconnection" shall be on a
slope less than or equal to 3%.
(H) The surface impervious area tributary to any one
discharge location shall not exceed 5,000 square feet.
(I) For those areas draining directly to a buffer, reduction
can be obtained from either overland flow filtration or
stream buffers (see Method No. 2).
(J) Rv is kept constant when calculating WQv.
E. Volume Reduction Method No. 5: Environmentally Sensitive
Large Lot Subdivisions.
1. This reduction can be taken when a group of
environmental site design techniques are applied to lowand
very-low-density residential development [e.g., one
dwelling unit per two acres (du/ac) or lower]. The use of
this method can eliminate the need for structural
stormwater controls to treat water quality protection
volume requirements. This method is targeted towards
large lot subdivisions and will likely have limited
application.
2. Rule: Targeted towards large lot subdivisions (e.g., twoacre
lots and greater). The requirement for structural
facilities to treat the water quality protection volume may
be waived.
3. Criteria:
(A) For single lot development:
a. Total site impervious cover is less than 15%.
b. Lot size shall be at least two acres.
c. Rooftop runoff is disconnected in accordance with
the criteria in Method No. 4.
d. Grass channels are used to convey runoff versus
curb and gutter.
(B) For multiple lots:
 913.16 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.16
C:354
a. Total impervious cover footprint shall be less than
15% of the area.
b. Lot areas should be at least two acres, unless
clustering is implemented. Open space
developments should have a minimum of 25% of
the site protected as natural conservation areas
and shall be at least a half acre average individual
lot size.
c. Grass channels should be used to convey runoff
versus curb and gutter (see Method No. 3).
d. Overland flow filtration/infiltration zones should
be established (see Method No. 4).
(b) Stormwater infiltration practices.
(1) In selecting the appropriate infiltration BMPs, the applicant shall
consider the following:
A. Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
B. Slope and depth to bedrock.
C. Seasonal high water table.
D. Proximity to building foundations and well heads.
E. Erodibility of soils.
F. Land availability and topography.
G. Slope stability.
H. Effects on nearby properties and structures.
(2) A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be performed to
determine the suitability of infiltration BMPs. The evaluation shall
be performed by a qualified professional and, at a minimum,
address soil permeability, depth to bedrock and slope stability. The
general process for designing the infiltration BMP shall be:
A. Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and manmade
features within the watershed to determine general
areas of suitability for infiltration BMPs.
B. Provide field testing data to determine appropriate percolation
rate and/or hydraulic connectivity.
C. Design infiltration BMPs for required stormwater volume
based on field-determined capacity at the level of the proposed
infiltration surface.
 913.16 CHARTER  913.16
C:355
(3) Soil characteristics are subject to the specific considerations
below:
A. Infiltration BMPs are particularly appropriate in Hydrologic
Soil Groups A and B, as described in the Natural Resources
Conservation Manual TR-55.
B. Low-erodibility factors ("K" factors) are preferred for the
construction of basins.
C. There must be a minimum depth of 48 inches between the
bottom of any facility and the seasonal high water table and/or
bedrock (limiting zones), except for infiltration BMPs receiving
only roof runoff which shall be placed in soils having a
minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the facility
and the limiting zone.
D. There must be an infiltration and/or percolation rate sufficient
to accept the additional stormwater load and to drain
completely as determined by field tests.
E. The infiltration system shall have positive overflow controls to
prevent storage within one foot of the finished surface or
grade.
F. Infiltration rates shall not be used for computing the storage
volume of the infiltration system.
G. Surface inflows shall be designed to prevent direct discharge
of sediment into the infiltration system.
(4) The recharge volume provided at the site shall be directed to the
most-permeable hydrologic soil group available, except where
other considerations apply, such as in limestone geology.
(5) Any infiltration BMP, shall be capable of completely infiltrating the
impounded water within 48 hours. The forty-eight-hour period is to
be measured from the end of the twenty-four-hour design storm.
(6) The Town may require additional analyses for stormwater
management facilities proposed for susceptible areas such as:
A. Strip mines.
B. Storage areas for salt, chloride, other materials for winter
deicing.
C. Unstable and steep slopes.
(7) During the period of land disturbance, runoff shall be controlled
prior to entering any proposed infiltration area. Areas proposed for
infiltration BMPs shall be protected from sedimentation and
compaction during the construction phase so as to maintain their
maximum infiltration capacity.
 913.16 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.16
C:356
(8) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until
the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has
received final stabilization.
(9) Infiltration facilities shall be selected based on suitability of soils
and site conditions. Acceptable infiltration facilities include, but
are not limited to: filter strips or stormwater filtering systems (for
example, bioretention facilities, sand filters), open vegetated
channels (that is, dry swales and wet swales), infiltration trenches,
dry wells, infiltration basins, porous paving systems, retention
basins, wet extended detention ponds, riparian corridor
management, riparian forested buffers, rooftop runoff management
systems, and sand filters (closed or open).
(10) Where sediment transport in the stormwater runoff is anticipated
to reach the infiltration system, appropriate permanent measures
to prevent or collect sediment shall be installed prior to discharge
to the infiltration system.
(11) All infiltration facilities shall be set back at least 20 feet from all
structures with subgrade elements (e.g., basements, foundation
walls).
(12) All infiltration facilities that serve more than one lot and are
considered a common facility shall have a private drainage
easement. The easement shall provide to the Town the right of
access.
(13) If detailed infiltration study is required, the following guidelines
shall be followed:
A. Soil evaluations shall be performed to determine the feasibility
and extent to which infiltration systems can be used. The
evaluation shall be performed by a qualified, licensed
geologist, geotechnical/civil engineer or soil scientist and, at a
minimum, address soil types, soil permeability, depth to
bedrock, limitations of soils, presence/absence of carbonate
geology, susceptibility to subsidence and/or sinkhole
formation, and subgrade stability. The testing and evaluation
should be completed at the preliminary design stage.
B. Infiltration requirements shall be based on the portions of the
site that are permeable prior to disturbance and the degree to
which development will reduce the permeability of the site.
Permeability of the site shall be determined based on the
detailed evaluations described herein. Use of stormwater
management facilities to retain stormwater for infiltration
should be applied to all areas where the soils evaluation
indicates favorable conditions. Areas generally not favorable
for infiltration shall still be provided with an appropriate water
quality practice.
 913.16 CHARTER  913.16
C:357
C. Soil infiltration tests shall be performed to an equivalent depth
or elevation of the bottom of the proposed infiltration areas.
These tests shall follow the procedures of percolation test
holes as established by the Allegheny County Health
Department (ACHD) for on-lot septic systems or Appendix C,
Site Evaluation and Soil Testing, in the PA Stormwater BMP
Manual.
D. The testing shall include a test pit and percolation test holes.
The test hole shall be excavated to a depth so that the presence
or absence of bedrock and/or seasonal high water table can be
determined. A soil log describing the soils present in each test
pit shall be performed. All test holes used for evaluating the
percolation rate shall be presoaked in accordance with the
procedures established by the ACHD. The location and number
of test pits and percolation holes shall be determined based on
the type(s) of stormwater management facilities being
designed. Acceptability of infiltration rates shall be based on
sound engineering judgment and recommended design
considerations described in the design manuals listed in the
references or other source material acceptable to the
Engineer.
(14) The following design and construction standards shall be followed
when planning and constructing infiltration BMPs:
A. The lowest elevation of the infiltration area shall be at least two
feet above the seasonal high water table and bedrock.
B. Where roof drains are designed to discharge to infiltration
facilities, they shall have appropriate measures to prevent
clogging by unwanted debris (for example, silt, leaves and
vegetation). Such measures shall include, but are not limited
to, leaf traps, gutter guards and cleanouts.
C. All infiltration facilities shall have appropriate positive
overflow controls to prevent storage within one foot of the
finished surface or grade, unless a specific amount of surface
storage away from pedestrian and vehicular traffic is provided
and such areas infiltrate the stored volume within 48 hours
after the end of the twenty-four-hour design storm.
D. All infiltration facilities shall be designed to infiltrate the
stored volume within 48 hours after the end of the twenty-fourhour
design storm.
E. All surface inflows shall be treated to prevent the direct
discharge of sediment into the infiltration facility. Accumulated
sediment reduces stormwater storage capacity and ultimately
clogs the infiltration mechanism. No sand, salt or other
particulate matter may be applied to a porous (pervious)
surface for winter ice conditions.
 913.16 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.16
C:358
F. During site construction, all infiltration practice components
shall be protected from compaction due to heavy equipment
operation or storage of fill or construction material. Infiltration
areas shall also be protected from sedimentation. Areas that
are accidentally compacted or graded shall be remediated to
restore soil composition and porosity. Adequate documentation
to this effect shall be submitted for review by the Engineer. All
areas designated for infiltration shall not receive runoff until
the contributory drainage area has achieved final stabilization.
G. The following procedures and materials shall be required
during the construction of all subsurface facilities:
1. Excavation for the infiltration facility shall be performed
with equipment that will not compact the bottom of the
seepage bed/trench or like facility.
2. The bottom of the bed and/or trench shall be scarified
prior to the placement of aggregate.
3. Only clean aggregate with documented porosity, free of
fines, shall be allowed.
4. The tops and sides of all seepage beds, trenches, or like
facilities shall be covered with drainage fabric. Fabric shall
meet the specifications of PennDOT Publication 408,
Section 735, Construction Class 1.
5. Perforated distribution pipes connected to centralized
catch basins and/or manholes with the provision for the
collection of debris shall be provided in all facilities. Where
perforated pipes are used to distribute stormwater to the
infiltration practice, stormwater shall be distributed
uniformly throughout the entire seepage bed/trench or like
facility.
(c) Open vegetated channels.
(1) Open vegetated channels are conveyance systems that are
engineered to also perform as water quality and infiltration
facilities. Such systems can be used for the conveyance, retention,
infiltration, and filtration of stormwater runoff.
(2) Open vegetated channels primarily serve a water quality function
(WQv); they also have the potential to augment infiltration.
Examples of such systems include, but are not limited to: dry
swales, wet swales, grass channels, and biofilters. Open vegetated
channels are primarily applicable for land uses such as roads,
highways, residential developments (dry swales only) and pervious
areas.
 913.16 CHARTER  913.16
C:359
(3) Open vegetated channels shall be designed to meet the following
minimum standards:
A. The channel shall be designed to safely convey the ten-year
frequency storm event with a freeboard of at least 12 inches.
"Freeboard" is the difference between the elevation of the
design flow in the channel and the top elevation of the channel.
B. The peak velocity of the runoff from the ten-year storm shall be
nonerosive for the soil and ground cover provided in the
channel.
C. The longitudinal slope shall be no greater than 4%.
D. Channels shall be trapezoidal in cross section.
E. Channels shall be designed with moderate side slopes of four
horizontal to one vertical. Flatter side slopes may be necessary
under certain circumstances.
F. The maximum allowable ponding time in the channel shall be
less than 48 hours.
G. Channels (for example, dry swales) may require an underdrain
in order to function and dewater.
H. Channels shall be designed to temporarily store the WQv
within the system for a maximum period of 48 hours and a
minimum period of one hour.
I. Landscape specifications shall address the grass species,
wetland plantings (if applicable), soil amendment and hydric
conditions present along the channel.
J. Accumulated sediment within the channel bottom shall be
removed when 25% of the original WQv volume has been
exceeded. The channel shall be provided with a permanent
concrete cleanout marker that indicates the 25% loss level.
K. Check dams along the channel length may be warranted.
L. The bottom of dry swales shall be situated at least two feet
above the seasonal high water table.
(4) Additional design information for open vegetated channels is
available in Design of Roadside Channels with Flexible Linings,
HEC 15, FHWA, September 2005.
(d) Retention basins.
(1) Retention basins shall be designed to create a healthy ecological
community with sufficient circulation of water to prevent the
growth of unwanted vegetation and mosquitoes or other vectors. If
circulation cannot be provided via natural means, then artificial
 913.16 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.16
C:360
aeration and circulation shall be provided. Care shall be taken to
landscape retention basins in accordance with  913.17.
(2) The retention basin shall be of sufficient size to allow the
appropriate aquatic community needed to maintain healthy pond
ecology and avoid mosquitoes capable of carrying West Nile virus
and other diseases. The Allegheny County Health Department, the
Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission, the Natural Resources
Conservation Service, the Pennsylvania Extension Service, or other
qualified professional consultant shall be consulted during the
design of these facilities in order to ensure the health of aquatic
communities and minimize the risk of creating mosquito breeding
areas.
(3) An outlet structure shall be designed to allow complete drainage of
the pond for maintenance.
(4) The design of a retention basin shall include the determination of
the proposed site's ability to support a viable permanent pool. The
design shall take into account such factors as the available and
required rate and quality of dry weather inflow, the stormwater
inflow, seasonal and longer-term variations in groundwater table,
and impacts of potential pollutant loadings.
(5) Sediment storage volume equal to at least 20% of the volume of the
permanent pool shall be provided.
(6) A sediment forebay with a hardened bottom shall be provided at
each inlet into the retention basin. The forebay storage capacity
shall at a minimum be 10% of the permanent pool storage. The
forebay shall be designed to allow for access by maintenance
equipment for periodic cleaning. A permanent concrete cleanout
maker shall be installed in the forebay to indicate the level where
25% for the forebay storage has been used.
(7) Emergency spillways shall be sized and located to permit the safe
passage of stormwater flows from an unattenuated 100-year postdevelopment
storm with one foot of freeboard. The maximum
velocities in vegetated spillways excavated in otherwise
undisturbed soil shall be analyzed based upon the velocity of peak
flow in the emergency spillway during an assumed clogged primary
outlet condition. Where maximum velocities exceed design
standards contained in the Engineering Field Manual for
Conservation Practices (USDA, SCS, July 1984), suitable lining
shall be provided. All emergency spillways placed on fill materials
shall be lined. Lining for emergency spillways shall incorporate
native colors and materials where possible, including mono slab
revetments, grass pavers, riprap and native stone.
(8) Basin and pond embankments must be designed by a professional
engineer registered in the State of Pennsylvania. The design must
include an investigation of the subsurface conditions at the
 913.16 CHARTER  913.16
C:361
proposed embankment location to evaluate settlement potential,
groundwater impacts, and the need for seepage controls. The
submittal of a geotechnical report from a geotechnical engineer
for any embankment over 10 feet in effective height or posing
a significant hazard to downstream property or life is required.
The selection of fill materials must be subject to approval of the
design engineer. Fill must be free of frozen soil, rocks over six
inches, sod, brush, stumps, tree roots, wood, or other perishable
materials. Embankment fills less than 10 feet in fill height must
be compacted using compaction methods that would reasonably
guarantee that the fill density is at least 90% of the maximum
density as determined by standard proctor (ASTM-698). All
embankment fills more than 10 feet in fill height must be
compacted to at least 90% of the maximum density as determined
by standard proctor (ASTM-698) and must have their density
verified by field density testing. A PADEP dam permit is required
for embankments having a maximum depth of water, measured
from the upstream toe of the dam to the top of the dam at maximum
storage elevation, of greater than 15 feet; and/or for ponds having
contributory drainage area of greater than 100 acres; and/or for
impoundments of greater than 50 acre-feet.
(9) The embankment's interior and exterior slopes may not be steeper
than 3:1 (three horizontal to one vertical).
(10) The minimum embankment width shall be five feet for
embankments less than three in height, 10 feet if the embankment
is between 3.1 feet and 9.9 feet in height, and 15 feet if the
embankment is higher than 10 feet.
(11) Existing ponds or permanent pool basins can be used for
stormwater management, provided that it can be demonstrated
that the ponds are structurally sound and meet the design
requirements herein.
(12) Inlet structures and outlet structures shall be separated to the
greatest extent possible in order to maximize the flow path through
the retention basin.
(13) Retention basins shall be designed to provide a length-to-width
ratio of at least 3L:1W as measured in plan view (for example, a
ratio of 4L:1W is too narrow).
(14) The retention basin depth shall average three to six feet.
(15) The interior slope of the pond shall be 4H:1V or flatter. A five-footwide
bench around the pond perimeter is required at an elevation
of one foot below the permanent water surface elevation. A
structural or vegetative barrier may be required by the Town.
 913.16 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.16
C:362
(16) Any side slopes below the permanent water surface level shall not
exceed 3H:1V. Interior side slopes above the permanent water
surface level shall not exceed 3H:1V.
(17) Stabilization. Proper stabilization structures, including stilling
basins, energy dissipaters, and channel lining, shall be constructed
at the outlets of all retention basins and emergency spillways. The
stabilization structures shall control water to: avoid erosion,
reduce velocities of released water and direct water so that it does
not interfere with downstream activities.
(18) Energy dissipaters shall be installed to prevent erosion and/or
initiate sheet flow at points where pipes or drainageways discharge
to or from basins. Energy dissipaters shall comply with criteria in
Hydraulic Design of Energy Dissipaters for Culverts and Channels,
HEC 14, FHWA, July, 2006. Such facilities shall be both functional
and harmonious with the surrounding environment; for example,
native rock shall be used in constructing dissipaters where
practical.
(19) Discharge points. The minimum distance between a proposed basin
discharge point (including the energy dissipater, etc.) and a
downstream property boundary shall in no case be less than 20
feet. Where there is discharge onto or through adjacent properties
prior to release to a stream, designers shall demonstrate how
downstream properties are to be protected. The Engineer may
require that the setback distance be increased based upon factors
such as topography, soil conditions, the size of structures, the
location of structures, and discharge rates. A drainage easement
may also be required.
(20) Outlet structures. Outlet structures shall meet the following
specifications:
A. To minimize clogging and to facilitate cleaning and inspecting,
outlet pipes shall have an internal diameter of at least 15
inches and a minimum grade of 1%.
B. Bentonite plugs shall be provided on all outlet pipes within a
constructed berm.
C. All principal outlet structures shall be built using reinforced
concrete with watertight construction joints.
D. The use of architecturally treated concrete, stucco, painted
surface or stone facade treatment shall be considered for
enhancing the outlet structure. Such facilities shall be both
functional and harmonious in design with the surrounding
environment.
E. Outlet pipes shall be constructed of reinforced concrete with
rubber gaskets in conformance with AASHTO M170, M198 and
 913.16 CHARTER  913.16
C:363
M207, or smooth interior HDPE pipe in conformance with
AASHTO M252 or M294.
F. Basin outlet structures shall have childproof, nonclogging
trash racks over all design openings exceeding 12 inches in
diameter except those openings designed to carry perennial
stream flows. Periodic cleaning of debris from trash racks shall
be included in the operation and maintenance plan.
G. Anti-vortex devices, consisting of a thin vertical plate normal to
the basin berm, shall be provided at the top of all circular
risers or standpipes.
(21) An easement 25 feet in width must be provided around the top
perimeter of all retention facilities. This easement shall remain
clear of any structures, sheds, retaining walls, swing sets, stored
debris, etc. The entire twenty-five-foot easement, unless otherwise
approved by the Town, must remain on the applicant's property.
(22) All detention facilities shall be provided with an access road (with a
legal easement) for maintenance purposes. The design criteria for
such access roads shall be as follows:
A. Access roads shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide and have a
maximum grade of 15%.
B. Access must be provided from a public street to the berm of the
facility so that equipment can obtain access to the outlet
control works without entering the water impoundment area.
C. Access roads with gradients of 3% or less are permitted to be
constructed with a stabilized base material and natural surface
or equal as approved by the Town.
D. Access roads with gradients of 10% or less are permitted to be
constructed with a stabilized base material and bituminous
seal coat surface in accordance with PennDOT Publication 408,
Section 470, or equal as approved by the Town.
E. A permanent easement must be provided for the access
roadway from the public right-of-way to the stormwater
detention facility. This easement shall be a minimum of 25 feet
in width.
F. Access roads with gradients exceeding 10% shall be
constructed with full depth bituminous pavement or concrete
surfacing as approved by the Town.
G. Where deemed necessary by the Town, a permanent gate shall
be provided for the access roadway. The design for the gate
must be submitted to and approved by the Town.
(e) Detention basins.
 913.16 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.16
C:364
(1) The landscape standards of  913.17 shall apply.
(2) The maximum interior side slopes shall not exceed four horizontal
to one vertical (4H:1V). The minimum required slope for the basin
bottom is 2%. A level bottom is acceptable, provided the designer
demonstrates to the Town's satisfaction that the basin bottom will
be landscaped with appropriate wetland vegetation pursuant to
 913.17. In addition, detention basins of sufficient size and slope
may serve other functions as well, including recreational uses,
which do not hinder or conflict with the function of the detention
basin.
(3) Inlet structures. The inlet pipe invert into a basin shall be set above
the one-year quality storm elevation or a minimum of six inches
above the basin floor or lining so that the pipe can adequately drain
after rainstorms. Inlets shall discharge into areas of the basin that
slope toward the outlet structure.
(4) Inlet structures and outlet structures shall be separated to the
greatest extent possible in order to maximize the flow path through
the retention basin.
(5) Low-flow channels. Low-flow channels constructed of concrete or
asphalt are not permitted. Where low-flow channels are necessary,
they shall be composed of a natural or bioengineered material.
Low-flow channels shall be designed to promote water quality and
slow the rate of flow through the basin. Low-flow channels may also
be designed to infiltrate where practical. The minimum slope of a
low-flow channel shall be 1%.
(6) Outlet structures. Outlet structures shall meet the following
specifications:
A. To minimize clogging and to facilitate cleaning and inspection,
outlet pipes shall have an internal diameter of at least 15
inches and a minimum grade of 1%.
B. Bentonite plugs shall be provided on all outlet pipes within a
constructed berm.
C. All principal outlet structures shall be built using reinforced
concrete with watertight construction joints.
D. The use of architecturally treated concrete, stucco, painted
surface or stone facade treatment shall be considered for
enhancing the outlet structure. Such facilities shall be both
functional and harmonious in design with the surrounding
environment.
E. Outlet pipes shall be constructed of reinforced concrete with
rubber gaskets in conformance with AASHTO M170, M198 and
 913.16 CHARTER  913.16
C:365
M207, or smooth interior HDPE pipe in conformance with
AASHTO M252 or M294.
F. Energy-dissipation facilities that convert concentrated flow to
uniform shallow sheet flow shall be used where appropriate.
G. Basin outlet structures shall have childproof, nonclogging
trash racks over all design opening exceeding 12 inches in
diameter except those openings designed to carry perennial
stream flows.
H. Anti-vortex devices, consisting of a thin vertical plate normal to
the basin berm, shall be provided at the top of all circular
risers or standpipes.
(7) Emergency spillways shall be sized and located to permit the safe
passage of stormwater flows from an unattenuated 100-year postdevelopment
storm with one foot of freeboard. The maximum
velocities in vegetated spillways excavated in otherwise
undisturbed soil shall be analyzed based upon the velocity of peak
flow in the emergency spillway during an assumed clogged primary
outlet condition. Where maximum velocities exceed design
standards contained in the Engineering Field Manual for
Conservation Practices (USDA, SCS, July 1984), suitable lining
shall be provided. In general, emergency spillways should not be
located in fill areas; all such facilities placed on fill materials shall
be lined. Lining for emergency spillways shall incorporate native
colors and materials where possible, including mono slab
revetments, grass pavers, riprap and native stone.
(8) Basin and pond embankments must be designed by a professional
engineer registered in the State of Pennsylvania. The design must
include an investigation of the subsurface conditions at the
proposed embankment location to evaluate settlement potential,
groundwater impacts, and the need for seepage controls. The
submittal of a geotechnical report from a geotechnical engineer for
any embankment over 10 feet in effective height or posing a
significant hazard to downstream property or life is required. The
selection of fill materials must be subject to approval of the design
engineer. Fill must be free of frozen soil, rocks over six inches, sod,
brush, stumps, tree roots, wood, or other perishable materials.
Embankment fills less than 10 feet in fill height must be compacted
using compaction methods that would reasonably guarantee that
the fill density is at least 90% of the maximum density as
determined by standard proctor (ASTM-698). All embankment fills
more than 10 feet in fill height must be compacted to at least 90%
of the maximum density as determined by standard proctor
(ASTM-698) and must have their density verified by field density
testing. A PADEP dam permit is required for embankments having a
maximum depth of water, measured from the upstream toe of the
dam to the top of the dam at maximum storage elevation, of greater
 913.16 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.16
C:366
than 15 feet; and/or for ponds having contributory drainage area of
greater than 100 acres; and/or for impoundments of greater than
50 acre-feet.
(9) The embankment's interior slopes shall not be steeper than 4H:1V
(four horizontal to one vertical). The exterior slopes shall not be
steeper than 3H:1V.
(10) Except where special erosion-protection measures are provided, all
disturbed areas shall be graded evenly, topped with four inches of
topsoil, fertilized, seeded, and mulched by methods approved by
the Town. Seed mixes including crown vetch shall not be permitted.
(11) The minimum embankment width shall be five feet for
embankments less than three feet in height, 10 feet if the
embankment is between 3.1 feet and 9.9 feet in height and 15 feet
if the embankment is higher than 10 feet.
(12) A structural or vegetative barrier may be required by the Town.
(13) Energy dissipaters shall be installed to prevent erosion and/or
initiate sheet flow at points where pipes or drainageways discharge
to or from basins. Level spreaders shall be used only where the
maximum slope between the discharge point and the waterway
does not exceed 5%. Energy dissipaters shall comply with criteria
in Hydraulic Design of Energy Dissipaters for Culverts and
Channels, HEC 14, FHWA, July, 2006. Such facilities shall be both
functional and attractive; for example, native rock shall be used in
constructing dissipaters where practical.
(14) Stabilization. Proper stabilization structures, including stilling
basins, energy dissipaters, and channel lining, shall be constructed
at the outlets of all basins and emergency spillways. The
stabilization structures shall control water to avoid erosion, reduce
velocities of released water and direct water so that it does not
interfere with downstream activities.
(15) Discharge points. The minimum distance between a proposed basin
discharge point (including the energy dissipater, etc.) and a
downstream property boundary shall in no case be less than 20
feet. Where there is discharge onto or through adjacent properties
prior to release to a stream, designers shall demonstrate how
downstream properties are to be protected. The Engineer may
require that the setback distance be increased based upon factors
such as topography, soil conditions, the size of structures, the
location of structures, and discharge rates. A drainage easement
may also be required.
(16) A sediment forebay with a hardened bottom shall be provided at
each inlet into the detention basin. The forebay storage capacity
shall at minimum be 10% of the permanent pool storage. The
 913.16 CHARTER  913.16
C:367
forebay shall be designed to allow for access by maintenance
equipment for periodic cleaning.
(17) A private easement, 25 feet in width, must be provided around the
top perimeter of all detention facilities. This easement shall remain
clear of any structures, sheds, retaining walls, swing sets, stored
debris, etc. The entire twenty-five-foot easement must remain on
the applicant's property.
(18) All detention facilities shall be provided with an access road (with a
legal easement) for maintenance purposes. The design criteria for
such access roads shall be as follows:
A. Access roads shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide and have a
maximum grade of 15%.
B. Access must be provided from a public street to the berm of the
facility so that equipment can obtain access to the outlet
control works without entering the water impoundment area.
C. Access roads with gradients of 3% or less are permitted to be
constructed with a stabilized base material and natural
surface, or equal as approved by the Town.
D. Access roads with gradients of 10% or less are permitted to be
constructed with a stabilized base material and bituminous
seal coat surface in accordance with PennDOT Publication 408,
Section 470, or equal as approved by the Town.
E. A permanent easement must be provided for the access
roadway from the public right-of-way to the stormwater
detention facility. This easement shall be a minimum of 25 feet
in width.
F. Access roads with gradients exceeding 10% shall be
constructed with full depth bituminous pavement or concrete
surfacing as approved by the Town.
G. Where deemed necessary by the Town, a permanent gate shall
be provided for the access roadway. The design for the gate
must be submitted to and approved by the Town.
(19) The volume and rate control capacities must drain in a period
between 24 and 72 hours after the design storm.
(f) Conveyance systems (open channels, drainageways, and storm sewers).
(1) Applicants are encouraged to design conveyance systems that
encourage infiltration and improve water quality wherever
practicable.
 913.16 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.16
C:368
(2) All conveyance systems shall convey stormwater to the nearest
established stream channel as approved by the Engineer or storm
sewer system.
(3) All conveyance systems shall have the appropriate erosion and/or
energy-dissipation controls installed.
(4) Conveyance systems should not be installed parallel and near the
top or bottom of major embankments to avoid the possibility of
slope failure.
(5) Wherever conveyance channels are necessary, drainage shall be
maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks designed to
carry the twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour stormwater runoff
from upstream contributory areas. The Engineer may increase the
design storm, as conditions require. All open channels shall be
designed with one foot of freeboard above the design water surface
elevation of the design runoff condition.
(6) Flood relief channels shall be provided and designed to convey the
runoff from the 100-year, twenty-four-hour storm, such that a
positive discharge of this runoff to an adequate receiving stream or
conveyance system occurs without allowing this runoff to encroach
upon other properties.
(7) Storm sewers and their appurienant facilities shall be designed to
convey the runoff from the twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour
storm. At no time shall the hydraulic grade line or energy grade line
exceed the top of any inlet or manhole. Supporting calculations to
document compliance with this requirement must be provided to
the Engineer for review and approval.
(8) All storm inlets, manholes, endwalls, and headwalls shall be
constructed in accordance with the Town Standard Specifications,
Design Standards, and Details (latest edition).
(9) Storm inlets shall be placed at all street intersections and should be
placed on the tangent and not the curved portions of any street. If
possible, inlets shall be placed at lot lines to avoid potential
conflicts with driveways.
(10) Storm inlets which are deeper than five feet in depth shall have
ladder bars installed.
(11) A subarea drainage area map delineating the area draining to each
inlet point of the storm sewer system is required to be part of the
stormwater management plan.
(12) All storm sewer pipe proposed for public dedication, either to the
Town or a homeowners' association, shall be greater than or equal
to 15 inches in diameter.
 913.16 CHARTER  913.16
C:369
(13) All storm sewer pipe proposed for public dedication under the
cartway must be constructed of a minimum Class III reinforced
concrete pipe (RCP) or as approved by the Town.
(14)No corrugated metal pipe may be used for storm sewers to be
dedicated to the Town or a homeowners' association.
(15) The minimum grade on any storm sewer pipe shall be 1%, unless
otherwise approved by the Engineer.
(16) Concrete anchors, per the Town Standard Specifications, Design
Standards, and Details (latest edition), shall be required where the
storm sewer pipe slope exceeds 20%.
(17) Manholes and/or inlets shall not be spaced more than 300 feet
apart for pipe sizes up to 24 inches in diameter and not more than
450 feet apart for larger pipe sizes.
(18) Where drainage swales are used in lieu of, or in addition to, storm
sewers, they shall be designed to carry the required runoff without
erosion and in a manner not detrimental to the properties they
cross. Drainage swales shall provide a minimum grade of 2% but
shall not exceed a grade of 9%. Drainage swales used strictly for
conveyance are not the same as open vegetated channels. Design
standards for open vegetated channels are provided under
 913.16(c) of this article.
(19)On streets that must contain curbing, storm sewers shall be placed
in front of the curbing. To the greatest extent possible, storm
sewers shall not be placed directly under curbing. At curbed street
intersections, storm inlets shall be placed in the tangent section of
the road.
(20) Use of grassed swales or open vegetated swales in lieu of curbing
to convey, infiltrate and/or treat stormwater runoff from roadways
is encouraged. Inlets shall be placed at the center of the shoulder
swale draining the street and shall be located no closer than four
feet from the edge of the cartway.
(21) Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or
vegetated BMPs where feasible.
(22) The developers shall obtain or grant a minimum twenty-foot-wide,
private drainage easement over all storm sewers, drainage swales,
channels, etc., that are a component of the stormwater
management system when located within undedicated land. All
permanent detention basins and/or other stormwater management
facilities providing stormwater control for other than a single
residential lot shall be located within a defined, private drainage
easement that allows proper legal access and maintenance vehicle
access.
 913.16 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.16
C:370
(23)No property owner shall obstruct or alter the flow, location or
carrying capacity of a stream, channel or drainage swale to the
detriment of any other property owner, whether upstream or
downstream. All subdivision and/or land development plans
containing streams, channels, drainage swales, storm sewers or
other conveyance systems that cross property boundaries, existing
or proposed, or whose discharge crosses such boundaries shall
contain a note stating the above.
(24)Water quality inlets and/or bioretention areas. Storm drainage
systems that collect runoff from parking areas and/or loading areas
exceeding 10,000 square feet of impervious coverage and
discharge to stormwater management systems, including surface
or subsurface infiltration systems, shall have a minimum of one
water quality inlet or bioretention area per each acre of drainage
area. The purpose of water quality inlets is to remove oil, grease,
and heavy particulates or total suspended solids, hydrocarbons and
other floating substances from stormwater runoff. Methods other
than water quality inlets or bioretention areas may be permitted if
the applicant demonstrates to the Town's satisfaction that any such
alternative will be as effective and as easily maintained. Periodic
cleaning of these systems shall be addressed in the operation and
maintenance plan submitted to the Town. All bloretention areas
should be designed as per the guidelines set forth in the PA
Stormwater BMP Manual.
(g) Underground detention facilities.
(1) Underground detention tanks shall utilize the largest practicable
pipe diameter in order to provide ease of access and maintenance.
(2) Design measures must be implemented to prevent pipe flotation
and allow for visual inspection capabilities, adequate pipe
ventilation, and access maintenance.
(3) Underground facilities shall be designed parallel to existing and/or
proposed contours.
(4) The underground facilities shall be designed to include overflow
controls able to pass the unattenuated 100-year peak storm without
overtopping the access point.
(5) Open grated risers must be provided at either end of the facility
and at all terminal ends and junctions for maintenance and venting
purposes. A minimum of two accesses must be provided.
(6) Maximum life expectancy of the underground system shall also be a
design consideration for pipe material specifications. The use of
corrugated metal pipe (CMP) for underground facilities proposed
for ownership and maintenance by the Town is prohibited.
(7) For underground rock sumps, refer to Appendix F of this article.36
 913.16 CHARTER  913.17
C:371
 913.17. Landscaping of stormwater management facilities.
[11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1481]
Stormwater management facilities shall be landscaped in accordance with
the following standards:
(a) Landscaping shall be required in and around all constructed
stormwater management facilities with a minimum surface area of
1,000 square feet for the purposes of:
(1) Assisting in the management of stormwater;
(2) Stabilizing the soil within such facilities to minimize and control
erosion;
(3) Enhancing the visual appearance of such facilities; and
(4) Mitigating maintenance problems commonly associated with the
creation of such facilities.
(b) A planting plan and planting schedule shall be submitted in accordance
with the following:
(1) Wet meadows, including floors of stormwater management
facilities.
A. Wet meadows and floors of stormwater management facilities
shall be planted with noninvasive plants native to western
Pennsylvania, such as wildflowers and noninvasive grasses, the
intent being to create a mixed meadow of such plantings,
where appropriate. Selection of plantings shall be based on
whether the area in question is usually well-drained or
permanently wet and whether the area will be used for
recreation purposes. No woody plants shall be planted within
the saturated zone (phreatic line) of a stormwater
management facility or on a berm constructed for impounded
water.
B. Seeding by drills, corrugated rollers, cyclone or drop seeders
or hand-seeding of such areas is preferred; however,
hydroseeding followed by hydromulching can be used on wet
ground and steep slopes.
C. Fertilizers, as a nutrient supplement, shall not be used unless it
is documented that soil conditions warrant such use and the
nutrient applled does not exceed plant uptake. Soil for planting
of wildflowers shall contain not less than 3% nor more than
10% organic matter, as determined by an agricultural chemist,
with certification of the test before planting.
36.Editor's Note: Appendix F is included as an attachment to this chapter.
 913.17 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.17
C:372
D. Seeding shall take place either between April 1 and May 15 or
between September 1 and October 15. Planting areas shall be
soaked to maintain a consistent level of moisture for at least
four to six weeks after planting. For seeding recommendations,
reference the DEP's E&S Pollution Control Program Manual.
E. Once established, a single annual mowing when plants are
dormant should be sufficient to maintain a wet meadow and/or
floor of a stormwater management practice.
(2) Wet edges that remain wet all or most of the year shall be planted
with wildflowers, grasses and shrubs. Plants to be located on rims
or banks, which remain dry most of the year, shall be planted with
species tolerant of dry soil conditions.
(3) Wooded areas.
A. Where stormwater management facilities adjoin wooded areas,
trees and shrubs shall be selected and planted outside the
practice so as to blend with existing surroundings.
B. Plantings in such areas shall be of sufficient density to
eliminate the need for mowing.
C. It is recommended that clusters of trees and shrubs be planted
around stormwater management facilities but well away from
outfalls and any constructed berms, where applicable, to
provide for wildlife habitat, wind control and buffering and
screening.
D. Vegetation shall be planted during appropriate times of the
year, predominantly between late March and mid May or from
early October until evidence of ground freezing, depending
upon the species selected. Most deciduous trees and shrubs
can be planted in either spring or fall. Evergreens are best
planted in late summer or early fall.
(4) Slopes.
A. Where slopes are gentle, a mixture of meadow grasses and
wildflowers (for wet meadows) shall be planted.
B. On steep slopes, as defined by the Town's Code of Ordinances,
dense spreading shrubs (shrubs tolerant of dry soils) shall be
planted. Heavy mat mulch shall be used during the period of
establishment.
C. No woody plant materials or trees shall be located on a
constructed or natural berm acting as the impoundment
structure of a stormwater management practice. Trees shall be
located downstream of an impoundment berm a sufficient
distance from the toe of the constructed slope to assure that
 913.17 CHARTER  913.17
C:373
 913.18. Stream buffer requirements. [11-26-2018 by Ord. No.
1481]
Stream buffers shall be provided as per the following requirements:
the toe of the slope is outside the dripline of the species
planted at maturity but in no case less than 15 feet.
(5) In cases where stormwater management facilities are to be located
in proximity to wetlands or waterways, the applicant's planting
plan and schedule shall consider the sensitive conditions existing
therein and be modified accordingly to reflect existing flora.
(6) Stormwater management facilities shall be screened in a manner
which complements the existing landscape and provides sufficient
access for maintenance.
(a) A minimum stream buffer width of 50 feet landward in each direction
from the top of stream banks is required for all waterways having both
a defined bank and a contributing watershed area of greater than 100
acres.
(b) A minimum stream buffer width of 35 feet landward in each direction
from the center line of the waterway is required for smaller waterways
having a contributing watershed area of less than 100 acres and
greater than 10 acres.
(c) The stream buffer area should be maintained in a natural state.
(d) Trails in the buffer are permitted and are preferred to be permeable
and for nonmotorized use only. Impermeable trails are permitted,
provided they have adequate drainage.
(e) Septic drainfields and sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted
within the riparian buffer easement and shall comply with setback
requirements established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73.
(f) Underground utilities shall be permitted within the riparian buffer
easement; however, work shall be performed to minimize disturbance
area and removal of trees. Restoration within the riparian buffer
easement shall be with native species of trees, grasses, and other
plantings. One tree shall be planted for each tree removed, and the
restoration shall be designed by a registered professional with the
requisite experience. Aboveground utilities shall only be permitted to
cross the easement perpendicular to the easement or in the shortest
practical distance. Existing utilities may remain and be maintained as
required.
(g) When wetland(s) extend beyond the edge of the required buffer width,
the buffer shall be adjusted so that the buffer consists of the extent of
the wetland plus a twenty-five-foot zone extending beyond the wetland
edge.
 913.17 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.18
C:374
(h) Stream buffer averaging may be applied to account for encroachments
such as road crossings. The following criteria must be met in order to
utilize buffer averaging on a development site:
(1) All waterways with defined bed and banks must be mapped, and
the total waterway length on the property proposed for buffer
averaging must be calculated.
(2) Buffer averaging is required for water quality buffers that have
stream crossings.
(3) An overall average buffer width of at least 50 feet must be achieved
within the boundaries of the property to be developed. Stream
buffer corridors on adjoining properties cannot be included with
buffer averaging on a separate property, even if owned by the same
property owner.
(4) The average width must be calculated based upon the entire length
of stream bank that is located within the boundaries of the property
to be developed. When calculating the buffer length, the natural
stream channel should be followed.
(5) Stream buffer averaging shall be applied to each side of a stream
independently. If the property being developed encompasses both
sides of a stream, buffer averaging can be applied to both sides of
the stream but must be applied to both sides of the stream
independently.
(6) On each stream bank, the total width of the buffer shall not be less
than 25 feet at any location, except at approved stream crossings.
Those areas of the buffer having a minimum width of 25 feet (or
less at approved stream crossings) can comprise no more than 50%
of the buffer length.
(i) Stream buffer locations and widths should be illustrated on all
subdivision plans with notations requiring that they be maintained in a
natural state.
(j) Stream buffers should be illustrated on all grading and erosion and
sedimentation control plans. The defined stream buffer location should
be properly recorded. The recording should provide a plan illustrating
the stream buffer location, width and the requirement that it be
maintained in a natural state.
 913.18 CHARTER  913.18
C:375

DIVISION 4
Operational Provisions
 913.19. Operation and maintenance responsibilities. [11-26-2018
by Ord. No. 1481]
(a) General responsibilities.
(1) The owner of stormwater management facilities shall be
responsible for the proper operation and maintenance of those
facilities during and after construction. An operation and
maintenance plan consistent with the requirements of  913.19(c)
shall be prepared for review and approval by the Engineer and
shall be executed and signed by the Town and the applicant.
(2) The owner of the stormwater management facilities for a property
shall be responsible for the proper installation and function of
those facilities in accordance with the approved stormwater
management plan. All temporary soil erosion and sedimentation
control measures shall be removed or converted to their permanent
configuration in accordance with an approved erosion control plan.
This requirement in no way precludes the authority of the
Allegheny County Conservation District to determine when
sufficient stabilization has occurred on a site in order to convert to
the permanent stormwater management facilities.
(3) Dedication and acceptance of stormwater management facilities.
A. Upon completion of construction of stormwater management
facilities shown on an approved subdivision or land
development plan and within 90 days after approval of such
construction, the applicant shall submit a written offer of such
stormwater management facilities for dedication to the Town.
Said offer shall include a deed of dedication covering said
facilities together with satisfactory proof establishing an
applicant's clear title to said property. Such documents are to
be filed with the Land Use Administrator for review by the
Town Attorney. Deeds of dedication for stormwater
management facilities may be accepted by resolution of the
Town at a regular meeting thereof. The offer of these facilities
does not constitute an acceptance by the Town.
B. The Town may require that stormwater management facilities
remain undedicated, with operation and maintenance the
responsibility of individual lot owners or a homeowners'
association or similar entity, or an organization capable of
carrying out maintenance responsibilities.
C. Regardless of ownership, the applicant shall submit a written
offer deeding an access and/or drainage easement to the Town
pursuant to  913.19(b). Such easement shall cover the
 913.19 CHARTER  913.19
C:377
stormwater management facilities, any drainage to and from
such facilities, and shall clearly permit Town entry for
inspection and/or maintenance purposes.
D. Regardless of ownership, the applicant shall submit an actual
as-built plan to the Town for the stormwater management
facilities required per the approved stormwater management
plan. The as-built plan shall show all final design specifications
for all permanent stormwater management facilities,
including, but not limited to, pipe material and diameter, inlet,
outlet and overflow elevations, two-foot contours for all
detention/retention basins and drainage swales, and a
comparison of as-built capacities compared to the capacities of
the approved design facilities, and shall be prepared and
certified by a licensed professional engineer. The as-built plan
shall be based on an actual field survey performed by a
licensed professional land surveyor. The surveyor shall certify
as to the accuracy of the plan. The as-built plan shall be
submitted to the Town for review by the Engineer. Any
performance and/or financial securities established for the
project shall include requirements for submittal of as-built
plans.
E. The as-built plan(s) shall be submitted to the Town in a digital
format or formats approved by the Town.
(4) Inspection of stormwater management BMP controls.
A. The Town Engineer or a designated representative shall
inspect the construction and permanent operation and
maintenance of all temporary and permanent stormwater
management BMP controls for the development site.
B. A note must be placed on the recorded subdivision and land
development drawings as follows: "As per the approved
stormwater management plan, the Town shall have the right of
access to the on-site stormwater management facilities for the
right of inspection and maintenance. In the event that the
owner, assigns or heirs do not adequately maintain the facility,
the owner, assigns or heirs shall reimburse the Town for all
costs associated with said maintenance. The aforementioned
rights granted to the Town in no way diminish the
responsibility of the owner, assigns or heirs of said
maintenance, and no liability will be assumed by the Town or
its representatives associated with the required access for
maintenance and inspection purposes."
C. The permittee shall notify the Engineer 48 hours in advance of
the completion of the following key development phases:
1. Prior to starting any construction to review the proposed
BMPs on site.
 913.19 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.19
C:378
2. At the completion of preliminary site preparation,
including stripping of vegetation, stockpiling of topsoil and
construction of temporary stormwater management and
erosion control facilities BMPs.
3. During construction of the permanent BMPs at such times
as specified by the Town Engineer.
4. Completion of permanent BMPs, including established
ground covers and plantings.
5. Completion of any final grading, vegetative control
measures, or other site restoration work done in
accordance with the approved plan and permit.
D. No work shall commence on any subsequent phase until the
preceding one has been inspected and approved. If there are
deficiencies in any phase, the Town Engineer shall issue a
written description of the required corrections and stipulate
the time by which they must be made.
E. If, during construction, the contractor or permittee identifies
any site conditions, such as subsurface soil condition, or
alterations in surface or subsurface drainage, which could
affect the feasibility of the approved stormwater facility BMPs,
he must notify the Town Engineer within 24 hours of the
discovery of such condition and request a field inspection. The
Town Engineer shall determine if the condition requires a
stormwater plan modification.
F. In cases where stormwater facility BMPs are to be installed in
areas of landslide-prone soils or where other special site
conditions exist, the Town may require special precautions
such as soil tests and core borings, full-time resident
inspectors, and/or similar measures. All costs of any such
measures shall be borne by the permittee.
(b) Ownership and maintenance. All stormwater management facilities
identified within an approved stormwater management plan shall be
owned and maintained by one, or a combination of, the following
entities:
(1) Private ownership.
A. Where individual on-lot stormwater management facilities are
proposed, the subdivision and/or land development plan shall
contain a note in a form satisfactory to the Town Attorney
designating the entity responsible for operation and
maintenance of the on-lot facilities consistent with an approved
operation and maintenance plan and, in the event that the
responsible person or entity fails to do so, granting to the Town
the right but not the duty to enter upon the premises to repair
 913.19 CHARTER  913.19
C:379
or restore said facilities, to charge and assess the costs thereof
to the owner, including a reasonable allowance for overhead,
and to enforce said charges and assessments by lien upon
the property. In addition, the deed for each lot shall contain
a perpetual covenant binding the grantee and all successors
in interest designating the responsibility for operation and
maintenance of the on-lot facilities essentially in the following
form:
"UNDER AND SUBJECT, nevertheless, to the following
conditions and restrictions: Prior to any Earth Disturbance
for which stormwater management facilities are required by
the Town, Grantee shall construct the permanent stormwater
management facilities as shown on the stormwater
management plan (the "Plan") prepared by <NAME>, P.E.,
dated <DATE> and last revised <DATE> and approved by
the Town; thereafter, the Grantee, his heirs, executors,
administrators, successors and assigns (the "Owner"), at his
sole cost and expense, shall operate, maintain and repair said
stormwater management facilities on the lot in accordance
with said Plan, so that the facilities shall at all times continue
to operate and function in the same manner and capacity as
they were designed. In the event of the failure of the Owner
to comply with these conditions and restrictions, the Town
shall have the right at the sole discretion of the Town to have
said stormwater management facilities repaired or restored as
required, and the costs thereof plus a reasonable allowance for
overhead shall be assessed to the Owner, said assessment shall
be a charge and a continuing lien upon the property herein.
The Town, before it may exercise this right, shall notify the
Owner by certified mail of its intention to take the aforesaid
action. The notice shall set forth in what manner the Owner
has neglected the operation and maintenance of or repair to
the stormwater management facilities, and if the Owner fails,
within a period of 90 calendar days, to correct or repair the
items listed in the notice from the Town, then, and only then,
may the Town exercise this right."
B. In addition to the above, developers of parcels with more than
one dwelling unit shall record in the office of Recorder of
Deeds for Allegheny County a declaration of covenants and
restrictions, in a form satisfactory to the Town Attorney,
describing the responsibility for operation and maintenance of
the on-lot facilities, consistent with an approved operation and
maintenance plan, prior to the sale of any individual lots. The
terms of this covenant and restriction shall run with the land
and be binding upon the initial grantees of each lot within the
subdivision, his, her or their heirs, administrators, successors
or assigns.
 913.19 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.19
C:380
(2) Homeowners' or condominium association ownership. Where a
homeowners' association is created to own and manage common
facilities, the subdivision and/or land development plan shall
contain a note, in a form satisfactory to the Town Attorney,
designating the entity responsible for construction and/or
maintenance of the stormwater management facilities consistent
with an approved operation and maintenance plan and, in the event
that the responsible entity fails to do so, granting to the Town the
right but not the duty to enter upon the premises to repair or
restore said facilities, to charge and assess the costs thereof plus a
reasonable allowance for overhead to each owner of property
within the development and to enforce said charges and
assessments by lien upon each property within the development. In
addition, the developer shall record in the office of Recorder of
Deeds for Allegheny County a declaration of covenants, in a form
satisfactory to the Town Attorney, setting forth the rights and
responsibilities of the homeowners' association for operation and
maintenance of the stormwater management facilities, prior to the
sale of individual lots. The terms of this covenant and restriction
shall run with the land and be binding upon the initial grantees of
each lot within the subdivision, his, her or their heirs,
administrators, successors and assigns.
(3) Town ownership. Where the Town has accepted an offer of
dedication of the permanent stormwater management facilities, the
Town shall be responsible for operation and maintenance. Town
ownership notwithstanding, the applicant is required to prepare a
stormwater management plan and an operation and maintenance
plan, as defined herein. Upon approval of the stormwater
management facilities by the Town, the applicant shall provide a
lump-sum long-term maintenance payment to the Town, to be
reserved and used at all times by the Town only for costs of
operation and maintenance of the dedicated facilities, as follows:
A. Long-term maintenance payment. The long-term maintenance
payment shall be in an amount equal to the present value of
operation and maintenance costs for the facilities for a tenyear
period. The long-term maintenance payment shall be
based on a ten-year cost estimate prepared by the applicant's
engineer and reviewed and approved by the Engineer. The
amount of the payment shall include all costs of operation and
maintenance, which shall include, but not be limited to, typical
operation and maintenance costs as well as costs such as
landscaping and planting, tax payments required and
construction of any kind associated with the use, benefit and
enjoyment of the facilities by the owners. In particular, a
description of routine facility operation and day-to-day
management requirements and a description of projected
maintenance actions and schedules necessary to ensure proper
 913.19 CHARTER  913.19
C:381
operation of stormwater management facilities shall be
submitted for review and approval to the Engineer.
B. Documentation. The terms of the long-term maintenance
payment shall be documented as part of the stormwater
management plan and the operation and maintenance plan.
(c) Operation and maintenance plan. An operation and maintenance plan
shall be prepared by an engineer licensed to practice in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that identifies the ownership, operation
and maintenance responsibilities and as-built conditions for all
stormwater management facilities. At a minimum, the operation and
maintenance plan shall include the following:
(1) Any obligations concerning perpetuation and/or maintenance of
natural drainage or infiltration facilities, and other facilities
identified within the stormwater management plan. Ownership of
and responsibility for operation and maintenance of stormwater
management facilities, including names and contact information,
shall be required.
(2) A description of the permanent stormwater management facilities
on the site, explaining how each facility is intended to function and
operate over time. All drainage and access easements shall be
depicted, and any site restrictions to be recorded against the
property shall be identified on the recorded plan. All such
easements and restrictions shall be perfected to run with the land
and be binding upon the landowner and any successors in interest.
(3) A description of the actions, budget and schedule for operating and
maintaining the stormwater management facilities. This
description should be written in a clear manner, consistent with the
knowledge and understanding of the intended user.
(4) A general description of operation and maintenance activities and
responsibilities for facilities held in common or on-lot, including,
but not limited to, lawn care, vegetation maintenance, cleanout of
accumulated debris and sediment (including from grates, trash
racks, inlets, etc.), liability insurance, maintenance and repair of
stormwater management facilities, landscaping and planting,
payment of taxes and construction of any kind associated with the
use, benefit and enjoyment of the facilities by the owners. In
particular, a description of routine facility operation and day-to-day
management requirements (as needed) and a description of routine
maintenance actions and schedules necessary to ensure proper
operation of stormwater management facilities shall be submitted.
(5) Assurances that no action will be taken by any lot owner to disrupt
or in any way impair the effectiveness of any stormwater
management system, setting forth in deed restrictions the ability of
the Town to take corrective measures if it is determined at any time
that stipulated permanent stormwater management facilities have
 913.19 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.19
C:382
been eliminated, altered, or improperly maintained, including the
ability of the Town to cause the work to be done and lien all
costs plus a reasonable overhead allowance against the property
should the required corrective measures not be taken by the lot
owner, following written notification, within a period of time set by
Engineer.
(6) Parties responsible for the long-term operation and maintenance of
stormwater management facilities shall make records of the
installation and of all maintenance and repairs and shall retain the
records for at least 10 years. These records shall be submitted to
the Town as established by the operation and maintenance plan or
if otherwise required by the Town.
(7) A note must be placed on the recorded subdivision and land
development drawings as follows: "As per the Approved
Stormwater Management Plan, the Town shall have the Right of
access to the on-site stormwater management facilities for the
right of inspection and maintenance. In the event that the Owner,
assigns or heirs do not adequately maintain the facility, the Owner,
assigns or heirs shall reimburse the Town for all costs associated
with said maintenance if the Town exercises its right to maintain
the facility. The aforementioned rights granted to the Town in no
way diminish the responsibility of the Owner, assigns or heirs of
said maintenance, and no liability will be assumed by the Town or
its representatives associated with the required access for
maintenance and inspection purposes."
(d) Operations and maintenance agreement.
(1) The owner of any land upon which permanent stormwater
management facilities and/or BMPs will be placed, constructed or
implemented, as described in an approved stormwater
management plan and the operations and maintenance plan, shall
record the following documents in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds for Allegheny County within 15 days of approval of the
operations and maintenance plan by the Town:
A. The operations and maintenance plan, or a summary thereof;
B. The operations and maintenance agreement; and
C. Access and/or drainage easements.
(2) The operations and maintenance agreement shall be substantially
the same as the sample agreement in Appendix C of this article.37
(3) Other items or conditions may be included in the operations and
maintenance agreement where determined necessary to guarantee
the satisfactory operation and maintenance of all permanent
37.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
 913.19 CHARTER  913.19
C:383
 913.20. Plan submission, review and review fees. [11-26-2018 by
Ord. No. 1481]
Plan submission will be according to the requirements set forth in the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,38 and submit one copy of
stormwater facilities and BMPs. The agreement shall be subject to
the review and approval of the Town.
(4) The Town may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply
with  913.19 of this article.
(e) Stormwater Facility Maintenance Fund.
(1) Persons installing stormwater storage facilities will be required to
pay a specified amount to the Town Stormwater Facility
Maintenance Fund to help defray costs of periodic inspections and
annual maintenance expenses. The amount of the deposit shall be
determined as follows:
A. If the storage facilities are to be privately owned and
maintained, the deposit shall cover the cost of periodic
inspections performed by the Town for a period of 10 years, as
estimated by the Engineer. After that period of time,
inspections will be performed at the expense of the Town.
B. If the storage facilities are to be owned and maintained by the
Town, the deposit shall cover the estimated annual costs for
maintenance and inspections for 10 years. The Engineer will
establish the estimated annual maintenance costs utilizing
information submitted by the applicant.
C. The amount of the deposit to the maintenance fund, covering
annual inspection and maintenance costs, shall be converted to
present worth of the annual series values. The Engineer or
Land Use Administrator shall determine the present-worth
equivalents, which shall be subject to the final approval of the
governing body.
D. If a storage facility is proposed which also serves as a
recreation facility, such as a lake or ballfield, the Town may
reduce or waive the amount of the maintenance fund deposit
based on the value of the land for public recreational purposes.
(2) If any storage facility (whether publicly or privately owned) is
subsequently eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers or
another storage facility (e.g., a distributed storage facility), the
unused portion of maintenance fund may be applied to the cost of
abandoning the facility and connecting to the storm sewer system
or other facility. Any amount of the deposit remaining after the
costs of abandonment are paid will be returned to the depositor.
 913.19 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.20
C:384
pertinent documents to the Allegheny County Conservation District (when
requested by the District), or as required by the Town Land Use
Administrator.
(a) The Engineer shall review the stormwater management plan for
consistency with this article. Any stormwater management plan found
incomplete shall not be accepted for review and shall be returned to the
applicant.
(b) The Engineer shall review the stormwater management plan for any
subdivision or land development against the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance provisions not superseded by this article.
(c) When required by regulation, the County Conservation District shall
review and approve the erosion and sedimentation control plan for
consistency with PADEP's Chapter 102 regulations.
(d) For activities regulated by this article, the Engineer shall notify the
Town whether or not the stormwater management plan is consistent
with the article.
(1) Should the stormwater management plan be determined to be
consistent with this article, the Engineer shall forward an approval
letter to the Town Land Use Administrator, who will then forward a
copy to the applicant.
(2) Should the stormwater management plan be determined to be
inconsistent with this article, the Engineer shall forward a
disapproval letter to the Town Land Use Administrator, who will
then forward a copy to the applicant. The disapproval letter shall
cite the reason(s) and specific ordinance sections for the
disapproval. Disapproval may be due to inadequate information to
make a reasonable judgment as to compliance with the stormwater
management plan. Any disapproved stormwater management plans
may be revised by the applicant and resubmitted to the Town
consistent with this article. Direct submissions to the Engineer will
not be considered official and are discouraged.
(e) For regulated activities specified in  913.02 to 913.12, which require
a building permit, the Engineer shall notify the Town Building
Inspector, in writing, within a time frame consistent with the Town
Building Code and/or Town Subdivision Ordinance, whether the
stormwater management plan is consistent with this article and
forward a copy of the approval/disapproval letter to the applicant. Any
disapproved stormwater management plan may be revised by the
applicant and resubmitted consistent with this article.
(f) For regulated activities under this article that require an NPDES permit
application, the applicant shall forward a copy of the Engineer's letter
stating that the stormwater management plan is consistent with this
38.Editor's Note: See Part 13 of this Code.
 913.20 CHARTER  913.20
C:385
article to the County Conservation District. PADEP and the County
Conservation District may consider the Engineer's review comments in
determining whether to issue a permit.
(g) The Town shall not grant preliminary or final approval to any
subdivision or land development for regulated activities specified in
 913.02 to 913.12 of this article if the stormwater management plan
has been found to be inconsistent with this article, as determined by the
Engineer. All required permits from PADEP must be obtained prior to
approval of any subdivision or land development.
(h) No building permits shall be issued for any regulated activity specified
in  913.02 to 913.12 of this article if the stormwater management
plan has been found to be inconsistent with this article, as determined
by the Engineer, or without considering the comments of the Engineer.
All required permits from PADEP must be obtained prior to issuance of
a building permit.
(i) The applicant shall be responsible for completing record as-built
drawings of all stormwater management facilities included in the
approved stormwater management plan. The record drawings and an
explanation of any discrepancies with the design plans shall be
submitted to the Engineer for final approval. In no case shall the Town
approve the record drawings until the Town receives a copy of an
approved highway occupancy permit from the PennDOT district office,
NPDES permit, and any other applicable permits or approvals from
PADEP or the County Conservation District. The above permits and
approvals must be based on the record drawings. The record drawings
must include copies of all applicable permits and approvals.
(j) The Town's approval of a stormwater management plan shall be valid
for a period not to exceed five years, commencing on the date that the
Town approves the stormwater management plan. If stormwater
management facilities included in the approved stormwater
management plan have not been constructed, or if constructed and
record drawings of these facilities have not been approved within this
time period, then the Town may consider the stormwater management
plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits. Stormwater
management plans that are considered disapproved by the Town shall
be resubmitted in accordance with  913.20 of this article.
(k) Modification of plans. A modification to a stormwater management plan
under review by the Town for a development site that involves a change
in stormwater management facilities or techniques, or that involves the
relocation or redesign of stormwater management facilities, or that is
necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the
stormwater management plan as determined by the Engineer, shall
require a resubmission of a modified stormwater management plan
consistent with this article and shall be subject to review as specified in
 913.20 of this article.
 913.20 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.20
C:386
(l) Resubmission of disapproved stormwater plans. A disapproved
stormwater management plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the Engineer's concerns documented in writing, and
addressed to the Town Land Use Administrator in accordance with
 913.20 of this article, and distributed accordingly, and shall be subject
to review as specified in  913.20 of this article. Any applicable Town
review and inspection fee must accompany a resubmission of a
disapproved stormwater management plan.
(m) Town stormwater plan review and inspection fees.
(1) Fees may be established from time to time by the Town in
accordance with applicable laws to defray plan review and
construction inspection costs incurred by the Town. All fees shall
be paid by the applicant at the time of stormwater management
plan submission.
(2) Any fees established pursuant to this article may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, any of the following:
A. Administrative costs.
B. The review of the stormwater management plan by the Town,
county (if applicable), Allegheny County Conservation District
(if applicable) and the Engineer(s).
C. The site inspections.
D. The inspection of stormwater management facilities and
stormwater management improvements during construction.
E. The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater
management facilities.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this article, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
 913.20 CHARTER  913.20
C:387

DIVISION 5
Enforcement And Penalties
 913.21. Compatibility with other requirements. [11-26-2018 by
Ord. No. 1481]
Permits and approvals issued pursuant to this article shall not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to comply with or to secure other required
permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code,
rule, act, statute or ordinance. This article shall not preclude the inclusion
in such other permit of more-stringent requirements concerning regulation
of stormwater and erosion. Where a conflict exists between a provision
within this article and that of the PADEP Phase II NPDES regulations,
as amended, or any other ordinance of the Town, the more-stringent
requirements shall govern.
 913.22. Enforcement and penalties. [11-26-2018 by Ord. No.
1481]
(a) Right of entry. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Town may
enter at reasonable times upon any property within the Town to inspect
the condition of stormwater structures and facilities which have been
accepted and are maintained by the Town, in regard to any aspect
regulated by this article. In case of an immediate threat to property or
to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town, the Town
may enter any property within the Town to inspect, maintain or repair
stormwater structures or facilities, whether privately maintained or
accepted and maintained by the Town.
(b) Inspection. SWM BMPs should be inspected by the landowner/
developer (including the Town for dedicated facilities) according to the
following list of frequencies:
(1) Annually for the first five years.
(2) Once every three years thereafter.
(3) During or immediately after the cessation of a significant rainfall
event.
(c) Enforcement.
(1) Public nuisance.
A. The violation of any provision of this article is hereby deemed a
public nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
(2) Enforcement.
 913.21 CHARTER  913.22
C:389
A. Whenever the Town finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the
Town may order compliance by written notice to the
responsible person. Such notice may require, without
limitation:
1. The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
2. The elimination of prohibited connections or illegal
discharges;
3. Cessation of any violating discharges, practices or
operations;
4. The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
5. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation
costs;
6. The implementation of stormwater BMPs; and
7. Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s)
and establish a time limit for correction of the violation(s). Said
notice may further advise that, if applicable, should the
violator fail to take the required action within the established
deadline, the work will be done by the Town or its designee and
the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. Failure to
pay the amount charged within 30 days of completion of the
work by the Town or its designee shall be a violation of this
article and, in addition to other available remedies at law,
subject the violator to the penalty provisions of this article.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject
such person to the penalty provisions of this article. All such
penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the
Town from pursuing any and all other remedies available in law
or equity.
(d) Suspension and revocation.
(1) Any approval for a regulated activity issued may be suspended or
revoked, in whole or in part, by the Town for:
A. Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of
the approval.
B. A violation of any provision of this article or any other
applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the
regulated activity.
 913.22 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.22
C:390
C. The creation of any condition or the commission of any act
during the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a
hazard or nuisance, pollution, or which endangers the life or
property of others.
(2) A suspended approval may be reinstated by the Town when:
A. The Town has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension.
B. The Town is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
(3) An approval that has been revoked by the Town cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this article.
(4) Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit, if there is no
immediate danger to life, public health, or property, the Town may
notify the landowner/developer to discuss the noncompliance.
(e) Penalties.
(1) No person shall alter or modify any portion of a stormwater
management BMP without written approval and consent from the
municipality.
(2) Any person violating or permitting the violation of the provisions of
this article shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for
each violation, recoverable with costs. The establishment or a
violation for purposes of setting fines or penalties for such violation
shall be in accordance with a citation to a Magisterial District
Judge with jurisdiction and venue over the location of the violation,
and such an action will be subject to the procedures provided for
the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure. A separate offense shall arise for each
day or portion thereof a violation is found to exist and may be
determined for each section of this article which is found to have
been violated.
(3) In addition, the municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus,
or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity
for the enforcement of this article. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other
appropriate forms of remedy or relief. Such relief may include
costs, fees, and charges, including the municipality's attorneys'
fees (charged at the hourly rate approved by the governing body of
the municipality) and costs, as may be permitted by law.
(4) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the
municipality shall have the right at any or all times deemed
necessary by the Municipal Engineer or designee to enter upon any
 913.22 CHARTER  913.22
C:391
 913.23. Repealer. [11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1481]
Any ordinance or ordinance provision of the Town inconsistent with any
of the provisions of this article is hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only; provided, however, that this repeal shall in no manner
be construed as a waiver, release or relinquishment of the right to initiate,
pursue or prosecute, as the case may be, any proceeding at law or in equity
pertaining to any act done which would have constituted a violation of such
prior ordinance or ordinance provision. All of said ordinance or ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect and are not repealed hereby
as they pertain to such acts and to the processing of such plans filed prior
to the effective date of this article, which are protected from the effect of
intervening ordinances by Section 508(4) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.39
 913.24. Severability. [11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1481]
Should any section or provision of this article be declared invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such determination of invalidity shall not affect
the validity of the remaining provisions of this article.
property within the municipality to inspect and, upon
determination of a violation of this article, to correct the violation,
with all expenses associated with correcting the violation to be
charged to the property owner responsible for the violation.
(f) Appeals.
(1) Any person aggrieved by any action of a designated agent of the
Town relative to the provisions of this article may appeal to Town
Council within 30 days of that action.
(2) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Town Council relevant
to the provisions of this article may appeal to the County Court of
Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place
within 30 days of the Town's decision.
39.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S.  10508.
 913.22 MCCANDLESS CODE  913.24
C:392
Article 915
CERTIFICATION OF SANITARY SEWER STATUS
 915.01. Definitions. [Ord. 1049, passed 3-10-1991; Ord. 1291,
passed 11-24-2003]
As used in this article, certain words and terms are defined as follows:
DOCUMENT OF CERTIFICATION, EVIDENCE OF COMPLIANCE  An
official statement from the McCandless Township Sanitary Authority
("MTSA") stating that there are no illegal storm or surface water
connections into the sanitary sewer system on the specific property which
is being sold, transferred or assigned. This Document of Certification shall
be in effect for the life of the building for which it was obtained and for so
long as the property is again not sold, transferred or assigned.
DYE AND/OR SMOKE TEST  Any commonly accepted method of testing
wherein dye and/or smoke is introduced into the storm, surface or subsurface
water collection system and downspout of real estate property
to determine if any illegal storm water or surface water is entering the
sanitary sewer system.
ILLEGAL STORM OR SURFACE WATER CONNECTIONS  The connection
of any basement seepage, surface water, sub-surface drains, downspouts,
roof drainage or surface areaway drainage into the sanitary sewer system.
MUNICIPAL LIEN AND PROPERTY TAX VERIFICATION LETTER  A
written letter from the proper official of the Town of McCandless concerning
municipal liens and property taxes.
PERSON  Any person, syndicate, associate, partnership, firm, corporation,
institution, agency, Authority or other entity recognized by law as the
subject of rights and duties.
TEMPORARY DOCUMENT OF CERTIFICATION  A temporary statement
of certification from the proper officer of the McCandless Township Sanitary
Authority ("MTSA"), issued pursuant to the terms of Section 915.04.
THE MCCANDLESS TOWNSHIP SANITARY AUTHORITY (MSTA)  The
municipal authority operating the Town's sanitary sewer system and
responsible for administration of the program of testing and certification.
 915.02. Sale, transfer, assignment, without evidence of
compliance prohibited. [Ord. 1291, passed 11-24-2003]
After the effective date of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to
sell, transfer or assign any real estate within the Town on which a building
or improvement exists, without first delivering to the purchaser, transferee
or assignee, a Document of Certification or a Temporary Document of
Certification from the proper officers of the McCandless Township Sanitary
Authority.
 913.24 CHARTER  915.03
C:393
 915.03. Evidence of compliance, document of certification,
application. [Ord. 1291, passed 11-24-2003]
 915.04. Temporary document of certification. [Ord. 1291, passed
11-24-2003]
A Temporary Document of Certification may be issued at The McCandless
Township Sanitary Authority's (MTSA's) sole discretion only under the
following circumstances:
(a) Any person selling, transferring or assigning real estate located within
the Town (hereinafter applicant) shall make application on a form
furnished by The McCandless Township Sanitary Authority ("MTSA") at
least 14 days before the date of sale, transfer or assignment. The MTSA
or a plumber designated by MTSA who is registered and licensed by the
Allegheny County Health Department shall perform a dye test on the
property to be sold, transferred or assigned within 14 days of the date
of the application. The plumber shall complete the appropriate portions
on the form that the property has been dye tested, and certify the
results of such test. In the event that there are no illegal storm or
surface water connections, the MTSA shall issue a Document of
Certification upon the payment of an amount to be set by resolution of
the Board of Directors of MTSA. When an illegal storm or surface
connection is discovered by the means of the above-mentioned testing,
no Document of Certification will be issued until the illegal connections
are removed, inspected and approved by the MTSA.
(b) A sanitary sewer dye test of the McCandless Township Sanitary
Authority may be substituted for that required under this Section
915.03 when the property has been dye tested under the MTSA
Comprehensive Sewer Inspection Program within 18 months of the date
of such a test conducted by the MTSA.
(c) The MTSA shall maintain a list of plumbers who are registered and
licensed by the Allegheny County Health Department who shall perform
the dye tests authorized herein at the request of MTSA at the fees set by
resolution of the MTSA.
(a) When such testing cannot be performed because of weather conditions,
the applicant shall provide the McCandless Township Sanitary
Authority with security in accordance with the fee schedule to be
approved by the Board of Directors of MTSA to guarantee that the
appropriate test will be performed. The applicant shall cause to have
performed the appropriate test at such time as weather conditions
make such testing possible. In addition, the applicant shall provide a
signed written acknowledgment from the applicant and the purchaser,
transferee or assignee of the real estate, agreeing to correct, at the sole
expense of the applicant and/or the purchaser, transferee or assignee
any violations that may be discovered as the result of subsequent tests.
Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit any purchaser, transferee or
assignee from requiring the applicant to reimburse the purchaser,
 915.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  915.04
C:394
 915.05. Rules and regulations. [Ord. 1049, passed 3-10-1991; Ord.
1291, passed 11-24-2003]
The McCandless Township Sanitary Authority is hereby authorized,
empowered and directed to make rules and regulations for the operation
and enforcement of this Article as it deems necessary, which shall include,
but not be limited to:
 915.06. No conflict with general police powers. [Ord. 1049, passed
3-10-1991]
Nothing in this article shall limit, in any fashion whatsoever, the Town's
right to enforce its ordinances or the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. Nothing in this article shall be a defense to any citation issued
transferee or assignee for any costs incurred, provided, nevertheless,
that primary liability shall run with the land and no such agreement
shall affect the Town's or MTSA's enforcement powers or excuse the
current owner from performance.
(b) When illegal storm water or surface water connections have been
discovered and the necessary remedial activities to correct such
connection would require a length of time such as to create a practical
hardship for the applicant, the applicant may apply to the MTSA for a
Temporary Document of Certification which may only be issued when
the applicant provides the MTSA with all of the following:
(1) Cash security in the amount of the contract for the completion of
the necessary remedial work is posted with the MTSA; and
(2) An agreement by the purchaser, transferee or assignee to be
responsible for all cost overruns related to the remedial work,
together with a license to the MTSA to enter upon the property to
complete such work in case of default by the contractor. The MTSA
shall determine, by regulation, when such Temporary Document of
Certification shall expire, at which time the security shall be
forfeited, and the MTSA may use the security to have the necessary
remedial work completed.
(a) Establishing acceptable forms of security or guarantees;
(b) Establishing the forms of application, fees and purchaser
acknowledgments;
(c) Limiting the times of year in which Temporary Documents of
Certification are available for reasons of weather;
(d) Setting standards for dye and/or smoke tests to be administered by
registered plumbers prior to issuance of Documents of Certification.
(e) Such other rules and regulations as are necessary for the operation and
enforcement of this article.
 915.04 CHARTER  915.06
C:395
by any municipal corporation or the Commonwealth pursuant to any other
law or ordinance.
 915.07. Severability. [Ord. 1049, passed 3-10-1991]
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any section, sentence,
clause or phrase shall be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining portions of this article
shall not be affected or impaired thereby.
 915.08. Regulation of dye testing by the commonwealth or by
Allegheny County. [Ord. 1291, passed 11-24-2003]
The provisions of this article providing for dye testing and issuance of
Documents of Certification shall be modified to the extent required by any
mandates of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or of Allegheny County
relating to such programs of testing and compliance.
 915.99. Penalty. [Ord. 1049, passed 3-10-1991; Ord. 1291, passed
11-24-2003]
Article 917
SEWERS
[Editor's Note: The McCandless Sanitary Authority owns and
operates the sewer system and sets rates for its utilization.]
 917.01. Definitions. [Ord. 229, passed 6-29-1959]
For the purpose of this article, the following terms are defined:
COMMUNITY SYSTEM  All or part of a device or devices intended to treat
or dispose of the sewage of equivalent volume of domestic sewage from two
or more residences, buildings or occupied parcels of land.
PERSON  An individual, firm, corporation, partnership or association.
PRIVATE SYSTEM  All or part of a device or devices intended to treat or
dispose of the sewage from a single residence, building or occupied parcel
of land on the individual parcel.
SEWAGE  Waste water discharged from any plumbing fixture.
(a) Whoever fails, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the terms or
provisions of this article, or of any regulation or requirement pursuant
thereto and authorized thereby shall, upon conviction before any
issuing authority, be sentenced to pay a fine of $600 and costs of
prosecution, and in default of payment thereof, to imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 90 days.
(b) Each day that the violation continues after the expiration of the
appropriate period of notice shall constitute a separate offense.
 915.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  917.02
C:396
 917.02. Permit for private or community system. [Ord. 229,
passed 6-29-1959]
No person shall cause to be installed on any piece or parcel of ground under
his ownership, care or control, either a private system or a community
system, unless a permit has been obtained from the Director of the
Allegheny County Health Department. A permit must also be obtained from
the Secretary of Health of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania when a
community system is to be installed.
 917.03. Public sewer to be used if accessible. [Ord. 229, passed
6-29-1959; Ord. 799, passed 7-28-1980]
 917.04. Public sewer connections. [Ord. 285, passed 8-1-1960;
Ord. 1203, passed 5-26-1998]
(a) No person shall construct a private system or community system where
public sewers are reasonably accessible.
(b) No person shall continue a private system or community system on any
parcel or piece of ground abutting on or contiguous to or reasonably
accessible to any public sewers of adequate capacity to carry the
additional volume.
(a) Requirement. Every owner of property in the Town whose property
abuts upon any line of the sanitary sewers of the Town or the Town
Sanitary Authority, shall connect, at his own cost, the building,
buildings or other structures located on such property with the sanitary
sewers of the Town or the Authority for the purpose of disposing of all
drainage as is customarily disposed of in a system of sanitary sewers. In
the case of a sanitary sewer line constructed in a public street or
highway right of way, property on either side of the street or highway
shall be considered as abutting the sewer line.
(b) Other disposal methods prohibited. No owner, lessee or occupier of any
property abutting on any line of the sanitary sewer system of the Town
or Authority shall employ any means, either by septic tank, mine hole or
otherwise, for the disposal of sanitary sewage, other than into and
through the sanitary sewers of the Town or Authority.
(c) Notice to connect. Where any structure on abutting property as
aforesaid is now or hereafter may be connected to any septic tank or
using any method by which sanitary sewage is disposed of or eliminated
other than through the sanitary sewer system of the Town or Authority,
it shall be the duty of the Town Secretary or other person authorized by
Council to notify the owner, lessee or occupier of such structure in
writing, either by personal service, certified mail or registered mail, to
disconnect the same and make proper connections for the discharge
and disposal of sewage through the sanitary sewer system of the Town
or the Authority as hereinafter provided, within 60 days after receipt of
such notice. However, notwithstanding anything herein or hereafter
 917.02 CHARTER  917.04
C:397
 917.05. Tapping permit. [Ord. 285, passed 8-1-1960]
Any person required to connect with the sewer system of the Town or the
Authority, shall make application for a tapping permit on forms furnished
by the Town or the Authority, and shall set forth in the application, the
character of the structure and use, the lot number and location, and the
name of the person who is to make the connection and shall pay the
required fee for the tapping.
contained to the contrary, no owner, lessee or occupier of such
structure shall be required to tap where his sewage would not by
natural gravity flow into the sanitary sewer.
(d) Failure to connect; action by town. In case any owner of property
adjoining or adjacent to such sewer neglects or refuses to connect with
and use the sewers for such period of service, 60 days after notice to do
so has been served upon him, either by personal service, certified mail
or by registered mail as aforesaid, the Town or its agents or the
Authority or its agents may enter upon such property and construct
such connection. In such case, the Town Secretary or the Authority
Secretary, or other authorized person shall forthwith upon completion
of the work send an itemized bill of the cost of construction of such
connection to the owner of the property to which connection has been
so made, which bill shall be payable forthwith. In case of neglect or
refusal by the owner of such property to pay the bill, a municipal lien for
such construction shall be filed within six months of the date of
completion of the construction of the connection, the same to be subject
in all respects to the general law providing for the filing and recovery of
municipal liens.
(e) Written reports of and required repairs of deteriorating or poorly
constructed laterals and sewer service connections. The Authority is
authorized in the course of its program of repair, rehabilitation,
maintenance and replacement of publicly owned treatment works of the
Authority, when it identifies deteriorating or poorly constructed laterals
and sewer service connections, causing infiltration and inflow of
extraneous waters into the publicly owned treatment works of The
McCandless Township Sanitary Authority, to provide written notice to
the property owner or owners as to the condition of such laterals and
sewer service connections, together with a statement that such
deteriorating or poorly constructed laterals and sewer service
connections must, at the property owner's expense, be promptly
repaired, replaced or rehabilitated within 60 days of receipt of said
notice. A copy of all written reports prepared by the Authority in
connection with its examination of deteriorating or poorly constructed
laterals and sewer service connections shall be provided to the Town.
 917.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  917.06
C:398
 917.06. Prohibited connections. [Ord. 285, passed 8-1-1960]
No privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, mine hole or similar receptacle for
human excrement shall at any time, now or hereafter, be connected with the
sanitary sewers of the Town or the Authority.
 917.07. Cleaning and filling abandoned septic tanks. [Ord. 285,
passed 8-1-1960]
No privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, mine hole or similar receptacle for
human excrement shall hereafter be maintained upon any premises from
which connection with any of the Town or Authority sewers shall have
been made. The Town may, at its discretion require every such privy vault,
cesspool, septic tank, mine hole or other receptacle within 30 days after
final enactment of this section (August 1, 1960), in the case of premises now
connected with a sewer, and within 30 days after connection with a sewer in
the case of premises hereafter so connected, to be abandoned, cleansed and
filled under the direction and supervision of the Town or the Authority. Any
such privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, mine hole or other receptacle not
abandoned, cleansed and filled as required by this section shall constitute
a nuisance and such nuisance may be abated on order of the Town or the
Authority as provided by law, at the expense of the owner of such property.
 917.08. Prohibited discharges. [Ord. 285, passed 8-1-1960]
No person, firm or corporation connected to the Town or Authority sewer
system shall connect any roof drain thereto or permit, allow or cause to
enter into such sewer system any storm water or surface water or any
sewage from any property other than that for which the permit was issued,
or any other substance, liquid, gas or solid which is prohibited by the terms
of any other rule, regulation or ordinance adopted by the Town or the
Authority for the operation of the sewer system.
 917.09. Inspection of construction and connections. [Ord. 285,
passed 8-1-1960]
The construction of all private sewers or laterals and their connections with
any lines of the sewer system shall be done in accordance with the plans and
specifications established by the Town and the Authority as the same may
be from time to time amended, copies of which are on file at the McCandless
Municipal Building. All construction and connections shall be inspected by
the Town or Authority engineers before being covered.
 917.10. Periodic testing authorized. [Ord. 1203, passed
5-26-1998; Ord. 1291, passed 11-24-2003]
(a) No property owner or property user in the sewer system shall
discharge, or permit the discharge of any storm water, surface water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, foundation drains, driveway drainage,
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process water into said Sanitary
Sewer System.
 917.06 CHARTER  917.10
C:399
 917.99. Penalty. [Ord. 1291, passed 11-24-2003]
(b) The McCandless Township Sanitary Authority is hereby authorized to
conduct random periodic smoke and/or dye tests, and any other
appropriate test or inspection, without cost to the residents of the Town
of McCandless, of all existing sewer systems and structures in the Town
of McCandless for compliance with this article and other laws
pertaining to sewer systems and structures.
(c) Every owner, lessee or occupier of land within the Town shall submit to
dye testing by the McCandless Township Sanitary Authority, which
Authority has been designated, authorized, constituted and appointed
by the Town of McCandless as its sole and exclusive agent for such
testing purposes. The owner, lessee or occupier of the land shall permit
said testing upon request of the McCandless Township Sanitary
Authority to conduct such testing. Testing will not be required when the
owner, lessee or occupier of the land produces a valid Document of
Certification issued by the Town of McCandless Inspector in accordance
with Ordinance No. 1049, or issued by MTSA in accordance with
Ordinance No. 1203, which Document of Certification shall be sufficient
proof of compliance for purposes of Ordinance No. 1049 for a period of
18 months from the date of issuance.
(d) When illegal storm water or surface water connections have been
discovered, all necessary remedial work to correct such connection
shall be completed by the owner, lessee or occupier of the premises,
weather permitting, within 45 days of the date such party receives
notification of the illegal connection.
(a) Any person who violates any provision of Article 917, except for
Sections 917.04(e) or 917.10, shall for every offense, be fined not more
than $600 together with costs, or shall be imprisoned for not more than
90 days, or both, at the discretion of the court. Each day that the
violation continues after the expiration of the appropriate period of
notice shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) Any person, firm or corporation who is found to have violated any order
of the Authority and/or the Town, or who willfully violated or failed to
comply with any provision of Sections 914.04(e) or 917.10 and the
orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder shall pay a fine
of $250 following adjudication by a District Justice for each violation.
Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue to occur shall be
deemed a separate and distinct violation. In addition to the penalties
provided herein, the Authority and the Town may recover penalties,
damages, costs, reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporters
fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against
the person or user found to have violated Sections 917.04(e) or 917.10
or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder.
(c) Upon final adjudication that a violation of Sections 917.04(e) or 917.10
exists and refusal or failure to act by the property owner to undertake
 917.10 MCCANDLESS CODE  917.99
C:400
Article 919
WASTE DISCHARGE INTO SEWERS
 919.01. Definitions. [Ord. 1143, passed 4-24-1995]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning
hereinafter designated:
ACT  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act also known as The Clean
Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
ALCOSAN  The Allegheny County Sanitary Authority including its
treatment facility and any devices and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial
wastes of a liquid nature.
CORROSIVE WASTE  A waste or substance which has any of the following
properties:
HAZARDOUS WASTE  All wastes that are defined as hazardous under the
regulations enacted pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act (RCRA) as specified in 40 CFR 261 or under the regulations
promulgated pursuant to the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act as
specified in 25 PA Code 261.
IGNITABLE WASTE  A waste or substance which can create a fire hazard
in the sewage collection system or the ALCOSAN Treatment Facility which
as any of but is not limited to the following properties:
INTERFERENCE  A discharge originating in the Town which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
the repair, replacement or rehabilitation identified by written notice
as herein provided, The McCandless Township Sanitary Authority shall
have the right to enter onto the subject property to conduct the
necessary work to bring the property into compliance with Sections
917.04(e) or 917.10 at the expense of the property owner, and further,
upon the failure of the property owner to pay said expense, the
McCandless Township Sanitary Authority shall have the right to file
a lien against the subject property for the amount of said expense,
together with costs of filing and perfecting such lien.
It is aqueous and has a pH of less than or equal to five or greater than
or equal to 10, as determined by pH meter.
(a)
It is a liquid and corrodes steel (SAE 1020) at a rate greater than 6.35
mm (0.250 in.) per year at a test temperature of 55 (130 F.).
(b)
It is liquid with a flash point less than 60 C. (140 F.) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(a)
(b) It is an oxidizer as defined in 49 CFR 173.151.
 917.99 CHARTER  919.01
C:401
MCCANDLESS TOWNSHIP SANITARY AUTHORITY  The municipal
authority responsible for the operation of sanitary sewer collection facilities
within the area of the Town for which treatment of such sewage waste is
provided by ALCOSAN facilities.
PASS-THROUGH  Any discharge of a pollutant through ALCOSAN into
the waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with other discharges from
other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the ALCOSAN's
NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation).
PERSON  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity, or its legal representatives, agents or
assigns.
pH  The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT  Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, emissions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt, or other industrial, municipal, or agricultural waste discharged
into water.
POLLUTION  The man made or man induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and/or radiological integrity of water.
REACTIVE/EXPLOSIVE WASTE  A waste or substance which can create
an explosion hazard in the sewage collection system or the ALCOSAN
treatment facility; which has any of but is not limited to the following
properties:
Inhibits or disrupts the ALCOSAN facilities, its treatment processes or
operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
(a)
Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of ALCOSAN's
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (hereinafter referred
to as "NPDES") permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use
or disposal by ALCOSAN in compliance with the following statutory
provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more
stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water
Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act including Title 2 or more commonly
referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and
including state regulations contained in the State Sludge Management
Plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act,
the Clean Air Act, and the Toxic Substance Control Act.
(b)
It is normally unstable and readily undergoes violent change without
detonating.
(a)
(b) It reacts violently with water.
 919.01 MCCANDLESS CODE  919.01
C:402
TOXIC POLLUTANT  Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA, pursuant to Section 307(A) of
the Act.
WASTE WATER  The liquid and water carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions, together with any ground water, surface water, and storm
water that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is
contributed directly or indirectly into the facilities of ALCOSAN.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH  All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
water courses, water ways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems or other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any portion thereof.
 919.02. Toxic substances and pollutants prohibited. [Ord. 1143,
passed 4-24-1995]
No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced directly or indirectly
into the facilities of ALCOSAN or into any sewer, pipe or other conveyance
located in the Town and transmitting substances into the facilities of
ALCOSAN, any toxic pollutant or other waste water which will:
(c) It forms potentially explosive mixtures with water.
When mixed with water, it generates toxic gases, vapors or fumes
in a quantity sufficient to present a danger to human health or the
environment.
(d)
It is a cyanide or sulfide bearing waste which can generate toxic gases,
vapors or fumes in a quantity sufficient to present a danger to human
health or the environment.
(e)
It is capable of detonation or explosive reaction if it is subjected to a
strong initiating source or if heated under confinement.
(f)
It is readily capable of detonation, explosive decomposition or reaction
at standard temperature and pressure.
(g)
It is a forbidden explosive as defined in 40 CFR 173.51, or a Class A
explosive as defined in 49 CFR 173.53 or a Class B explosive as defined
in 49 CFR 173.88.
(h)
(a) Cause interference with the operation or performance of ALCOSAN's
treatment plant or other facilities; or
(b) Pass through ALCOSAN's treatment plant or other facilities.
 919.01 CHARTER  919.03
C:403
 919.03. Specific substances prohibited. [Ord. 1143, passed
4-24-1995]
No person shall introduce, permit or cause to be introduced, directly or
indirectly, into the facilities of ALCOSAN or into any piped sewer, pipe or
other conveyance located in the Town and transmitting substances into the
facilities of ALCOSAN any of the following:
(a) Any substance which will endanger the life, health or safety of the
treatment plant sewer maintenance and plant operations personnel or
which would preclude safe entry into the sewer system or any portion of
the treatment plant;
(b) Any ignitable, reactive, explosive, corrosive or hazardous waste, except
as provided for by ALCOSAN's rules and regulations;
(c) Any waste water with a temperature greater than 140 F. (60 C.);
(d) Any waste which exceeds the naturally occurring background levels for
either Alpha, Beta, or Gamma radiation and/or any waste water
containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or
concentration not in compliance with applicable State or Federal
regulations;
(e) Any solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of
ALCOSAN's facility or facilities discharging into the ALCOSAN system;
(f) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly
or by interaction with other wastes may create a public nuisance or
adversely affect public health or safety;
(g) Pathological wastes from a hospital or other medical establishment;
(h) Garbage, whether ground or not, except properly shredded food waste
garbage resulting from the proper use of garbage grinder or disposer
type approved by ALCOSAN and maintained in good operating
condition;
(i) Sludges or other materials from septic tanks or similar facilities or from
sewage or industrial waste treatment plants or from water treatment
plants unless the discharge of such sludges and other materials is
specifically approved by ALCOSAN;
(j) Any pollutant including oxygen demanding pollutants released in a
discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference with the ALCOSAN facilities; or
(k) Any substance which will cause ALCOSAN's effluent or any other
product of the ALCOSAN facilities such as residues, sludges, or scums,
to be unsuitable for reclamation processes, including any substance
which will cause the ALCOSAN facility to be in noncompliance with
sludge use or disposable criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed
 919.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  919.03
C:404
 919.04. Prohibitions generally; pretreatment regulations. [Ord.
1143, passed 4-24-1995]
 919.05. Severability. [Ord. 1143, passed 4-24-1995]
The provisions of this article are severable, and the invalidity of any section,
clause, sentence, or provision of this article shall not affect or impair the
validity of any other part of the article which can be given effect without the
invalid part of parts.
 919.06. Provisions limited to ALCOSAN facilities. [Ord. 1143,
passed 4-24-1995]
The provisions of this article are expressly limited to facilities of ALCOSAN
or any sewer, pipe or other conveyance located in the Town and transmitting
substances into the facilities of ALCOSAN and expressly excludes any such
sewer, pipe or other conveyance which does not transmit substances into
the facilities of ALCOSAN,
 919.99. Penalty. [Ord. 1143, passed 4-24-1995]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $1,000, for each offense,
recoverable with costs, and in default of payment of the fine and costs,
shall be subject to imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for a period
not exceeding 30 days. Each day a violation is continued shall constitute
a separate offense. In addition, any person violating any provision of the
ALCOSAN pretreatment regulations may be subject to administrative and
civil penalties as provided for by the pretreatment regulations and
administered by ALCOSAN. Such penalties may include, but are not limited
to, injunctive relief and penalties of up to $25,000 per day, per violation
as provided for by the Publicly Owned Treatment Works Penalty Law, 35
P.S. 752.1 et seq. Authority to so enforce the pretreatment regulations is
granted to ALCOSAN, and is in addition to but not in place of any other
remedy available to the Town or to the McCandless Township Sanitary
Authority.
Article 925
under Section 405 of the Act, any criteria, guidelines, or regulations
promulgated pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or State laws or regulations
applicable to the treatment or disposal of such effluent or such product.
(a) No person shall take any action or cause to be done anything in
violation of any rule or regulation of ALCOSAN.
(b) The pretreatment regulations of the Allegheny County Sanitary
Authority are incorporated into this article by reference as though fully
set forth herein.
 919.03 CHARTER  919.99
C:405
GARBAGE COLLECTION
 925.01. Compliance. [Ord. 121, passed 4-19-1956]
Pursuant to the Act of June 24, 1931, P.L. 1206 as amended by Act. No.
78, enacted July 1, 1955, the Town does hereby and hereafter prohibit
the collection of garbage, rubbish or other refuse materials except in
accordance with the terms and authority of this article.
 925.02. Contract for collection. [Ord. 121, passed 4-19-1956]
The Town shall hereafter contract with one or more persons, partnerships,
corporations, associations or companies for exclusive collection of garbage,
rubbish and other refuse materials within the geographic limits of the Town.
The contract shall be binding upon the Town and the contractors for not less
than one year nor more than three years, and provide for a complete service
to the residents of the Town. The proper officers of the Town are hereby
authorized to enter such contract upon approval by Council.
 925.99. Penalty. [Ord. 121, passed 4-19-1956]
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provision of this
article shall be fined not more than $100 together with costs for each
offense and upon failure to pay such fine shall be imprisoned not more than
30 days. Each day that any person, firm, partnership or corporation shall
continue to violate or fail to comply with any requirement of this article shall
be considered a separate offense.
Article 927
SOLID WASTE STORAGE, COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
 927.01. Definitions. [Ord. 1017, passed 11-27-1989; Ord. 1398]
(a) The following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the
meaning ascribed herein, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ACT or ACT 97  The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of
1980 (P.L. 380, No. 97, July 7, 1980.)
AGRICULTURAL WASTE  Poultry and livestock manure, or residual
materials in liquid or solid form, generated in the production, and
marketing of poultry, livestock, fur-bearing animals and their products,
provided such waste is not a hazardous waste. The term includes the
residual materials generated in producing, harvesting, and marketing
of all agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and agricultural crops or
commodities grown on what are usually recognized and accepted as
farms, forest, or other agricultural lands.
 919.99 MCCANDLESS CODE  927.01
C:406
BULKY WASTE  Large items of solid waste including but not limited to
large auto parts, trees, branches or stumps which may require special
handling due to their size, shape or weight.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT  Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including, but not
limited to, stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping
centers and theaters.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE  All municipal and
residual waste building materials, grubbing waste and rubble resulting
from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on
houses, commercial buildings and other structures and pavements.
DEPARTMENT  The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources (DER).
DISPOSAL  The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a
manner that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters
the environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DOMESTIC WASTE or HOUSEHOLD WASTE  Solid waste, comprised
of garbage and rubbish, which normally originates in the residential
private household or apartment house.
GARBAGE  Any solid waste derived from animal, grain, fruit or
vegetable matter that is capable of being decomposed by
microorganisms with sufficient rapidity to cause such nuisances as
odors, gases or vectors.
HAULER or PRIVATE COLLECTOR  Any person, firm, copartnership,
association or corporation who has been licensed by the Town or its
designated representative to collect, transport, and dispose of refuse
for a fee as herein prescribed.
HAZARDOUS WASTE  Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes,
as defined in the Act, which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may:
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT  Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or processing, including but not limited to factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and
slaughterhouses.
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in morbidity in either an individual or the total population;
or
(1)
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of or otherwise managed.
(2)
 927.01 CHARTER  927.01
C:407
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT  Any establishment engaged in
service, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, day care centers, schools and universities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE  Garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous materials resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community
activities; and any sludges not meeting the definition of residual or
hazardous waste under Act 97 from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant,
or air pollution control facility.
MUNICIPALITY  The Town of McCandless, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
PERSON  Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, Federal
government or agency, State institution or agency, or any other legal
entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
In any provisions of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or
penalty, or any combination of the foregoing, the term person shall
include the officers and directors of any corporation or other legal
entity having officers and directors.
PROCESSING  Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal or residual waste or any technology used to
convert part or all of such waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing
facilities include, but are not limited to, transfer facilities, composting
facilities, and resource recovery facilities.
REFUSE  All solid waste materials which are discarded as useless.
RESIDUAL WASTE  Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material
or other waste including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous
materials resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations
and any sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility or air pollution control
facility, provided that it is not hazardous. The term residual waste shall
not include coal refuse as defined in the "Coal Refuse Disposal Control
Act". Residual waste shall not include treatment sludges from coal
mine drainage treatment plants, disposal of which is being carried on
pursuant to and in compliance with a valid permit issued pursuant to
"The Clean Streams Law".
RUBBISH  All nonputrescible municipal waste except garbage and
other decomposable matter. This category includes but is not limited to
ashes, bedding, cardboard, cans, crockery, glass, paper, wood and yard
cleanings.
SEWAGE TREATMENT RESIDUES  Any coarse screenings, grit and
dewatered or air-dried sludges from sewage treatment plants and
pumpings from septic tanks or septage which are a municipal solid
waste and require proper disposal under Act 97.
 927.01 MCCANDLESS CODE  927.01
C:408
 927.02. Prohibited activities. [Ord. 1017, passed 11-27-1989]
SOLID WASTE  Any waste including, but not limited to, municipal,
residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material.
STORAGE  The containment of any waste on a temporary basis in
such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall
be presumed that the containment of any waste in excess of one year
constitutes disposal. This presumption can be overcome by clear and
convincing evidence to the contrary.
TRANSFER STATION  Any supplemental transportation facility used
as an adjunct to solid waste route collection vehicles.
TRANSPORTATION  The off-site removal of any solid waste at any
time after generation.
(b) In this article, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
(a) No person shall accumulate or permit to accumulate upon any public or
private property within the Municipality, any garbage, rubbish, bulky
waste or any other municipal or residual solid waste except in
accordance with the provisions of this article, any Department rules
and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and the Health Department
Rules and Regulations, Article VIII.
(b) No person shall burn any solid waste within the Municipality except in
accordance with the provisions of this article, any Department rules
and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and the Health Department
Rules and Regulations, Article VIII.
(c) No person shall dispose of any solid waste in the Municipality except in
accordance with the provisions of this article, any Department rules
and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and the Health Department
Rules and Regulations, Article VIII.
(d) No person shall haul, transport, collect or remove any solid waste from
public or private property within the Municipality without first securing
a license to do so in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(e) (Reserved)40
(f) No person shall salvage or reclaim any solid wastes within the
Municipality except at an approved and permitted resource recovery
facility under Act 97 and any Department rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97.
(g) No person shall throw, place or deposit, or cause or permit to be
thrown, placed or deposited any solid waste in or upon any street, alley,
40.Editor's Note: Former subsection (e) hereof was repealed by Ord. No. 1398.
 927.01 CHARTER  927.02
C:409
 927.03. Standards for storage of solid waste. [Ord. 1017, passed
11-27-1989; Ord. 1398, passed 8-22-2011]
sidewalk, body of water, public or private property within the
Municipality except as provided in this article.
(a) The storage of all solid waste shall be practiced so as to prevent the
attraction, harborage or breeding of insects or rodents, and to eliminate
conditions harmful to public health or which create safety hazards,
odors, unsightliness or public nuisances.
(b) Any person producing municipal waste shall obtain a sufficient number
of approved containers to store all waste materials generated during
periods between regularly scheduled collections, and shall place and
store all waste materials therein.
(c) Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the
following preparation standards:
(1) All municipal waste shall be drained of free liquids before being
placed in storage containers.
(2) All cans, bottles or other food containers should be rinsed free of
food particles and drained before being placed in storage
containers.
(3) Garden clippings and tree trimmings shall be placed in approved
containers or shall be cut and placed into compostable paper bags.
Tree twigs or limbs no greater than four inches in diameter may be
bundled. Bundles shall be no more than four feet in length.
(4) Newspapers and magazines shall be placed in approved containers.
(5) When specified by the Municipality or its designated
representative, special preparation and storage procedures may be
required to facilitate the collection and resource recovery of
certain waste materials.
(d) All municipal waste shall be stored in containers approved by the
Municipality or its designated representative. Individual containers and
bulk containers utilized for storage of municipal waste shall comply
with the following standards:
(1) Reusable containers shall be as approved by the Town.
(2) Reusable containers for individual residences shall meet
specifications approved by the Town to facilitate collection.
(3) Disposable plastic bags or sacks are acceptable containers for
trash that does not fit into containers specified by the Town. Plastic
bags shall have sufficient wall strength to maintain physical
integrity when lifted by the top and shall be securely tied at the top
for collection.
 927.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  927.03
C:410
 927.04. Standards and regulations for collection. [Ord. 1017,
passed 11-27-1989; Ord. 1047, passed 2-25-1991; Ord. 1398, passed
8-22-2011; Ord. 1413, passed 6-25-2012]
(4) All containers, either reusable or disposable, shall also comply with
minimum national standards.
(5) Containers shall be kept tightly sealed or covered at all times. Solid
waste shall not protrude or extend above the top of the container.
(6) Reusable containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all
times. The interior of the containers shall be thoroughly cleaned,
rinsed, and drained, as often as necessary, to prevent the
accumulation of liquid residues or solids on the bottom or sides of
the containers.
(7) Containers shall be used and maintained so as to prevent public
nuisances.
(8) Containers shall be placed by the owner or customer at a collection
point specified by the Municipality or its designated representative.
Containers shall not be placed at the curb or collection point or side
of the road before 7:00 p.m. on the day prior to the pickup.
(9) With the exception of pickup days when the containers are placed
out for collection, the containers shall be stored on the owner or
customer premises at all times, and not curbside or along the edge
of a road which is not curbed.
(10) Bulk waste items shall be stored in a manner that will prevent the
accumulation or collection of water, the harborage of rodents,
safety hazards and fire hazards.
(e) The storage of all municipal waste from multi-family residential units,
commercial establishments, institutions and industrial lunchroom or
office waste sources is subject to the regulations and standards set
forth in this article. The type, size and placement requirements for bulk
containers shall be determined by the waste generator and the waste
hauler, and are subject to approval by the Municipality.
(a) The Municipality shall contract with a private collector or collectors for
the collection of all garbage, rubbish and bulky wastes from individual
residents and multi-family residential sources with two or less units to
provide this essential residential collection service.
(b) All households and homeowners shall utilize the residential collection
service provided by the Municipality.
(c) All multi-family residential sources (with more than two units),
commercial, institutional, and industrial establishments shall
individually contract collection service with the Municipality's collector
or any other properly licensed waste hauler of their choice.
 927.03 CHARTER  927.04
C:411
(d) The Municipality or its contracted hauler shall give notice of residential
collection schedules.
(e) All commercial, institutional, public and industrial lunchroom and office
waste containing garbage shall be collected at least once a week.
Rubbish collection from these sources shall be made as often as
necessary to control health hazards, odors, flies, and unsightly
conditions. The Municipality reserves the right to require more
frequent collection when deemed necessary.
(f) Residential collection schedules shall be published regularly by the
Municipality or its contracted hauler.
(g) All residential solid waste collection shall be conducted from Monday
through Friday between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. or on
Saturdays between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., unless prior
approval of any exception has been granted by the municipality. No
collection, hauling or transporting of solid waste shall be permitted on
Sunday.
(h) All commercial, institutional, public and industrial lunchroom and office
solid waste collection shall be conducted from Monday through Friday
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. or on Saturdays between
the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., unless prior approval of any
exception has been granted by the municipality. No collection, hauling
or transporting of solid waste shall be permitted on Sunday.
(i) All licensed haulers and haulers under contract with the Municipality
shall comply with the following standards and regulations:
(1) All municipal waste collected within the Municipality shall
ultimately be disposed only at a landfill cited in the Allegheny
County Solid Waste Plan - 1990 or on subsequent revisions thereto.
(2) Any trucks or other vehicles used for the collection and
transportation of municipal waste must comply with the
requirements of Act 97, and any Department regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97 and must be licensed by the Allegheny County
Health Department.
(3) All collection vehicles conveying domestic waste and garbage shall
be watertight and suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside
littering, attraction of vectors, the creation of odors and other
nuisances.
(4) All solid waste shall be collected and transported so as to prevent
public health hazards, safety hazards and nuisances.
(5) All solid waste collection vehicles shall be operated and maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition.
 927.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  927.05
C:412
 927.05. Collection and disposal charges. [Ord. 1017, passed
11-27-1989; Ord. 1398, passed 8-22-2011]
 927.06. Arbitration. [Ord. 1017, passed 11-27-1989; Ord. 1330,
passed 4-24-2006]
 927.07. Injunction powers. [Ord. 1017, passed 11-27-1989]
The Municipality may petition the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania for an injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, to
enforce any of the provisions of this article.
 927.08. Separability. [Ord. 1017, passed 11-27-1989]
In the event that any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
article be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder
of such article shall not be invalidated by such action.
 927.99. Penalty. [Ord. 1243, passed 4-23-2001]
Any person who has violated or permitted the violation of any provision
of this Article shall be deemed guilty of a summary offense and shall be
fined not more than $500, and pay any amount owed for hauler or private
collector services, if applicable; plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the Town or its hauler or private collector as a
(a) Annual fee schedules (if appropriate) shall be published by the
Municipality based on any competitively bid residential collection
service contract that may be awarded by the Municipality.
(b) The Municipality's contracted hauler and other licensed haulers shall
be responsible for the collection of any fees for solid waste collection
and disposal services provided to residential, commercial, institutional
or industrial sources within the Municipality.
(c) It is the responsibility of the property owner to pay for solid waste
collection and disposal services provided to one and two-family
residential units.
(a) Whenever any disputes arise between a homeowner and the contractor,
the contractor shall be responsible to meet with Town officials and the
aggrieved party prior to arbitration. If the dispute is not settled, the
contractor may then proceed to arbitration.
(b) In the event of any dispute concerning any of the provisions of this
contract, the dispute shall be submitted to a Board of Arbitration,
consisting of one person selected by the contractor, one person selected
by the Town, and one other person selected by the first two appointees.
Every effort will be made to make a prompt determination of the
dispute.
(c) This section does not apply to issues dealing with payment for services.
 927.05 CHARTER  927.99
C:413
result thereof. Each day a violation is committed or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense.
Article 929
RECYCLING
 929.01. Definitions. [Ord. 1018, passed 11-27-1989; Ord. 1398]
(a) The following words and phrases used throughout this article shall have
the following meanings:
ACT 101  The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act of 1988.
ALUMINUM  Empty all-aluminum beverage or food cans.
BI-METAL CONTAINERS  Empty food or beverage containers
consisting of steel and aluminum.
COLLECTOR  The entity or entities authorized by the Town to collect
recyclable materials from residences, or authorized by commercial,
municipal and institutional establishments that do not receive
collection services from the Town to collect recyclable materials from
those properties.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS  Those properties used primarily
for commercial or industrial purposes, and those multiple dwelling
residential buildings containing more than two dwelling units.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES  Events that are sponsored by public or
private agencies or individuals that include but are not limited to fairs,
bazaars, socials, picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200
or more individuals per day.
CORRUGATED PAPER  Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
FERROUS CONTAINERS  Empty steel or tin coated food or beverage
containers.
GLASS CONTAINERS  Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass. Expressly excluded are noncontainer glass, plate glass,
automotive glass, light bulbs, blue glass and porcelain and ceramic
products.
HIGH GRADE OFFICE PAPER  All white paper, bond paper and
computer paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal
establishments and in residences.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT  Those facilities that house or
serve groups of people including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing
homes, orphanages, day care centers, schools and universities.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES  Includes but is not limited to automotive,
truck and industrial batteries that contain lead.
 927.99 MCCANDLESS CODE  929.01
C:414
LEAF WASTE  Leaves from trees, bushes and other plants, garden
residues, chipped shrubbery and tree trimmings, but not including
grass clippings.
MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES  Any properties having two
or more dwelling units per structure.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT  Public facilities operated by the
Town and other governmental and quasi-governmental authorities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE  Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial
or institutional establishments and from community activities and any
sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste in
the Solid Waste Management Act from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant or air pollution control
facility. The term does not include source-separated recyclable
materials.
MUNICIPALITY  The Town of McCandless.
PERSON(S)  Owners, lessees, and occupants of residences and
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS  Empty plastic food and beverage containers.
Due to the wide variety of types of plastics, the Town may stipulate
specific types of plastic which may be recycled.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS  Materials generated by residences and
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments which are
specified by the Town and can be separated from municipal waste and
returned to commerce to be reused as a resource in the development
of useful products. Recyclable materials may include, but are not
necessarily limited to, clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel and
bimetallic cans, high grade office papers, newsprint, corrugated paper,
leaf waste, plastics, and any other items selected by the Town or
specified in future revisions to Act 101. The recyclable materials
selected by the Town may be revised from time to time as deemed
necessary by the Town.
RECYCLING  The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse
of metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which
would otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the
mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than
through combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials.
RESIDENCES  Any occupied single or multi-family dwellings having
up to two dwelling units per structure for which the Town provides
municipal waste collection service.
SOURCE SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS  Those materials
separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
 929.01 CHARTER  929.01
C:415
 929.02. Establishment of program/grant of power. [Ord. 1018,
passed 11-27-1989]
 929.03. Lead acid batteries. [Ord. 1018, passed 11-27-1989]
Disposal by persons of lead acid batteries with other municipal wastes is
prohibited and shall be a violation of this article.
 929.04. Separation and collection. [Ord. 1018, passed
11-27-1989]
WASTE  A material whose original purpose has been completed and
which is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise
disposed. The term does not include source separated recyclable
materials or material approved by the PA Department of Environmental
Resources for beneficial use.
(a) The Town hereby establishes a Recycling Program for the mandatory
separation and collection of recyclable materials and the separation,
collection and composting of leaf waste from all residences and all
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments located in the
Town for which waste collection is provided by the Town or any other
collector. Collection of the recyclable materials shall be made at least
once per week by the Town, its designated agent, or any other solid
waste collectors operating in the Town and authorized to collect
recyclable materials from residences or from commercial, municipal
and institutional establishments. The Recycling Program shall also
contain a sustained public information and education program.
(b) Specific program regulations are provided as an attachment to original
Ordinance 1018. Council is empowered to make changes to program
regulations as necessary, as described in Section 929.09. Subsequent
changes in the program regulations may be made through approval of
Council and public notice and notification of all affected parties.
(c) This article is ordained pursuant to the Town Home Rule Charter.
(a) All persons who are residents of the Town shall separate all of those
recyclable materials designated by the Town from all other municipal
waste produced at their homes, apartments and other residential
establishments, store such materials for collection, and shall place
same for collection in accordance with the guidelines established
hereunder.
(1) Persons in residences shall separate recyclable materials from
other refuse. Recyclable materials shall be placed at the curbside
in containers provided by the Town for collection. Any containers
provided to residences for collection of recyclable materials shall
be the property of the Town and shall be used only for the collection
of recyclable materials. Any resident who moves within or from the
Town shall be responsible for leaving the allocated container within
 929.01 MCCANDLESS CODE  929.04
C:416
 929.05. Ownership of recyclable materials. [Ord. 1018, passed
11-27-1989]
All recyclable materials placed by persons for collection by the Town or
authorized collector pursuant to this article shall, from time of placement
at the curb, become the property of the Town or the authorized collector,
except as otherwise provided by Section 929.07. Nothing in this article shall
be deemed to impair the ownership of separated recyclable materials by
the generator unless and until such materials are placed at the curbside for
collection.
the residence or shall pay the replacement cost of such
container(s). Use of recycling containers for any purpose other
than the designated recycling program or use of the recycling
containers by any person other than the person allocated such
container(s) shall be a violation of this article.
(2) An owner, landlord, or agent of an owner or landlord of a
multifamily rental housing property with more than two units shall
comply with its recycling responsibilities by establishing a
collection system at each property. The collection system shall
include suitable containers for collecting and sorting the recyclable
materials, easily accessible locations for the containers, and
written instructions to the occupants concerning the use and
availability of the collection system. If recyclable materials are
collected by a collector other than the Town or its authorized agent,
owners, landlords and agents of owners or landlords shall submit
an annual report to the Town reporting the tonnage of materials
recycled during the previous year.
(b) All persons shall separate leaf waste from other municipal waste
generated at their houses, apartments and other residential
establishments for collection unless those persons have otherwise
provided for composting of leaf waste.
(c) Persons shall separate high grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated
paper, leaf waste and such other materials as may be designated by the
Town generated at commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments and from community activities and store the recyclable
materials until collection. A person may be exempted from this
subsection if that person submits documentation to the Town annually
indicating that the designated recyclable materials are being recycled
in an appropriate manner. If recyclable materials are collected by a
collector other than the Town or its authorized agent, occupants of such
establishments shall submit an annual report to the Town reporting the
tonnage of materials recycled during the previous year.
 929.04 CHARTER  929.06
C:417
 929.06. Collection by unauthorized persons. [Ord. 1018, passed
11-27-1989]
It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm or corporation, other
than the Town or one authorized by Council or other entity responsible
for providing for collection of recyclable materials, to collect recyclable
materials placed by residences or commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments for collection by the Town or an authorized collector, unless
such person, firm or corporation has prior written permission from the
generator to make such collection. In violation hereof, unauthorized
collection from one or more residences or commercial, municipal and
institutional establishments on one calendar day shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
 929.07. Existing recycling operations. [Ord. 1018, passed
11-27-1989]
Any residence or commercial, municipal or institutional establishment may
donate or sell recyclable materials to any person, firm or corporation,
whether operating for profit or not, provided that the receiving person,
firm or corporation shall not collect such donated recyclable materials from
the collection point of a residence or commercial, municipal or institutional
establishment without prior written permission from Council or other entity
responsible for authorizing collection of recyclable materials to make such
a collection.
 929.08. Recycling of materials. [Ord. 1018, passed 11-27-1989]
Disposal by persons of recyclable materials with wastes is prohibited and
shall be a violation of this article. The collected recyclable materials shall be
taken to a recycling facility. Disposal by collectors or operators of recycling
facilities of source separated recyclable materials in landfills or to be
burned in incinerators is prohibited unless markets do not exist and the
collectors or operators have notified the Town Manager, or his designee, in
writing.
 929.09. Enforcement and administration. [Ord. 1018, passed
11-27-1989]
(a) The Town Manager or his designee is hereby authorized and directed to
make reasonable rules and regulations for the operation and
enforcement of this article as deemed necessary, including, but not
limited to:
(1) Establishing recyclable materials to be separated for collection and
recycling by residences, and additional recyclable materials to be
separated by commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments.
(2) Establishing collection procedures for recyclable materials.
 929.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  929.09
C:418
 929.10. Franchise or license. [Ord. 1018, passed 11-27-1989]
The Town may enter into (an) agreement(s) with public or private agencies
or firms to authorize them to collect all or part of the recyclable materials
from curbside.
 929.11. Repeal and severability. [Ord. 1018, passed 11-27-1989]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with this article are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency. Should any part of
this article be held unconstitutional, illegal or unenforceable by any court
of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect, impair, nullify
or otherwise prevent the enforcement of the remainder of this article. It
is hereby declared that such parts as are legal would have been erected
independently of the invalid portion had the invalidity of such part been
known, and it is the intention of the Town that such remainder shall be and
remain in full force and effect.
 929.12. Modifications. [Ord. 1018, passed 11-27-1989]
The Town may, from time to time, modify, add to or remove from the
standards and regulations herein and as authorized in Section 929.09.
 929.99. Penalty. [Ord. 1018, passed 11-27-1989]
(3) Establishing reporting procedures for amounts of materials
recycled.
(4) Establishing procedures for the distribution, monitoring and
collection of recyclable containers.
(5) Establishing procedures and rules for the collection of leaf waste.
(b) The Town reserves the right not to collect municipal waste containing
recyclable materials in combination with nonrecyclable materials.
(a) Any person, firm or corporation who violates the provisions of this
article shall receive an official written warning of noncompliance for
the first and second offense. Thereafter all such violations shall be
subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.
(b) Except as hereinafter provided, any person, firm or corporation who
violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $300, and
costs of prosecution for each and every offense.
 929.09 CHARTER  929.99
C:419
Part 13 - Planning And Zoning Code
Article 1301
PLANNING COMMISSION
[Editor's Note: The Planning Commission's establishment,
membership and duties are governed by the Town Charter and the
Administrative Code and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.]
 1301.01. Officers; procedural rules and regulations; records;
annual report. [Ord. 519, passed 3-24-1969]
The Planning Commission shall elect its own chairman and vice chairman
and create and fill such other offices it deems appropriate. Officers shall
serve annual terms and may succeed themselves. The Commission may
make and alter any laws and rules and regulations to govern its procedure
consistent with the laws of the Commonwealth. The Commission shall keep
a full record of its business and shall annually make a written report by
March 1 of each year of its activities to Town Council.
 1301.02. Powers and duties. [Ord. 519, passed 3-24-1969]
(a) The Planning Commission shall have the power and shall be required
to:
(1) Prepare the comprehensive plan for the development of the Town.
(2) Maintain and keep on file records of its action. All records and files
of the Commission shall be in the possession of Town Council.
(b) The Planning Commission shall:
(1) Prepare and present for consideration to Town Council and, after
adoption, maintain for Council, an official map and make
recommendations to Council on proposed changes in such map.
(2) Prepare and present to Council a zoning ordinance, and make
recommendations to Council on proposed amendments to it.
(3) Prepare and administer subdivision and land development
regulations.
(4) Prepare and administer planned residential development
regulations.
(5) Prepare and present to Council a building code and make
recommendations on proposed amendments thereto.
(6) Prepare and present to Council a housing code and make
recommendations on proposed amendments thereto.
 929.99 MCCANDLESS CODE  1301.02
C:420
Article 1311
PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS
 1311.01. Enabling clause, short title and date. [Ord. 741, passed
7-3-1978]
It is hereby ordained and enacted by the Town Council of the Town of
McCandless, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, that from and after the
effective date of this Zoning Ordinance the following regulations shall be in
full force and effect. This ordinance shall be known as and may be referred
to as the Zoning Code.
 1311.02. Community development objectives. [Ord. 1052, passed
4-22-1991]
The community development objectives which are the basis for the
provisions of this Code are set forth in the Comprehensive Plan as adopted
and amended by Council. In addition to the Comprehensive Plan, the
following is a supplementary statement of the purpose and intent of the
Town Zoning Ordinance. The objectives are adopted as a statement of
legislative findings and may be used in evaluating any proposed additions
or deletions to the Zoning and Land Use Ordinances.
(7) Submit to Council a recommended capital improvement program.
(8) Promote public interest in, and understanding of, the
comprehensive plan and planning.
(9) Hold public hearings and meetings.
(10) Require from other departments and agencies of the Town such
available information as relates to the work of the Planning
Commission.
(11) Enter upon any land to make examinations and surveys either after
permission has been obtained from the owner or after public
notices:
(c) In the performance of its powers and duties, any act or
recommendation of the Planning Commission which involves
engineering consideration shall be subject to the approval of a
professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(a) The general objective for the management of growth in the Town is to
provide a pleasant, attractive, healthy, safe and convenient
environment for living, working, education, shopping and recreation.
This objective shall be pursued by the creation and implementation of
land use plans to:
(1) Preserve and improve the natural environment;
 1301.02 CHARTER  1311.02
C:421
(2) Increase property values, employment opportunities, and the
economic base of the community;
(3) Provide for safe, adequate and attractive housing;
(4) Obviate losses from flooding;
(5) Provide the necessary infrastructure of utilities and vehicular and
pedestrian transportation arteries;
(6) Provide for recreational and community facilities; and
(7) Provide for ongoing community planning and growth management.
(8) Provide for safe, adequate and attractive commercial, institutional
and industrial uses.
(b) The preservation and improvement of the environment shall be pursued
by:
(1) The elimination of visual and physical blight such as overhead
utility lines, light spillage, concentrations of signs of excessive size
and proximity, large expanses of unbroken pavement and
dilapidated structures;
(2) The preservation of natural topography and wooded slopelands,
including the limiting of hillside development beyond a reasonable
gradient, and the control of floodplain and water sheds;
(3) The limitation of excess erosion, hazardous rock and soil slippage,
sedimentation and other soil and water management problems;
(4) The regulation and control of the design, construction, quality of
materials, use, location and maintenance of grading, excavation
and fill;
(5) The acquisition by the Town of and the promotion of dedication of
natural open space and wooded slopeland in order to link the
existing and proposed park sites and neighborhoods and to prevent
ecological problems resulting from extensive cut and fill necessary
to develop wooded slopelands.
(c) The increase of property values, employment opportunities and the
economic base of the community shall be pursued by:
(1) The promotion of balanced economic growth and employment
opportunities;
(2) The concentration of commercial and industrial uses in the areas
where streets and utilities can provide the necessary services and
where conflicts with other uses can be minimized through site
design and transitional provisions; and
 1311.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  1311.02
C:422
(d) The provision of safe, adequate and attractive housing for the entire
population of the community shall be pursued by:
(1) The provision of a wide range of housing density alternatives and a
mix of housing types, correlating residential density and housing
type with topography, environmental conditions, and the capacity
of and distance from existing and proposed utilities, streets and
community facilities;
(2) The removal of dilapidated housing, the rehabilitation of
deteriorating housing, the maintenance of sound housing and the
development of new housing;
(3) The promotion of an attractive residential environment through the
implementation of the other objectives set forth herein;
(4) The provision of residential areas with adequate commercial,
governmental, recreational and educational facilities; and
(5) The preservation of historical landmarks.
(e) The creation and implementation of land use plans shall seek to achieve
the foregoing objectives and to:
(1) Avoid incompatible land use if possible and protect against the
detrimental effect of incompatible land uses through planting, open
space and natural breaks in topography;
(2) Concentrate development where possible to prevent sprawl,
conserve open space, and make full use of utilities and services;
and
(3) Provide site plan control.
(f) The prevention of loss of life, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection
and relief, and the related impairment of the tax base shall be pursued
by:
(1) Regulation of uses and development in floodplains which, acting
alone or in combination with other uses and development, may
cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities and
frequencies;
(2) Restricting and prohibiting certain uses, activities, and
development from locating within areas subject to flooding; and
(3) Requiring all those uses, activities, and developments that occur in
floodplains to be protected and flood proofed against flooding and
flood damage.
(g) The provision of the necessary infrastructure of utilities and
transportation arteries shall be pursued by:
 1311.02 CHARTER  1311.02
C:423
 1311.03. (Reserved)41
 1311.04. Definitions. [Ord. 964, passed 10-26-1987; Ord. 1004,
passed 3-27-1989; Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991; Ord. 1127, passed
8-22-1994; Ord. 1163, passed 4-22-1996; Ord. 1235, passed
7-17-2000; Ord. 1264, passed 3-25-2002; Ord. 1316, passed
3-28-2005; Ord. 1334, passed 9-25-2006; Ord. 1359, passed
4-28-2008; Ord. 1360, passed 4-28-2008; Ord. 1408, passed
12-19-2011; Ord. 1449, passed 5-18-2015]
The meanings of certain terms used herein are defined as follows:
(1) The promotion of the town improvements of water lines, storm and
sanitary sewers and roads;
(2) The encouragement of public utilities to improve and extend
services consistent with the objectives set forth herein; and
(3) Traffic planning and control which will provide safe, rapid and
convenient movement of people and goods within and through the
Town, with a separation of through and local traffic, provision for
pedestrians, and minimal disruption of existing and proposed
development patterns and community integrity.
(h) The provision of recreational and community facilities shall be pursued
by:
(1) The creation of a variety of outdoor and indoor recreational
facilities to accommodate the existing and future population;
(2) The promotion of schools and parks in close proximity to decrease
duplication of services and to provide the greatest value for public
expenditures;
(3) The promotion of acquisition or dedication of natural open space
for park and recreational purposes;
(4) The providing of residential areas with adequate commercial,
governmental, recreational and educational facilities; and
(5) The preservation of historical landmarks.
(a) As used in this Code, words in the singular include the plural, and those
in the plural include the singular; the word may is permissive; the
words shall and will are mandatory.
ABUTTING  Having a common border with, or being separated from
such common border by, an alley or easement.
ACCESS  A means of vehicular approach or entry to or exit from
property.
41.Editor's Note: Former  1311.03, Zoning Objectives, was repealed 4-22-1991 by Ord. No.
1052.
 1311.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  1311.04
C:424
ACRE  43,560 square feet.
ADVERTISING SIGN  A sign which is a principal use on a lot as
opposed to an accessory use to a principal structure.
AGRICULTURAL COMMODITY  An agricultural commodity as
generally defined in the "Right to Farm" law, as amended through Act
58 of 1998 and including: (1) agricultural, agronomic, aquacultural,
horticultural, floricultural, viticultural, silvicultural or dairy products;
(2) livestock and products of livestock; (3) ranch-raised fur bearing
animals and the products of ranch-raised fur bearing animals; (4) the
products of poultry or bee raising; (5) any products raised or produced
on farms intended for human consumption and the processed or
manufactured result of such products intended for human consumption,
and (6) forestry and forestry products.
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION, NORMAL  The activities as defined
in the Right to Farm law, including the practices and procedures and
the use of equipment by farmers in the production, harvesting and
marketing of agricultural commodities.
AMATEUR RADIO (also called HAM RADIO)  The use of designated
radio frequency spectra for purposes of private recreation, noncommercial
exchange of messages, wireless experimentation, selftraining,
and emergency communication.
APARTMENT  A dwelling unit contained in a building comprising
more than three dwelling units, each of which has a entrance to a
hallway or balcony in common with at least one other dwelling unit.
APPEAL  A means for obtaining review of a decision, determination,
order or failure to act pursuant to the terms of this Code.
APPLICANT  A landowner or developer (as hereinafter defined) who
has filed an application for development, his heirs, successors or
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT  Every application, whether
preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start
of construction or development, including, but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat
or plan for the approval of a development plan.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY  Is synonymous with "personal care
home".
ATTIC  That part of a building which is immediately below, and wholly
or partly within, the roof framing.
BASE SITE AREA  A calculated area; see Section 1314.03.
BASEMENT  A portion of a building located partially or totally below
grade. The basement constitutes a story if the basement floor is less
than four feet below the average elevation of the ground.
BLOCK  An area bounded on all sides by existing or proposed streets.
 1311.04 CHARTER  1311.04
C:425
BOARDING HOUSE  A lodging house at which meals are provided but
not medical facilities.
BUFFERYARD/BUFFER AREA  A unit of land, together with a
specified type and amount of planting thereon, and any structures
which may be required between land uses to eliminate or minimize
conflicts between them.
BUILDABLE AREA  That part of the lot not in any required yard.
BUILDING  A structure built, maintained or intended for use for the
shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. The
term is inclusive of any part thereof. Where independent units with
separate entrances are divided by party walls, each unit is a building.
BUILDING AREA  The total gross area of the first floor of all principal
buildings on a lot.
BUILDING FRONT  That exterior wall of a building which faces a
front lot line of the lot.
BUILDING LINE  A line on a lot, generally parallel to a lot line or
road right-of-way line, and located at a distance from such lot line or
road right-of-way line, a distance equal to the minimum yards required
by this Code. The building line delimits the area in which buildings
or structures may extend or be constructed, subject to all applicable
provisions of this Code. For irregular-shaped lots, see Section 1313.14
Yards.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE  A line representing the front building
line. (See the definition of "building line.")
BUILDING, ACCESSORY 
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL  A building in which is conducted, or in which
is intended to be conducted, the main or principal use of the lot on
which it is located.
CALIPER  A measurement of the size of a tree equal to the diameter
of its trunk measured 4 1/2 feet above natural grade.
A building which:
Is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or a principal
use;
A.
Is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal
structure or use served;
B.
Is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use
served except as otherwise expressly authorized by provisions
of this Code; and
C.
D. Is customarily incidental to the principal structure or use.
(1)
Any portion of a principal structure devoted or intended to be
devoted to an accessory use is not an accessory structure.
(2)
 1311.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  1311.04
C:426
CARETAKER'S RESIDENCE  A dwelling unit which is used exclusively
by either the owner, manager or operator of a principal permitted use
and which is located on the same parcel as the principal use.
CARTWAY  The portion of a street intended for vehicular use.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE  An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given
distance from the intersection of street center lines.
CO-LOCATION  The mounting of one or more Communications
Antennas on an existing Communications Tower, or on any structure
that already supports at least one Communications Antenna.
COMMON OPEN SPACE  A parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water, or a combination of land and water within a development site,
designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the site.
Common open space does not include streets, off-street parking areas
and areas set aside for public facilities.
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA (ANTENNA)  Any system of wires,
rods, discs, panels, flat panels, dishes, whips, or other similar devices
used for the transmission or reception of wireless signals, which may
include an omnidirectional Antenna (rod), directional Antenna (panel),
parabolic Antenna (disc) or any other wireless Antenna.
Communications Antenna further includes, but is not limited to, Related
Equipment. Communications Antennas shall not include support
structures for Antennas or any Related Equipment that is mounted to
the ground or at ground-level.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER  Any structure that is used for the
purpose of supporting one or more Antennas, including, but not limited
to, self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers and monopoles, utility
poles and light poles. DAS hub facilities are considered to be
Communications Towers.
COMPLETION GUARANTEE  A deposit of cash, bond, certified check,
negotiable securities or the submission of an irrevocable letter of credit
from a bank or savings and loan by the owner or developer as security
for the completion of any required improvements. The deposit is
returnable to the depositor or the letter of credit is terminated upon
completion of all required improvements within the stated period.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN  A plan consisting of maps, charts and
textual data stating the objectives and plans for the development of
the Town, as may be adopted, altered or revised from time to time
by Council in accordance with Article III of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
CONDITIONAL USE  A use permitted in a specific zoning district,
subject to specified criteria, and as approved by Council pursuant to
public notice and public hearing and recommendations by the Planning
Commission.
 1311.04 CHARTER  1311.04
C:427
CONVENIENCE STORE  Any retail establishment offering for sale
a relatively limited selection of prepackaged food products, household
items, and other related goods, which may or may not include gasoline
or fuel sales, characterized by a rapid turnover of customers and high
traffic generation.
CORNER LOT  See the definition of "lot, corner."
COUNTY  Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
COVERAGE  The ratio of the total area of buildings, and structures to
the gross lot area.
CUL-DE-SAC  A dead end street terminating in a vehicular
turnaround.
CURB CUT  See the definition of "access."
DAY CARE CENTER  A center providing supervision, facilities and
meals for preschool children during the day, excluding lodging.
DEDICATION  The transfer of property interests from private to
public ownership for a public purpose. The transfer may be of fee
simple interest or of less than fee interest, including an easement.
DENSITY FACTOR  An intensity measure expressed as the number
of units per net buildable site area. It is the density on the buildable
portion of a site.
DENSITY, GROSS  The quotient of the total number of dwelling units
divided by the base site area of a site.
DEVELOPER  Any landowner, holder of an option or contract to
purchase, agent or tenant of such landowner, who, with the permission
of such landowner, makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or
a land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN  The provisions for development of a planned
residential development, including a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures,
intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking
facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phrase
"provisions of the development plan" shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS)  A network of spatially
separated Antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.
DRAINAGE  The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading or other means. "Drainage" includes the control
of runoff to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after
development and includes the means necessary for water supply
preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE EASEMENTS  The dedication of or grant of use of lands
required for the installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches,
 1311.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  1311.04
C:428
or required along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the
channel and providing for the flow of water therein to safeguard the
public against flood damage.
DRAINAGEWAY  Any area to which runoff from surrounding land
flows naturally or is caused to flow from existing land alterations and
which conveys such runoff to a watercourse.
DWELLING  Any building or portion thereof which is designated or
used for residential purposes.
DWELLING UNIT  One or more living or sleeping rooms with cooking
and sanitary facilities for one person or one family.
DWELLING, ATTACHED  Three or more adjoining dwelling units,
each of which is separated from the others by one or more unpierced
walls from ground to roof.
DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED  Two dwelling units, each of which is
attached side to side, each one sharing only one common wall with the
other.
EASEMENT  Authorization by a property owner of the use by another
and for a specified purpose of any designated part of his property.
EMERGENCY  A condition that (1) constitutes a clear and immediate
danger to the health, welfare, or safety of the public, or (2) has caused
or is likely to cause facilities in the Rights-of-Way to be unusable and
result in loss of the services provided.
ENGINEER  A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and duly appointed as the engineer for
the Town.
ENVIRONMENTAL CRITICAL AREAS  Lands that include streams,
their floodplains, steep areas and slopes in excess of 25%, that shall
be restricted from development because of their resource values or
hazardous nature.
EROSION  The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice and/or gravity.
EXTERIOR STORAGE  Outdoor storage of fuel, raw materials
products, and equipment. In the case of lumberyards, exterior storage
includes all impervious materials stored outdoors. In the case of truck
terminals, exterior storage includes all trucks, truck beds and truck
trailers stored outdoors.
FAMILY  One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or
guardianship or not more than three persons not so related occupying
a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit.
FARM  Any lot or parcel of land used in the raising of farm animals or
in the production of agricultural commodities.
 1311.04 CHARTER  1311.04
C:429
FARM ANIMAL  Any type of animal normally kept or raised on a farm.
Normal household pets are not included in this definition. Farm animals
are classified as follows:
FARM BUILDING  Any type of building used for housing farm animals
or farm type equipment used in normal agricultural operations or used
for processing, production or storage of agricultural commodities.
FCC  Federal Communications Commission.
FILLING  The depositing on land, whether submerged or not, of sand,
gravel, earth or other materials of any composition whatsoever.
FINAL PLAT  The final map of the land development or subdivision
which is submitted for Town approval and which, if approved, is filed
with the County Recorder of Deeds.
FLOODPLAIN  Either riverine or inland depressional areas. Riverine
floodplains are those area contiguous with a lake, stream or stream
bed whose elevation is greater than the normal waterpool elevation but
equal to or lower than the projected 100 year flood elevation. Inland
depressional floodplains are not associated with a stream system but
are low points to which surrounding lands drain.
FLOOR AREA  The sum of the gross floor area for each of a building's
stories measured from the exterior limits of the faces of the structure.
The floor area of a building includes basement floor area and includes
attic floor area only if the attic area meets the Town building code
standards for habitable floor area. It does not include cellars and
unenclosed porches or any floor space in an accessory building or in the
principal building which is designed for the parking of motor vehicles
in order to meet the parking requirements of this Code.
FLOOR AREA FACTOR  The intensity measure expressed as the ratio
derived by dividing the total floor area of a building by the net buildable
site area. It is the floor area ratio measured on the buildable area of the
site.
FLOOR AREA RATIO  An intensity measured as a ratio derived by
dividing the total floor area of a building by the base site area. Where
the lot is part of a larger development and has no bufferyard, that lot
area may be used instead of the base site area.
FOREST  An area containing mature woodlands, woodlands and/or
young woodlands.
GARAGE  A deck or building, or part thereof, used or intended to be
used for the parking and storage of motor vehicles.
(1) Large animals, e.g., horses, ponies, mules, cattle, alpacas, etc.;
(2) Medium animals, e.g., sheep, goats, pigs, etc.
Small animals, e.g., rabbits, chickens, turkeys, pheasants, geese,
ducks, birds, fowl, fish, small reptiles, etc.
(3)
 1311.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  1311.04
C:430
GARDEN APARTMENT BUILDING  An apartment building with three
or more dwelling units on one, two or three floors.
GROSS DENSITY  See the definition of "density, gross."
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR SUBSTANCES  Any substances or
materials in form or quantities which, in the determination of the
Town, pose a possible risk to the life, health or safety of persons or
property, or to the ecological balance of the environment, or to the
contamination of our water sources. These shall include, but not be
limited to: explosives, PCB's, petroleum products or gases (except in
motor vehicles and equipment), poisons, etiologic agents, flammables,
corrosives, gases under high pressure, acetone, ammonia, benzene,
calcium carbide, carbon disulfide, celluloid, chlorine, hydrochloric acid,
hydrocyanic acid, magnesium, nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen,
phosphorus, potassium, sodium, sulfur products and pesticides
(including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides) and any other
products or materials listed in the Hazardous Substances List of the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry.
HEIGHT OF A COMMUNICATIONS TOWER  The vertical distance
measured from the ground level, including any base pad, to the highest
point on a Communications Tower, including Antennas mounted on the
tower and any other appurtenances.
HEIGHT OF STRUCTURE  Building height in accordance with the
International Building Code (IBC), latest edition.
HI-RISE APARTMENT BUILDING  An apartment building with four to
12 floors.
HOME IMPROVEMENT CENTER  A retail establishment, selling a
mixture of residential construction materials, appliances, cleaning
supplies, home decorating and finishing materials, landscaping
maintenance supplies, landscaping materials, and seasonal home use
items such as holiday decorations, or flowers, but shall not include wet
concrete or unbagged blacktop.
HOME OCCUPATION  An occupation which is carried on in the home
by the resident without special signs or displays, special mechanical
equipment not customary in family dwelling units, or building
alterations not customary to family dwelling units. No one living outside
the home may be employed nor any commodity sold or warehoused.
Any need for parking generated by the conduct of a home occupation
shall be met off the street and on the lot other than in the required front
yard and honoring the setback requirements for accessory facilities. An
office in the home is a home occupation and is subject to the above
restrictions.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE  Those which do not absorb water. They
consist of all buildings, parking areas, driveways, road, sidewalks and
any areas of concrete or asphalt. In the case of lumberyards, areas of
stored lumber constitute impervious surfaces.
 1311.04 CHARTER  1311.04
C:431
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE ON LOT  The total amount of impervious
surface which is present on a lot.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO  A measure of the intensity of land
use which is determined by dividing the total area of all impervious
surfaces on a site by, in the case of residential uses, base site area or, in
the case of nonresidential uses, by net buildable site area.
INTENSITY CLASS, LAND USE  A measure of the magnitude and
negative impact of a land use on the environment and neighboring land
uses.
JUNK  Any discarded material or article and shall include, but not be
limited to, scrap metal, batteries, scrapped, abandoned or junked motor
vehicles, machinery, equipment, glass, containers and industrial waste.
It shall not include refuse or garbage kept in proper containers for the
purpose of prompt disposal.
JUNKED VEHICLE  Any vehicle which meets one or more of the
conditions set forth below:
(1) Broken windshields, mirrors or other glass with sharp edges.
One or more flat or open tires or tubes which could permit vermin
harborage.
(2)
Missing doors, windows, hood, trunk or other body parts which
could permit animal harborage or entry of children.
(3)
Any body parts with sharp edges including holes resulting from
rust or damage.
(4)
(5) Missing tires resulting in unsafe suspension of the motor vehicle.
Upholstery which is torn or open that could permit animal and/or
vermin harborage.
(6)
(7) Sharp objects protruding from the chassis.
Broken headlamps, tail lamps, side lamps, or other vehicle body
parts with sharp edges which are inherently dangerous and could
permit the harborage of vermin.
(8)
Broken vehicle frame suspended from the ground in an unstable
manner.
(9)
Leaking or damaged oil pan or gas tank which could cause fire or
explosion.
(10)
(11)Leaking battery.
Any condition enabling entrapment within the vehicle including but
not limited to open trunks.
(12)
Damaged floor boards, trunk, trunk floor, fire wall or truck bed with
holes or sharp edges.
(13)
 1311.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  1311.04
C:432
JUNKYARD  Any land with or without buildings, where any junk,
as defined herein, is stored, disposed of, or accumulated outside of a
completely enclosed building and shall conform to the requirements as
set forth in this article. "Junkyard" includes any place where two or
more junked vehicles, as defined herein, are stored for any purpose for
a period of 30 days or more shall be deemed a junkyard.
LAND DEVELOPMENT  The improvement of one lot or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
LANDOWNER  The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is
authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or
other persons having a proprietary interest in land.
LANDSLIDE PRONE AREA  An area where the downward and
outward movement of slope-forming materials composed of rock, soils,
artificial fills or a combination of these materials exist. (See Article
1314 Appendix map for landslide prone areas, soils types and
locations.)
LOT  A parcel, tract or area of land, undivided by any street or private
road as established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to
be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA  See the definition of "lot area, gross."
LOT AREA, GROSS  The area within the lot lines.
LOT AREA, NET  The gross lot area, less internal road rights-of-way
(calculated 50 feet wide), parking spaces (calculated at 180 square feet
each), parking area aisles and drives (calculated at 24 feet wide).
LOT, CORNER  A lot abutting two or more streets at their
intersection.
(14)Damaged bumpers pulled away from the perimeter of the vehicle.
(15)Broken grill with protruding edges.
(16)Vehicle suspended on unstable supports.
A group of two or more buildings, or a single nonresidential
building; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space between or among two
or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for
the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups or other features; or
(2)
(3) A subdivision of land; or
Development in accordance with Section 503(1) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247).
(4)
 1311.04 CHARTER  1311.04
C:433
LOT FRONTAGE  Lot width measured at the street lot line. When a
lot has more than one street lot line, lot width shall be measured and
the minimum lot width required by this Code shall be provided, at each
such line. The minimum lot frontage shall be 65 feet.
LOT LINE  A line bounding a lot which divides one lot from another
or from a street or any other public or private space.
LOT LINE, REAR  That lot line which is parallel to and most distant
from the front lot line of the lot; in the case of an irregular, triangular
or gore-shaped lot, a line 20 feet in length, entirely within the lot,
parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the front line
shall be considered to be the rear lot line. In the case of lots which
have frontage on more than one road or street, the rear lot line shall be
opposite the lot line along which the lot takes access to a street.
LOT LINE, SIDE  Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT LINE, STREET  In the case of a lot abutting only one street,
the street line separating such lot from such street; in the case of a
double frontage lot, each street line separating such lot from a street
shall be considered to be the front lot line, except where the rear yard
requirement is greater than the front yard requirement in which case
one of two opposing yards shall be a rear yard.
LOT OF RECORD  Any validly recorded lot which at the time of
its recordation complied with all applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations.
LOT WIDTH  The distance between side lot lines measured along the
front building line.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE  A guarantee of facilities or work to
insure the correction of any failures of any improvements required
pursuant to this Code and regulation, or to maintain same.
MANUFACTURED STRUCTURE  A structure transported in one or
more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed
for use with or without a permanent foundation.
MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN  A document, including plats and
plans, demonstrating how the development meets the purpose and
objectives of the conditional use express standards for a TND,
establishing locations for uses within the proposed development and
establishing lot lines and bufferyards, the locations of common open
space, and civic art (such as pavilions, pergolas, benches, sculpture
gardens, fountains and the like) and shared parking facilities or parking
structures.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA  Marijuana for certified medical use as legally
permitted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with Act 16 of 2016,
35 P.S.  10231.101 et seq., as amended.[Added 2-25-2019 by Ord.
No. 1485]
 1311.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  1311.04
C:434
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ACADEMIC CLINICAL RESEARCH CENTER 
An accredited medical school within this commonwealth that operates
or partners with an acute care hospital licensed within this
commonwealth.[Added 2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 1485]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY  A person, including a natural
person, corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity, or
any combination thereof, which holds a permit issued by the
Department of Health of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
("Department of Health") to dispense medical marijuana.[Added
2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 1485]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA GROWER/PROCESSOR  A person, including
a natural person, corporation, partnership, association, trust or other
entity, or any combination thereof, which holds a permit from the
Department of Health to grow and process medical marijuana.[Added
2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 1485]
MINIMUM FLOOR ELEVATION  The lowest elevation permissible for
the construction, erection or other placement of any floor, including a
basement floor.
MONOPOLE  A Communications Tower or site which consists of a
single pole structure, designed and erected on the ground or on top
of a structure, to support Communications Antenna and connecting
appurtenances.
MORTICIAN  The business or profession of a funeral home which
does not contain any crematory facilities.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING  A single structure intended for
occupancy by three or more families.
NET BUILDABLE SITE AREA  A calculated area for residential uses
and nonresidential uses.
NURSING HOME  A facility licensed as a nursing home by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
OLDER ADULT DAY CARE CENTER  An establishment, licensed by
the Commonwealth, located within a building not used as a dwelling
unit, for the care of six or more persons, on a regular basis during part
of a twenty-four-hour day, of handicapped or elderly persons, but who
do not require constant medical or nursing care. This does not include
current court adjudicated felons or misdemeanants or drug or alcohol
treatment centers.
ON-SITE  Located on the lot in question, except in the context of
on-site detention, when the term means within the boundaries of the
development site as a whole.
OPEN SPACE RATIO  The proportion of a site consisting of open
space which shall be calculated using the base site area.
 1311.04 CHARTER  1311.04
C:435
OWNER  The person or persons having the right of legal title to,
beneficial interest in or a contractual right to purchase a lot or parcel
of land.
PARALLEL  Extending in the same direction or within 20 of the same
direction.
PARCEL  The area within the boundary lines of a development.
PERSONAL CARE HOME  A premise in which food, shelter and
personal assistance or supervision are provided for a period exceeding
24 hours for six or more adults who are not relatives of the operator,
who do not require the services in (or of) a long term care facility, but
who do require assistance or supervision in matters such as dressing,
bathing, diet, financial management, evacuation of a residence in the
event of an emergency, or medication prescribed for selfadministration,
and which premise is licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare as such, but not including, drug or
alcohol rehabilitation or medical or nursing care or current court
adjudicated felons or misdemeanants.
PERSONAL STORAGE FACILITIES/ESTABLISHMENTS  A building or
group of buildings for the interior storing of goods, equipment, wares
or merchandise where there is no sales or service on the premises.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT  An area of land,
controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a
number of dwelling units, the development plan for which does not
correspond in lot size, bulk or type of dwelling, density, lot coverage
or required open space to the regulations established in any one
residential district created, from time to time, under the provisions of
the zoning code.
PLANNING COMMISSION  The Town of McCandless Planning
Commission.
PLAT  The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS  Trailers, units rolled off a truck or
transported by truck or other vehicular means and generally used or
intended for use as temporary storage on a premise. This includes:
PODS or similarly designed units, storage trailers, drop-off or rolloff
dumpsters unless expressly permitted, and other portable storage
units.
PRELIMINARY PLAT  A preliminary map of the proposed land
development or subdivision which is submitted for Town consideration.
PUBLIC GROUNDS  Includes parks, playgrounds and other public
areas; and sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and
other publicly owned or operated facilities.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT  Any improvement, facility or service,
together with customary improvements and appurtenances thereto,
 1311.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  1311.04
C:436
necessary to provide for public needs, including any or all of the
following: grading, vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, flood
control improvements, water supplies and distribution facilities,
sanitary sewage disposal and treatment, public paving, curbs, curb
returns, gutters, sidewalks, drive entrances within a street right-ofway,
utility and energy services, parking areas, fire hydrants, storm
sewer lines and structures, drainage channels and structures, guide
rails, traffic signals and devices, retaining walls, recreation facilities,
sodding, landscaping and monuments, whether on-site or off-site.
PUBLIC NOTICE  A notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town.
Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the
particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first
publication shall be not more than 30 days and the second shall not be
less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC TRANSIT SHELTER  A structure located at a transit stop
providing protection for individuals who are waiting for public
transportation.
RELATED EQUIPMENT  Any piece of equipment related to, incident
to, or necessary for, the operation of a Communications Tower or
Communications Antenna. By way of illustration, not limitation,
RELATED EQUIPMENT  Includes generators and base stations.
RIGHT-OF-WAY or ROW  The surface of and space above and below
any real property in the Town in which the Town has a regulatory
interest, or interest as a trustee for the public, as such interests now
or hereafter exist, including, but not limited to, all Streets, highways,
avenues, roads, alleys, sidewalks, tunnels, viaducts, bridges, skyways,
or any other public place, area or property under the control of the
Town, and any unrestricted public or utility easements established,
dedicated, platted, improved or devoted for Utility purposes, but
excluding lands other than streets that are owned by the Town. The
phrase "in the Right(s)-of-Way" and means in, on, over, along, above
and/or under the Right(s)-of-Way. For the purpose of this ordinance,
ROW shall include streets and roads owned by Allegheny County, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and any other Pennsylvania state
agencies.
SEDIMENTATION  The deposition of soil that has been transported
from its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means
as a result of erosion.
SIGHT DISTANCE  The distance an object two feet above the
pavement of a street is visible from an eye level 4 1/2 feet above the
pavement (the average height of an automobile operator's eye).
SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING  A separate, detached building designed
for or occupied exclusively as a residence of one family.
SMALL-FORMAT HOSPITAL  [Added 6-25-2018 by Ord. No. 1476]
 1311.04 CHARTER  1311.04
C:437
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY  Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communications towers. Antennas and other facilities which render
them more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the
existing structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render
it minimally visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but
are not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted Antennas,
building-mounted Antennas painted to match the existing structure and
facilities constructed to resemble trees, shrubs, and light poles.
STEEP SLOPES  Land area where the inclination of the land's surface
from the horizontal is 12% or greater. Slope is determined from onsite
topographic surveys prepared with a two-foot contour interval
or topography taken from controlled aerial photography at two-foot
contour intervals.
STREET  A right of way which affords the principal means of access
to abutting property. A street may be designated as a highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, boulevard, road, avenue, drive or other
appropriate name. A street may also be identified according to type of
use as in the following subsections:
A facility that:
A. Occupies not more than 40,000 square feet; and
Offers no more than 15 emergency room bays and no more
than 15 inpatient beds for medical-related use 24 hours per
day by individuals requiring diagnosis, treatment, or care for
illness, injury, deformity, infirmity, abnormality or disease; and/
or
B.
Regularly makes available clinical laboratory services,
diagnostic radiological services, treatment facilities for
medical treatment, and/or other services associated with
hospitals licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Health.
C.
(1)
Small-format hospitals may be contained within the same building
as medical or dental offices.
(2)
ARTERIAL STREET  A street which is used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic of an intercommunity nature.
(1)
COLLECTOR STREET  A street which carries traffic from minor
streets to the arterial system.
(2)
MINOR STREET  A street which is used primarily for traffic
access to the abutting properties.
(3)
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET  A minor street which is parallel to
an arterial street which provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
(4)
 1311.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  1311.04
C:438
STRUCTURES  Any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on land or in water, whether or not affixed to the
land.
SUBDIVISION  The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other
divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building
or lot development; provided, however, that subdivision by lease of
land for agriculture purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not
involving any new street or easement of access or residential dwellings
shall be exempt. All subdivisions are also land developments.
SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION  The completion in the judgment of
the engineer of those improvements required as a condition for final
approval have been completed in accordance with the approved plan,
so that the project shall be able to be used, occupied or operated
for its intended use, but in no event shall substantial completion be
considered to have been achieved when less than 90% (based on the
cost of the required improvements for which, security was posted) has
been completed.
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE 
TEMPORARY USE  See the definition of "use, temporary."
TOWN MASTER PLAN  A plan which may consist of maps, data and
other descriptive material as may be adopted, altered or revised from
time to time by Council.
TOWNHOUSE BUILDING  A building containing three to eight family
dwelling units attached side by side but without interior access from
one to another.
USE  The purpose or activity for which land or any building thereon is
designed, arranged or intended for which it is occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY  A use which:
Any increase in the height of a Wireless Support Structure by more
than 10%, or by the height of one additional Antenna array with
separation from the nearest existing Antenna not to exceed 20 feet,
whichever is greater, except that the mounting of the proposed
Wireless Communications Facility may exceed the size limits set
forth in the WBCA or the Town of McCandless Zoning Ordinance if
necessary to avoid interference with existing Antennas; or
(1)
Any further increase in the height of a Wireless Support Structure
which has already been extended by more than 10% of its originally
approved height or by the height of one additional Antenna array.
(2)
Is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or a principal
use;
(1)
 1311.04 CHARTER  1311.04
C:439
USE, PRINCIPAL  The specific primary purpose for which land is
used.
USE, TEMPORARY  A use established for a fixed period of time
with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of such
time. Such uses do not involve the construction or alteration of any
permanent structure.
WATERCOURSE  Any channel for conveyance of surface water having
a defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WBCA  The Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S.
 11702.1 et seq.).
WIRELESS  Transmissions through the airwaves including, but not
limited to, infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or
radio signals.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY  The Antennas, nodes,
control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics
and other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving,
distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless communications
services.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICANT (APPLICANT)
 Any person that applies for a wireless communication facility
building permit, zoning approval and/or permission to use the public
right-of-way (ROW) or other Town owned land or property.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE  A freestanding structure, such as
a Tower-Based Wireless Communications Facility or any other support
structure that could support the placement or installation of a Wireless
Communications Facility if approved by the Town.
WOODLAND  An area of planted material covering one acre or more
and consisting of 30% or more canopy trees having an eight inch or
greater caliper, or any grove consisting of eight or more trees having a
10 inch or greater caliper.
WOODLAND, MATURE  An area of plant material covering one acre
or more and consisting of 30% or more canopy trees having a sixteeninch
or greater caliper, or any grove consisting of eight or more trees
having an eighteen-inch or greater caliper.
WOODLANDS, YOUNG  An area of plant material covering one acre
or more and consisting of 70% or more canopy trees having a 2 1/2 inch
Is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal
structure or use served;
(2)
Is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use served
except as otherwise expressly authorized by provisions of this
Code; and
(3)
(4) Is customarily incidental to the principal structure or use.
 1311.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  1311.04
C:440
 1311.05. Zoning district designations; map. [Ord. 1052, passed
4-22-1991; Ord. 1073, passed 5-26-1992; Ord. 1127, passed
8-22-1994; Ord. 1359, passed 4-28-2008]
caliper or greater, or a tree plantation for commercial or conservation
purposes where 70% or more of the canopy trees have a 2 1/2 inch or
greater caliper.
YARD  The area between a lot line or road right-of-way and the face of
a building or structure. The minimum yard width or depth shall be the
minimum measurement between the lot line or street right-of-way and
the building or structure.
YARD, FRONT  A yard extending the full width of the front of a lot,
between the road right-of-way line and the front face of a building or
structure.
YARD, REAR  A yard extending the full width of rear of a lot, between
the rear lot line and rear face of the building or structure.
YARD, SIDE  A yard extending from the rear yard to the front yard,
between the lot line and the side face of the building or structure.
ZONING OCCUPANCY PERMIT  A document issued by the Zoning
Officer upon completion of the development of a site including, but
not limited to, the construction of a structure, or change in use of
a structure or parcel of land, or change of occupancy of structure,
validating that all conditions have been met, and that the structure and
land may be occupied and used for the purposes set forth in this Zoning
Code.
ZONING PERMIT  A document issued by the Zoning Officer stating
that a proposed use or development will be in compliance with this
Zoning Code, and authorizing the applicant to proceed.
(a) Zoning district designations. A Map entitled the "McCandless Zoning
District Map" is hereby adopted as a part of this Zoning Code. The
Zoning Map shall be kept on file for examination in the office of the
Zoning Officer. All property in the Town is zoned according to the
following districts and is so shown on the Zoning Map:
R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District
R-2 Single-Family and Two-Family Dwellings District
R-3 Townhouse and Garden Apartment District
R-4 Hi-Rise Apartment District
R-5 Planned Residential Development District
R-6 Elderly Housing District
R-C Residential-Commercial
D Development District
I Institutional District
 1311.04 CHARTER  1311.05
C:441
 1311.06. Stormwater overlay districts. [Ord. 979, passed
2-22-1988]
TND Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District
C-1 Commercial Recreation District
C-2 Neighborhood Shopping District
C-3 Highway Commercial District
C-4 Regional Shopping District
C-5 Commercial Residential District
C-6 Industrial District
C-7 Office Building District
C-8 General Office and Limited Retail District
TD-1 Transportation Overlay District
(b) TD-1 District boundaries. For TD-1 Districts, the boundaries shall be
coterminous with the District established pursuant to the requirements
of the Transportation Partnership Act, 53 P.S.  1621 et seq., Business
Improvement Districts, 53 P.S. 1551 et seq. or Municipality Authorities
Act of 1945, 53 P.S.  301 et seq. The maps created for such districts
shall be deemed to be the TD-1 maps.
(c) Creation and incorporation of Transportation Overlay Districts. Upon
both: (1) the creation by the Town of a Transportation Development
District or a Business Improvement District and (2) receipt by the
Zoning Officer of a certified copy of the ordinance or resolution, as
appropriate, creating the District along with the District map, there
shall be created a TD-1 Transportation Overlay District coterminous
with such District. The Zoning Officer shall cause such Transportation
Overlay District to be noted on the Zoning Map. The Transportation
Overlay District shall continue in existence until the earliest of: (1) the
payment of all indebtedness issued by the Town for transportation
improvements in the transportation or business improvement district,
or (2) the end of the useful life of the TPAD transportation
improvements as determined by the Town Engineer.
(d) Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District. A Traditional
Neighborhood Development Overlay District is created as a conditional
use, as shown on the zoning map, bounded on the north by Cumberland
Road, on the east by Babcock Boulevard, on the south by Duncan
Avenue and on the west by McKnight Road, including all parcels of land
abutting Duncan Avenue between Babcock Boulevard and McKnight
Road but excluding the parcel of land at the southwestern corner of
Cumberland Road and Babcock Boulevard, currently identified as Lot 1
of the La Roche College Plan of Lots (Greek Church).
 1311.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  1311.06
C:442
 1311.07. Stormwater management. [Ord. 979, passed 2-22-1988]
 1311.08. Compliance. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991]
No structure shall be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved,
altered, converted or enlarged nor shall any structure or land be altered
or used except in full compliance with all provisions of this Zoning Code,
the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations, and all other applicable
Land Development Regulations, and after the lawful issuance of all permits
and certificates required by the Land Development Regulations.
 1311.09. Permits required. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991; Ord.
1127, passed 8-22-1994; Ord. 1144, passed 5-22-1995]
To ensure compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Code, the following
permits are required:
(a) The Town is hereby divided into a series of overlay districts which are
listed in subsection (b) hereof and shown on the Subwatershed Map in
Appendix A of Article 913.
(b) Stormwater management districts. The following districts are
established according to the boundaries of the watersheds designated
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Stormwater Management Act (Act
167 of 1978, as amended) and the watershed stormwater management
plans prepared pursuant thereto, where applicable:
Pine Creek
Girty's Run
Lowries Run
The Pine Creek and Girty's Run watersheds are further subdivided into
hydrologic subbasins as shown on the Subwatershed map. Copies of
these maps are available at the Town Hall.
(a) All uses or lots in all zoning districts shall comply with the requirements
and standards for managing stormwater runoff in the watershed and/or
subbasin in which the lot is located, as contained in Article 913.
(b) Agricultural activities, nurseries and forestry management operations,
where permitted, shall be required to provide for the safe management
of stormwater runoff in accordance with the requirements of Article
913. However, the submission and approval of a stormwater
management plan, as required by Section 913.04 shall be waived for
such activities which have an erosion and sedimentation control plan
approved by the County Conservation District.
(a) A zoning permit shall be required before any person may construct,
reconstruct, move, alter, or enlarge any structure or building; or change
 1311.06 CHARTER  1311.09
C:443
the use of a structure or land to a different use; or change a
nonconforming use or structure.
(1) No zoning permit shall be issued for a subdivision or land
development until the final plan has been approved by Council and
has been recorded as required herein.
(2) No zoning permit shall be issued for any permitted conditional or
accessory use upon any lot except a single-family dwelling until a
site plan has been submitted, reviewed and approved in
accordance with the provisions of this Code. A zoning permit is not
required by a change in occupancy for existing structures if there
is:
A. No change in use category;
B. No building, additions or alterations. (See Section 1345.01(2)).
(3) A grading permit shall be obtained from the Town for new grading,
excavations and fills. Changes, additions or alterations made to
existing excavations or fills shall conform to the provisions of
Article 1705 of the Codified Ordinances. A separate grading permit
shall be required for each site. One permit may cover the grading,
excavation and any fills made on the same site.
(b) A zoning occupancy permit shall be required for each separate business
conducted on property prior to the occupancy of land or structure or
any portion thereof, and to certify the validity of nonconforming uses or
structures. (See Section 1701.04(n) of the Codified Ordinances.)
(c) A sign permit shall be required before any person may hereafter erect
or alter in any way any sign, except a nameplate or temporary real
estate sign as specified in Section 1313.11(b)(1) and (b)(2).
(d) Every permit shall become null and void if the work authorized has not
been commenced within one year from the date of issue or is not
completed within five years from the date of the preliminary approval of
the land development. The applicant may request in writing a new
permit for the start of the development as covered by the original
permit or an extension of the time constraints for the completion of the
work.
If the scope of work conforms to the plat or plan originally approved
and the development can be completed within the aforesaid five-year
period, the Zoning Officer may issue a new permit.
If the development cannot be completed within the aforesaid five-year
period, the request for an extension of the time constraints may be
approved by Council with or without changes to the originally approved
plat or plan.
 1311.09 MCCANDLESS CODE  1311.09
C:444
 1311.10. Interpretation. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991]
The provisions for this Zoning Code shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the protection of the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the Town.
 1311.11. Severability. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991]
Should any section, part or provision of this Zoning Code be declared by
appropriate authority to be unlawful or unconstitutional, the remainder of
this Code shall remain in full force and effect as if the provision declared to
be unlawful or unconstitutional had been omitted as of the effective date of
this Code.
Article 1313
DISTRICT COMMON STANDARDS
 1313.01. Area adjustment. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
If part of a lot or parcel of land presently has a slope over 25% only half
of such sloped areas shall be included in determining compliance with
minimum lot area, density or coverage. This adjustment applies to either
gross or net areas.
 1313.02. Buffer areas. [Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994; Ord. 1361,
passed 5-19-2008]
(e) Every permit shall be revocable where the Zoning Officer determines
that the applicant or occupant is not complying with every condition
required by the issuance of such permit.
(a) Where specified as a dimensional standard a buffer area shall be
provided along certain boundaries of a lot to provide protection for
adjacent property. This buffer area shall not be used for parking,
vehicular circulation, storage or display of commercial materials or
goods for retail or wholesale or other purpose. This includes any
portion of the buffer area which is within the road right of way.
(b) When a lot size is reduced by way of condemnation or deed in lieu of
condemnation, and as such reduces or eliminates a required buffer
zone, such buffer is not required to be replaced as required by the Town
Code.
(c) Where a lot size is reduced by way of condemnation or deed in lieu of
condemnation and where a "Corridor Study" has been performed,
future development or redevelopment may follow buffer standards
adopted by ordinance or resolution of Town Council in lieu of the buffer
requirements of the zone district in which such a study has been
performed.
 1311.09 CHARTER  1313.03
C:445
 1313.03. Fences and walls. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991; Ord.
1127, passed 8-22-1994]
 1313.04. Lighting. [Ord. 1144, passed 5-22-1995]
(a) Except as otherwise provided in the Zoning Code, the maximum
permitted height of a fence in the rear or side yard shall be six feet. The
only fences permitted in the front yard are ornamental or decorative
fences, at least 80% open, and not fencing of the chain link type or wire
generally used for enclosure or containment. The maximum height of a
fence in the front yard shall be three feet. Enclosure or containment
fences are permitted in the side and rear yard only. On a corner lot the
side yard abutting the right of way shall be considered front yard for
fencing purposes.
(b) Higher fences between properties in different zoning districts may be
authorized or required at the time of site plan approval. Higher fences
along lot lines adjacent to swimming pools or commercial properties
may be authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception
when necessary for effective buffering. Electrified fences and fences
with barbed wire are not permitted.
(c) Retaining walls shall not exceed six feet. See Section 1705.05 of the
Codified Ordinances.
(a) These regulations are intended to prevent the spillover of light offsite
onto adjacent lots or streets, and to prevent disturbance, annoyance or
hazard from direct vision of light sources. Public street lighting is not
covered by these regulations.
(b) Applications for land development approvals shall include an accurate
photometric map of the proposed lighting.
(c) These regulations apply to all commercial and institutional uses and
recreation facilities in all zoning districts, except signage, including but
not limited to, park areas, ball fields, tennis courts, golf driving range,
baseball and basketball practice areas, par three and miniature golf
courses and amusement or recreational parks and shall be subject to
the following conditions:
(1) A maximum permitted light intensity of 5/10 foot candle shall
extend no closer than 15 feet to a residential lot.
(2) Any light source within 100 feet of a residential lot shall not be
directly visible from said lot.
(3) The lighting fixture shall be shielded and so arranged that the light
or glare does not represent a hazard to the operation of motor
vehicles.
(4) Special lighting approved for tennis courts or other home
recreational purpose shall not be permitted after 10:00 p.m.
 1313.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  1313.04
C:446
 1313.05. Loading berths. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
The number and size of truck loading berths shall be adequate to handle
the anticipated traffic. Loading berth areas shall have a dust-free surface,
shall not be used for repair and shall not be included in the required parking
area.
 1313.06. Parking requirements. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord.
1052, passed 4-22-1991; Ord. 1144, passed 5-22-1995; Ord. 1433,
passed 12-16-2013]
(5) Flickering or flashing lights shall not be permitted.
(6) Building lighting used for security shall not extend beyond the
drive or parking areas.
(a) The minimum number of off-street parking spaces to be provided for
every new or substantially reconstructed building shall be as follows:
Building or Use
Required Minimum Parking
Space
Assisted Living/Personal Care
Home [Ord. 1192, passed
11-24-1997]
1 space per 2 beds
Auto sales  (outdoor storage) 1 for every 4,000 square feet of
storage area
Auto sales room 2 for each 600 square feet of
display area
Bowling alley 5 per lane
Churches 1 for every 3 pew seats
Doctors office 2 per doctor plus 1 for each 150
square feet of office space
Home occupation 1 additional
Hospital 1 per bed
Funeral home 20 per parlor (rooms with dividers
shall be required to have the
minimum number of spaces per
potential parlor)
Motel/hotel 5 for each 4 sleeping rooms
Nursing home 1 for every 3 beds
Offices [Ord. 1252, passed
8-27-2001]
1 for each 300 square feet of
office area
Outdoor storage/display 1 for every 200 square feet of
storage/display
 1313.04 CHARTER  1313.06
C:447
Building or Use
Required Minimum Parking
Space
Residential 2 per dwelling unit, not to include
garage area
Retail store/service shop 1 for each 150 square feet of
gross floor area
Schools 2 per classroom plus 1 for every 5
students in grades 11 and above
Swimming club 1 for each 60 square feet of water
surface
Theater 1 for each 3 seats
Warehouse/storage area 1 for each 500 square feet of
designated floor area
(b) The minimum number of parking spaces for uses not listed above shall
be sufficient to accommodate the vehicles of the peak number of
persons at the facility at any one time as determined by the Town.
Parking spaces suitable for the needs of the handicapped will be
provided as approved on the site plan and sign, railings and ramps will
be provided as appropriate to the site and in accordance with
applicable State and Federal regulations. A traffic and parking study
performed by a professional engineer shall be required if requested by
the Town to assist in this determination at the expense of the applicant.
(c) Parking spaces may be inside or outside, but no area where cars are
being serviced, painted, or washed shall be counted as parking spaces.
Each required space and aisles shall conform to the following:
(1) Parking spaces shall be at least 10 feet by 18 feet. The minimum
drive or aisle width shall be 24 feet. Council may approve an
alternate design conforming to the following:
A. Angled parking, at a minimum of 60, with a nine-foot by
eighteen-foot rectangular space.
B. With angled parking in accordance with subsection (c)(1)
hereof, aisles between cars shall be a minimum of 22 feet for
two way traffic an 20 feet for one way traffic.
C. The minimum parking space shall be 9 1/2 feet by 18 feet.
Parking shall be double striped with each parking area having
an inside dimension of 6 1/2 feet and the double strip between
parking areas having an outside dimension of three feet.
 1313.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  1313.06
C:448
(2) All parking spaces shall open directly on an aisle or drive of such
design as to provide means of vehicular access to a street in a
manner which shall least interfere with traffic movement.
(3) Parking spaces, aisles and drives shall be paved with asphalt,
concrete or as approved by Council.
(4) Wheel stops shall be provided to prevent vehicle bumpers from
extending into an uncurbed buffer area, pedestrian pathway or
other protected area.
(5) These parking requirements do not apply to single and two family
houses.
(6) Striping or re-striping of parking spaces requires the issuance of a
permit. A plan showing the layout of spaces shall be submitted
along with a permit application.
(d) The minimum distance from a parking area to an apartment building or
to a townhouse building without an inside garage for each dwelling unit
shall be 15 feet.
(e) Council may require or approve alternate design standards for offstreet
parking in response to unusual conditions such an attendant
parking, indoor parking, interaction between different abutting uses in
the same zoning district, or a clearly documented difference between
expected parking and required parking spaces; provided any reduction
in the number of required spaces so granted shall be offset by a
reserved area for future installation of a like number of spaces to be so
improved at the discretion of the Town.
(f) (Reserved)42
(g) If a new use is proposed for an existing building, or a new use is to be
added to the original use, the parking requirements of this section shall
apply.
42.Editor's Note: Former Subsection (f) hereof was repealed by Ord. No. 1426.
 1313.06 CHARTER  1313.06
C:449
 1313.07. Privacy screen. [Ord. 906, passed 5-28-1985]
A privacy screen to provide visual privacy may be built of fence-type
materials provided it is not over eight feet in height nor more than 28 feet in
total length. Privacy screens are permitted in side and rear yards only and
shall respect the zoning district building setback line.
 1313.08. Restricted building sites. [Ord. 906, passed 5-28-1985]
Nothing may be built, placed or graded within or above an easement.
Nothing may be built, placed or graded on a site known to be landslide
prone or which has a slope over 25% unless the plans for same have been
approved by a registered engineer and submitted with the request for the
appropriate permit.
 1313.09. (Reserved)43
 1313.10. Landscaping. [Ord. 1004, passed 3-27-1989]
Refer to Section 1314.02 for design standard then to Section 1314.05(b).
 1313.11. Signs. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord. 770, passed
7-23-1979; Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991; Ord. 1065, passed
12-9-1991; Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994; Ord. 1285, passed
5-19-2003; Ord. 1374, passed 6-15-2009]
(h) All parking lots greater than 200 parking stalls which have drive aisles
parallel to the building must provide walkways from the parking lot to
the front of the building meeting the following requirements:
(1) The walkways must be a minimum of four feet wide and may be
painted and shall not be curbed.
(2) The walkways shall not be obstructed by parking lot landscaping,
lighting or other impediments.
(3) The walkways shall be located so that any point on the parking lot
is not more than 100 feet from a walkway.
(4) Walkways crossing drive aisles must be marked in accordance with
applicable cross walk standards.
(5) Walkways adjacent to buildings must meet Town sidewalk
standards.
(i) Parking lots must meet the requirements of Article 1346, Appendix A,
section (b)(13) ("Parking Lot Landscape Requirements").
(a) General requirements. All signs must be constructed and maintained in
accordance with the Building Code. Signs over eight square feet
43.Editor's Note: Former  1313.09, Road right-of-way, was deleted by Ord. No. 1316.
 1313.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  1313.11
C:450
require a building permit. Billboards, bulletin boards, graphic displays
and posters are considered signs. Three-dimensional displays,
pennants, banners and flashing lights are not considered signs and
are not permitted. The area of an irregularly-shaped sign shall be
calculated as the area of the smallest quadrilateral needed to enclosed
it. No sign may be illuminated unless specifically authorized herein. All
free-standing signs shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet off any road
right-of-way line. No sign will be permitted which would constitute a
traffic hazard or impair a motorist's ability to see a traffic light or be
confused with a traffic light.
The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, wording
and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background,
whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed, but not
including any supporting framework and bracing which are incidental
to the display itself.
(b) Types of signs permitted and their restrictions. Only the following signs
are permitted:
(1) A name plate sign identifying the occupant of a building may not
exceed one square foot in area.
(2) A for sale or for rent sign not over six square feet in area is
permitted on the premises only. Such a sign shall be removed
promptly as soon as the sale or rental has been accomplished or if
the sale or rental is no longer desired.
(3) A construction project sign identifying a design firm, general
contractor or subcontractor, not over eight square feet in area is
permitted on the premises provided the total area of such sign does
not exceed 50 square feet. Such signs shall be removed within 10
days of the completion of the work.
(4) A bulletin board, not over 12 square feet in area and to face each
abutting road is permitted upon the premises of a church,
cemetery, school, college, hospital, nursing home, etc. provided
they relate exclusively to the identity, activities and services of the
particular institution. A bulletin board may be illuminated.
(5) A development sign, not over 50 square feet in area, may be
erected on the premises to face each abutting road. Such signs may
not interfere with the required clear-sight triangle at road
intersections. Signs not over eight square feet in area to direct the
public to a residential development may be erected during the
period of construction on other property with the owner's written
consent.
(6) An identification sign not over eight square feet in area giving the
name of a residential development may be placed on the gate post
or wall at the development's entrance even though it is within the
road right-of-way.
 1313.11 CHARTER  1313.11
C:451
(7) A commercial sign on commercial premises conforming to the
following dimensional standards may face each abutting road. Two
signs may face any abutting road on which the frontage is over 200
feet. Signs may be illuminated in a manner that does not infringe
on the privacy of adjoining property. Dimensional standards are as
follows:
Type of Sign
Dimensions District Freestanding Roof Overhanging Wall
Maximum area in
square feet
C2, C7 32 32 16 (See (b)(14)
below)
C1, C3-C6 and C8 64 64 32
Maximum height to
top
C2, C7, RC C1,
C3-C6 and C8
20
35
35
35
20
35
20
35
Minimum height to
bottom in feet
C1-C8, RC 8  10 
Maximum projection
in feet
C1-C8, RC   5 
Should several commercial signs be assembled on a common support or supports they will be considered
a sign group, and the above restrictions will be applicable to the sign group as though it were a single
sign.
(8) A portable free-standing sign not over six square feet in area and
advertising special sales or prices of products sold on the premises
may be placed along each abutting road during the hours that the
premises are open for business. Such signs shall be back three feet
from the right-of-way.
(9) An institutional sign of the free-standing, roof or wall type may be
erected on the institution's premises provided it conforms to the
requirements for a commercial sign in the C-7 District.
(10) Only directional signs to churches, hospitals and government
buildings may be placed in the right-of-way. Maximum size of any
directional sign is two square feet. If there are three or more signs
at one location they shall be mounted on a common support.
(11)No commercial sign may be placed on any property except
commercial property and then only at such time as the commercial
business being advertised by the sign is being physically conducted
on such premises and only after a sign permit is obtained.
(12) Noncommercial signs including but not limited to signs announcing
or advocating candidates for political office or ballot questions are
permitted on private property within the Town and with the
property owner's permission. The provisions of subsection (a)
hereof do not apply to noncommercial signs.
 1313.11 MCCANDLESS CODE  1313.11
C:452
(13) Advertising signs are permitted as a conditional use in the C-3
Highway Commercial District, as a principal use only. (See Section
1341.12)
(14) The total area of all wall signs shall not exceed one square foot for
each foot of length of the front building wall or length of that
portion of such wall which is devoted to such establishment. Corner
buildings may divide total square feet on signage permitted to two
sides. Height of lettering, designs and symbols shall not exceed five
feet.
(15) An off-premise sign which shall be permitted under the following
circumstances and no other:
A. When access to two or more buildings or uses is available but
not readily obvious or safely available to a vehicle operator and
a safer entrance is available and the entrances to the buildings
or uses are not on an arterial, minor arterial or collector road
as defined and named in the Town Comprehensive Plan, dated
May, 2005, and any successor comprehensive plan.
B. When the use of the alternate access will serve to lessen traffic
congestion, and simplify traffic movements.
C. There shall be no advertising copy on the sign.
D. The signs shall be limited to four square feet per building or
use identified on the sign.
E. The signs must not be in the sight triangle as defined in the
Town Zoning Ordinance and specified in the most recent
version of the Town Standards for Construction applicable at
the time of application for the sign.
F. The sign must be placed on a cooperating property owner's
land or in the right-of-way with the jurisdiction's agreement.
G. All signs shall be mounted on a common support at an
intersection.
H. The sign may be placed only at the intersection or intersections
of the public road from which access is gained and the arterial,
minor arterial or collector road.
I. If the status of the public road on which the building or use is
changed to an arterial, minor arterial or collector road, the
sign must be removed at the sign owner(s)' expense.
J. If the business ceases to exist the sign must be removed at the
business owner's expense.
 1313.11 CHARTER  1313.11
C:453
K. A fee in an amount to be determined by the Municipality to be
sufficient to cover the cost of removal and adopted by
resolution must be paid prior to the issuance of a permit.
L. A maintenance agreement must be signed by the property
owner installing the sign prior to issuance of a permit.
(c) Sign regulations for U.S. Route 19 ("Wexford Flats").
(1) Statement of purpose and intent. It is the intent of Section
1313.11(c) of the Town of McCandless:
A. To develop a consistent and compatible identity of the sign
overlay zone for the Route 19 Corridor through the
development of signage standards for the Town of McCandless
and the Township of Pine. The regulations shall be applied to
the Route 19 Corridor as identified in Section VII of this
ordinance.
B. To encourage changes to, or replacement of non-conforming
signs with signs conforming to these regulations, through the
use of an incentive program.
C. To ensure a safer environment for pedestrians and automobiles
through the placement, size, design, and quantity of signs
along the corridor.
D. To afford the business community equal and fair opportunity to
advertise and promote its services.
E. To minimize the adverse effects of signs.
F. To maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment of this
corridor.
(2) Applicability. A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted,
created, or maintained along the Route 19 Corridor only in
conformance with the standard procedures, exemptions, and other
requirements of this subsection.
(3) Definitions. Words and phrases used in this subsection shall have
the meanings set forth in this section. Words and phrases not
defined in this section, but defined in the Township of Pine and the
Town of McCandless Zoning Ordinances, shall be interpreted with
the meaning set forth in each respective ordinance. Definitions not
specifically appearing anywhere in the ordinance shall have the
meaning as defined in Merriam Webster Collegiate Dictionary,
latest edition.
ABANDONED SIGN  A sign or sign structure on a site, which
identifies a business that is not operating or does not have services
offered on the premises on which the sign is located.
 1313.11 MCCANDLESS CODE  1313.11
C:454
ADDRESS SIGNS  The number or other designation assigned to
a housing unit, business establishment, or other structure for all
purposes of location, mail delivery, and emergency services.
ADVERTISING VEHICLE  Any vehicle and/or trailer which has
affixed to it any sign or advertising device which is parked on public
or private property and visible from the public right-of-way where
the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or direct people to a
business or activity located on the same or nearby property.
AWNING  An architectural projection or shelter projecting from,
and supported by, the exterior wall of a building and composed
of a covering of rigid or non-rigid materials and/or fabric on a
supporting framework that may be either permanent or
retractable.
AWNING SIGN  A sign mounted, painted, or attached to, or
integral to, an awning.
BACK-LIGHTING or SILHOUETTE LIGHTING  A method of
internal illumination whereby the light source is contained within
the sign structure. Illumination is directed towards the building
facade, thereby back-lighting or silhouetting the sign itself.
BANNER SIGN  A sign with or without characters, letters, or
illustrations applied to cloth, paper, fabric or other non-rigid
material.
 1313.11 CHARTER  1313.11
C:455
CAMPUS SIGN  Any on-premises sign that assists the flow or
circulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
CANOPY SIGN  A sign mounted, painted, attached to, or integral
to, a canopy.
CANOPY, ATTACHED  A multi-sided overhead structure or
architectural projection supported by attachments to a building or
on one or more sides and either cantilevered from such building or
also supported by columns at additional points.
CANOPY, DETACHED  A multi-sided overhead structure
supported by columns, but not enclosed by walls.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN, MANUAL  A sign that is designed
so that characters, letters, or illustrations can be changed or
rearranged manually to change the message on the sign without
altering the face or the surface of the sign.
ELECTRONIC, CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN, REMOTE  A sign that
is designed so that characters, letters, or illustrations can be
changed or rearranged remotely by electronic or other means to
change the message on the sign without altering the face or the
surface of the sign.
EXPOSED TUBE STYLE LIGHTING  A luminaire in which the
light source consists of, or is contained in, an uncovered extruded
cylinder or other shape which may be formed into geometric
 1313.11 MCCANDLESS CODE  1313.11
C:456
patterns, lettering, logos, or emblems. This may include, but not
be limited to, LED's, exposed glass tube lighting, neon, or rope
lighting. This shall not include strings of incandescent bulbs.
FLAG  Any fabric containing distinctive colors, patterns, or
symbols, used as a symbol of the United States of America, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or the local municipality. A flag is
not a sign.
FLASHING SIGN  A sign that contains an intermittent or
sequential flashing light source or has a light source which is not
stationary, varies in illumination intensity, or contains elements
which give the appearance of any of the aforementioned.
FREESTANDING SIGN  A self-supporting sign which is detached
from any building and is supported by poles, posts, braces, or other
type of base on the ground.
GROUND/MONUMENT SIGN  A freestanding sign, which is
completely self-supporting, has its sign face or base on the ground
and has no air space, columns, or supports visible between the
ground and the bottom of the sign.
ILLUMINATED SIGN  A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial
lighting, either by lights on or in the sign, or directed toward the
sign.
EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN  A sign lighted by a
source outside the sign.
A.
 1313.11 CHARTER  1313.11
C:457
KIOSK SIGN  A sign consisting of three to five sides that lists
names of businesses or other directional information located on a
property or in a building.
MARQUEE  An integral part of the building consisting of a roof,
which is supported by the building and may also be supported
by columns or piers, and includes porches, porticos and
portecocheres, but does not include canopies or awnings.
MARQUEE SIGN  A wall sign attached to a Marquee.
MOVING OR ANIMATED SIGN  Any sign or part of a sign that
changes physical position by any movement or rotation or that
gives the visual impression of such movement. This may include a
flashing or Remote Changeable Copy Sign.
MULTI-TENANT BUILDING  A non-residential building which
provides occupancy for two or more tenants.
INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN  A sign containing a
source of light contained within the sign structure.
B.
 1313.11 MCCANDLESS CODE  1313.11
C:458
NON-CONFORMING SIGNS  A lawfully existing sign that
complied with the zoning ordinance at the time the sign was
erected but does not meet the current zoning requirements.
OFF-PREMISE SIGN  A sign advertising a business, person,
activity, goods or services not located on premises where the sign
is located.
PATHFINDER SIGN  A government sign directing traffic within a
region or a municipality to a commercial, residential, recreational
or industrial development or for a public purpose.
PENNANT/STREAMER  Any lightweight plastic fabric or other
material, whether or not containing a message of any kind,
suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in a series and
designed to move in the wind.
POLE/PYLON SIGN  A freestanding sign erected on a pole, poles,
pylon, or pylons, where the bottom edge of the sign face is five feet
or more above the ground.
POLITICAL SIGN  Any sign that advertises a candidate or an
issue, which is to be voted on in a local, state, or federal election
process.
PORTABLE SIGN  A sign intended to be moved easily and is
not designed to be permanently affixed into the ground or to a
structure.
PREMISES  The contiguous land in the same ownership or
control, which is not divided by a street.
 1313.11 CHARTER  1313.11
C:459
PROJECTING SIGN  Any sign that is projecting perpendicularly
from the facade of a building more than 12 inches from the face of
the wall.
PROJECTION SIGN  A sign that reproduces a remote image, by
optical or any other means, on any surface.
PUBLIC WAY  Any corridor designed for vehicular or pedestrian
use that is maintained with public funds.
REAL ESTATE SIGN  A temporary sign advertising the real estate
upon which the sign is located as being for rent, lease, or sale.
ROOF SIGN  A sign erected on or attached to a roof or a sign
attached to a building that projects above the highest point on the
roofline.
SAFETY CONTROL SIGN  A public safety sign pursuant to
federal, state, or local public safety regulations.
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN  A sign that provides a menu option for
a particular use displayed on an easel-like frame.
SIGN AREA  The smallest quadrangle encompassing the entire
face of a sign including the advertising surface and any framing,
 1313.11 MCCANDLESS CODE  1313.11
C:460
trim, molding, background, and the supporting structure situated
above the lowest edge of the sign face.
SIGN BASE  The support on which a sign face stands.
SIGN FACE  The area or display surface, including the
advertising surface and any framing, trim, or molding, used for the
message on a single plane.
SIGN HEIGHT  The vertical distance measured from the lowest
finished grade elevation directly beneath the sign to the highest
point of the sign, including all decorative embellishments.
SIGN or SIGNBOARD  Any writing, printing, painting, display,
emblem, drawing, graphic, electronic display, computerized display
or other device designed to be viewed by the public, designed and
intended for advertising, and the structure supporting the display.
SINGLE TENANT BUILDING  A non-residential building that
provides occupancy for one tenant.
SITE DEVELOPMENT SIGN  A sign indicating that the premises
is in the process of being subdivided and/or developed for the
construction of dwellings or other buildings.
TEMPORARY SIGN  Any sign erected for a limited time for a
specific promotion.
THREE-DIMENSIONAL SIGN  A sign having length, width, and
depth and including spheres. Rectangular or square signs with
a thickness of less than 13 inches are not considered threedimensional
signs.
TIME AND TEMPERATURE SIGN  A sign which indicates
changing time and/or temperature.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGN  A sign regulating traffic.
 1313.11 CHARTER  1313.11
C:461
WALL SIGN  Any sign painted, attached to, or affixed to, a
building or structure, flat against the wall surface, in such a way
that only one face of the sign is visible.
WINDOW SIGN  Any sign, picture, symbol, or combination
thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity,
business, commodity, event, sale, or service that is permanently
affixed inside a window or upon the windowpanes or glass and is
visible from the exterior of the window.
(4) Exempted signs. The following signs shall meet the requirements of
this subsection (c) but do not require permits or fee payments:
A. House and business street addresses.
B. Traffic Control Signs meeting federal, state, and/or local
regulations.
C. Governmental Signs, including Pathfinder Signs.
D. Political signs.
E. Religious or devotional symbols which contain no commercial
content. Words or letters are not exempted and are covered by
the sign regulations.
F. Real Estate Signs.
(5) Prohibited signs. The following signs are not permitted. Such signs
include, but are not limited to:
A. Awning signs.
B. Banners.
C. Canopy signs.
D. Any sign attached to any tree, utility pole, or otherwise directly
affixed to any rock, ledge, or other natural feature.
E. Advertising vehicle.
 1313.11 MCCANDLESS CODE  1313.11
C:462
F. Projection signs.
G. Three-dimensional signs.
H. Traffic Control Signs not meeting federal, state and/or local
regulations.
I. Except as specifically permitted elsewhere in the Town Code
no sign shall be erected:
1. In the public right-of-way or public easement, except for
those placed by an authorized governmental agency.
2. At any location where, by reason of position, shape,
wording, or color, it interferes with, or obstructs the view
and/or movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
3. Which may be confused with any authorized traffic sign,
signal, or device.
4. Signs employing neon except those as permitted in
subsection (9)A. hereof.
J. No sign shall project into or over any public right-of-way or
easement, except as specifically permitted elsewhere in the
zoning regulations.
Any federal, state, or local traffic control sign.
(6) Defining the corridor. The corridor governed by Section 1313.11(c)
is the intersection of U.S. Route 19 with Old Perry Highway in the
Town of McCandless north to the McCandless-Pine boundary. The
lots adjacent to this section of U.S. Route 19, or any sign that is
visible from Route 19 (Refer to attached map of the Route 19
Corridor) are governed by Section 1313.11(c).
(7) Abandoned signs. A sign face must be removed within 30 calendar
days of final closure of the business, loss of lease, vacating of the
premise, or any event where the services are discontinued, or any
event where the subject, business, or service ceases to operate or
occupancy is terminated on the premise on which the sign is
located.
(8) Signs by type.
 1313.11 CHARTER  1313.11
C:463
SIGNS BY TYPE
P - Permitted
N - Not Permitted
Sign Type
Single Tenant
Buildings
Multi-tenant
Buildings
Freestanding
Pole/Pylon Sign P P
Ground/Monument Sign P P
Building
Awning Sign N N
Canopy Sign N N
Marquee Sign P P
Projecting Sign P P
Roof Sign N N
Wall Sign P P
Miscellaneous
Advertising Vehicle Sign N N
Banner N N
Campus Sign P P
Changeable Copy
(Manual) Sign
P P
Changeable Copy
(Remote) Sign
P P
Electronic Sign P P
Flashing Sign N N
Kiosk Sign P P
Moving/Animated Sign N N
Off-Premise Sign (See
Section 1313.11(b)(13))
N N
Pathfinder Sign P P
Pennant/Streamer N N
Political Sign P P
Portable Sign N N
Projection Sign N N
Real Estate Sign P P
Safety Control Sign P P
 1313.11 MCCANDLESS CODE  1313.11
C:464
Sign Type
Single Tenant
Buildings
Multi-tenant
Buildings
Sandwich Board Sign N N
Site Development Sign P P
Temporary Sign P P
Three Dimensional Sign N N
Time & Temperature
Sign
P P
Traffic Control Signs P P
Window Sign P P
Freestanding
POLE/PYLON P P
Area (square feet) Max of 60 square
feet
Ratio based on
building size
Height (feet) 20' max. 20' max.
Setback from the edge of
the pavement (linear
feet)
15 feet from edge
of pavement
15 feet from edge
of pavement
Number Permitted 1/street frontage
if located on a
corner lot with 2
arterial roads
1/street frontage
if located on a
corner lot with 2
arterial roads
GROUND SIGNS
(includes monument
signs)
P P
Area (square feet) 60-100 feet max. 60-100 feet max.
Height (feet) 5-10 feet (see
standards in
Section X)
5-10 feet (see
standards in
Section X)
Setback (linear feet) At least 15 feet
from the edge of
the pavement (see
standards in
Section X) and
outside the R-O-W
At least 15 feet
from the edge of
the pavement (see
standards in
Section X) and
outside the R-O-W
Number Permitted 1/100 lineal feet
of frontage
1/100 lineal feet
of frontage
Building Signs
PROJECTING SIGN P P
Area (square feet) 10 square feet 10 square feet
 1313.11 CHARTER  1313.11
C:465
Sign Type
Single Tenant
Buildings
Multi-tenant
Buildings
Number Permitted (per
square feet of building
facade of per tenant)
1 per first floor
tenant
1 per first floor
tenant
ROOF SIGN N N
WALL SIGN P P
Area (% of building
facade or ratio of
distance from the street)
1.25 square feet/1
lineal foot
1.25 square feet/1
lineal foot
Height As noted in
Section (9)F.
As noted in
Section (9)F.
Number Permitted As noted in
Section (9)F.
As noted in
Section (9)F.
Miscellaneous
KIOSK (not permitted
along highway)
P P
Height (feet) 5 feet max. 5 feet max.
Setback (linear feet) N/A N/A
Number Permitted 1/tenant 1/tenant
(9) Design, construction, and illumination regulations.
A. Exposed tube style lighting.
1. Shall not blink, flash, move, or give the visual impression
of movement.
2. Any outside dimension of the exposed tube style light shall
not exceed 1 1/2 inches.
3. The exposed tube style lighting may be used for lettering,
geometric shapes and patterns, logos, or emblems or other
sign elements.
4. The exposed tube style lighting shall not be used to outline
or highlight a building or any portion of a building or
structure unless approved as an architectural element of
the building design and as such is not considered a sign.
B. Ground/monument sign.
1. The sign must be setback at least 15 feet from the edge of
the pavement of the cartway. For every additional three
feet of setback, the allowable sign height is increased by
one foot. At no point shall the sign exceed 10 feet of height.
 1313.11 MCCANDLESS CODE  1313.11
C:466
2. Fractions of the three-foot setback increments shall be
considered at the next lower level increment.
3. For every additional three foot of setback, the allowable
area is increased by eight square feet.
4. Chart for allowable increases:
Setback
(feet)
Height
(feet)
Area
(square feet)
15 5 60
18 6 68
21 7 76
24 8 84
27 9 92
30 10 100
C. Pole/pylon sign.
1. A single support structure is permitted provided that the
structure is 30% of the width of the sign face.
2. Two supporting structures/poles/pylons/beams are
permitted provided that the width of each supporting
structure does not exceed 10% of the width of the sign
face.
3. The foundation of the sign cannot protrude from the
ground more than 12 inches. All portions for the
foundation extending above ground level shall be
completely encased in decorative stone or brick veneer.
4. No portion of the bottom edge of the sign face shall be less
than five feet above the ground.
5. Fractions of the five-foot setback increments shall be
considered at the next lower level increment.
6. Chart for allowable increases:
Setback
(feet)
Height
(feet)
Area
(square feet)
15 10 30
20 14 40
25 18 50
30 22 60
 1313.11 CHARTER  1313.11
C:467
D. Real estate signs.
1. The sign must be setback at least 15 feet from the edge of
the pavement of the cartway.
2. The total sign area for a real estate sign shall be 12 square
feet for the first 100 lineal feet of street frontage.
3. The total sign area for a real estate sign may increase four
square feet for each additional 50 lineal feet of street
frontage above the initial 100 lineal feet.
4. Any fraction of the fifty-foot increase shall be at the next
lower increment.
5. The real estate sign shall be erected only upon the
property for sale or lease.
6. No real estate sign shall exceed 32 square feet.
E. Site development sign.
1. A single development sign not exceeding 48 square feet
announcing the erection of a building, the architect, or
contractors may be erected after final municipal approval
for a period not to exceed 60 days.
2. Upon the issuance of a building permit, a single
development sign is permitted provided that the sign shall
not be erected for a period not to exceed one year from the
issue date of the building permit, after which the sign shall
be removed from the premises.
F. Wall signs.
1. The total area of a wall sign shall not exceed 1.25 square
feet of sign area for each foot of length of the front
building wall or length of that portion of such wall, which
is devoted to the tenant.
2. No wall sign shall extend beyond the face of the building or
beyond a tenant's leased space.
3. Except as noted elsewhere, wall signs shall only be placed
on the ground floor.
4. A building on a corner lot may place a wall sign on each
wall facing a street, provided that one of the wall signs
shall not exceed 50% of the sign area of the sign installed
on the primary wall frontage and that no more than two
walls signs are permitted on a building on any corner lot.
5. Wall signs shall be individual lettering, insignias, logos, or
other symbols placed directly on the building facade. Wall
 1313.11 MCCANDLESS CODE  1313.11
C:468
signs shall not be joined or surrounded by a solid
background other than the building facade. A frame or any
structure shall not enclose a wall sign.
6. Wall signs shall be located between the heads of windows
and doors on the ground floor of the structure and the sills
of windows on the second floor or the top of the parapet on
a one-story building.
7. In a C-3 zoned District each building which has a principal
tenant which occupies the majority of the floor area of a
second floor of the building shall be permitted one wall
sign attached to on the outside of the building it occupies.
8. Wall signs shall project not more than 12 inches there
from. Such wall sign shall not exceed 30 inches in height,
unless it contains more than one line of letters or contains
symbols or a company logo, in which event no more than
two lines of letters of no more than 30 inches each shall be
utilized and the total height shall not exceed 60 inches. A
symbol or company logo may exceed 30 inches in height
when utilized in conjunction with two lines of letters,
however the symbol or logo shall not exceed the total
height of the two lines of letters utilized.
9. The total length of each line of stacked letters shall not
exceed the width of the occupied premises or building
length or exceed 10% of the wall surface to which they are
attached.
G. Changeable copy sign, remote.
1. All parts of the sign face, including any message or sign
copy, must remain stationary for a period no less than one
minute.
2. Light emitting lamps, devices, or cells shall not
sequentially change and shall change in unison so as not to
produce the illusion of movement.
3. Manual Changeable Copy Signs must have a solid
background that is darker than the letters.
H. Temporary signs.
1. The maximum area of a temporary sign shall not exceed 32
square feet.
2. Only one temporary sign is permitted per property.
3. Temporary signs shall be at least 15 feet from the edge of
the roadway.
 1313.11 CHARTER  1313.11
C:469
4. Temporary signs shall not be attached to a utility pole,
rock, trees or any federal, state, or local traffic control
sign.
5. Temporary signs shall be erected for no more than 30
calendar days in one calendar year.
6. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
7. All temporary signs shall be adequately secured to the
ground or building.
I. Address signs.
1. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in
a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street
or road fronting the property.
2. Address numbers shall contrast with their background.
3. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet
letters.
4. Address numbers shall be a minimum of six inches and a
maximum of 30 inches in overall height with a minimum
stroke width of 0.5 inch.
J. Projecting signs.
1. Shall be in a stationary position.
2. Shall not be internally illuminated.
K. Campus signs.
1. The sign area for each sign shall not exceed six square
feet.
2. The sign shall contain no more than two sign faces, one per
side.
3. No corporate logos are permitted on the sign.
4. The recognized corporate colors utilized as a background
feature are permitted.
5. The sign shall not be illuminated.
6. The sign shall not be a substitute for a Traffic Control Sign.
7. The municipality, prior to installation, shall approve the
quantity and location of signs.
L. Time and temperature signs.
 1313.11 MCCANDLESS CODE  1313.11
C:470
1. The maximum number and letter size permitted is 12
inches.
2. The numbers and letters must not change more than once
every five seconds.
3. The time and temperature sign is not part of the sign size
requirements unless if it is independent of the advertising
sign and does not contain advertising.
4. The time and temperature must not be higher than eight
feet to the top of the sign.
5. The time and temperature must be a minimum of 15 feet
from the front right-of-way.
M. Additional standards.
1. All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of the
building code and the electrical code.
2. There shall be no more than one pole/pylon sign or one
monument sign on any site for each 200-foot of frontage. If
the property has more than 200 feet of continuous
frontage on a public street, an additional pole/pylon sign
or monument sign shall be permitted provided that the
signs are spaced a minimum of 100 feet apart.
3. There shall be no more than one wall sign or one
projecting sign, except that a sign that identifies the
business and is less than five square feet is permitted to
hang from a building and perpendicular to the building
over a sidewalk.
4. Illumination Requirements Applicable to All Districts.
(A) The illumination from any sign may not cause any
reflection or glare upon a public street, highway,
sidewalk, or adjacent property.
(B) Sources of illumination shall be hidden from view.
(C) If a sign is internally illuminated, at least 75% of the
sign face must be opaque.
(D) Signs consisting of individual letters that are
internally illuminated must be illuminated through
backlighting or silhouette lighting.
(E) No illuminated sign, whether internally or externally
illuminated, shall cause glare or other disturbance,
which would be incompatible with the nature of the
surrounding area.
 1313.11 CHARTER  1313.11
C:471
(F) All lighting shall be effectively shielded to avoid
impairing the vision of passing motorists.
(G) Wall signs on buildings setback more than 75 feet
from the road right-of-way may be internally
illuminated and exempted from the backlighting
requirement provided that the source of the
illumination shall not be visible. The face of the
lettering shall be of sufficient opacity to shield the
source of the light.
(10) Change of property owner. If a new business owner buys an
existing property within the corridor and the business owner
chooses to tear down the existing sign structure, the new sign must
comply with the new sign standards. If they choose to use the old
sign structure, they can continue to use the color and material that
existed on that old structure. However, if they choose to use the old
sign structure and change the color and materials, the new color
and materials must comply with the color and materials outlined in
the new ordinance regulations of the Township of Pine and the
Town of McCandless.
(11) Permit procedure and maintenance standards.
A. Permit procedure. All signs, except those included in the
"Exempted Section" require a sign permit in accordance with
both the Township of Pine and the Town of McCandless permit
application requirements but will include at least the following
standards:
A scaled site plan, sign illumination plan, colored, scaled
construction drawings of the proposed sign and all its
elements, and a digital photograph depicting proposed sign
location with proposed sign depicted in the photograph.
B. Maintenance standards:
1. Signs shall be maintained in a safe and secure condition, in
compliance with all building and electrical codes, and in
conformance with this code.
2. Any lawfully existing nonconforming sign cannot be
enlarged, reworded, redesigned, or altered in any way
including the repainting in a different color, except to
conform to the requirements of this ordinance.
3. Replacement. Any sign replacing a non-conforming sign
shall conform to the provisions of this Section, and the
non-conforming signs shall no longer be displayed.
 1313.11 MCCANDLESS CODE  1313.11
C:472
 1313.12. Swimming pools; fences. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991;
Ord. 1104, passed 9-27-1993]
 1313.13. Temporary structures. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord.
1334, passed 9-25-2006]
Temporary structures incidental to the construction of a project are
permitted during construction and shall be removed as soon as the
construction is completed.
(12) Incentives. If a business has a non-conforming sign and chooses to
replace the non-conforming sign with a conforming sign, the permit
cost will be waived.
(a) Unless the wall of the pool is at least four feet above the ground at all
points, it shall be enclosed with a fence at least four feet and no greater
than six feet in height, or have a fence on top of the pool deck so that
the combined height is at least four feet. The fence shall be locked and
any access steps or ladders shall be removed or rendered inoperative
when the pool is unattended. A higher fence along lot lines adjacent to a
pool may be authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
(b) The fence shall be kept in good repair at all times and be in compliance
with the standards set by the Building Code currently in effect.
(a) Regulations for portable storage units:
(1) A zoning permit must be issued by the Town of McCandless prior to
installation of a portable storage unit.
(2) Units may be stored on the premises for a period not to exceed two
consecutive weeks.
(3) Units may be stored on the premises for not more than four weeks
in a one-year period.
(4) Units must be stored off any right-of-way.
(5) Units must not exceed 10 feet wide by 15 feet long by eight feet
high.
(6) A combination of a storage unit and a dumpster may be stored on
the premises at one time. Only one permit is required.
(7) When a valid building permit is issued for construction in an R-1,
R-2 or R-5 zoned district, units may be stored on the premises for
up to a one-year period.
(8) When used in conjunction with a building permit in a commercial,
institutional, R-3, R-4 or R-6 zoned district, up to three units are
permitted on the premises.
 1313.11 CHARTER  1313.14
C:473
 1313.14. Yards. [Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994]
Yards are defined in Section 1311.04. For irregular-shaped lots, refer to
Exhibit A below for typical measurements of rear yard depths. Rear yard
depth shall be measured at a right angle from the rear of the building to the
nearest location of the lot line. The rear lot line is that lot line most nearly
parallel to the front lot line.
For the purpose of measuring yards, carports and covered porches are
considered part of the building. Roof overhangs and external chimneys may
intrude two feet into any yard. Fire escapes, steps and a door landing not
over 32 square feet may intrude into any yard. Balconies, open porches,
patios and terraces may intrude into the rear yard.
For the purpose of identifying the various yards, a house on a corner lot
shall be considered as fronting on the street from which it derives its house
number.
Examples of how to measure rear yard depths on various shaped lots are
given below.
 1313.15. Minimum distance between office buildings. [Ord. 756,
passed 1-22-1979]
Whenever multiple office buildings are to be erected on a single parcel
of ground, there shall be a minimum distance of 20 feet between such
buildings.
 1313.16. (Reserved)44
 1313.17. Sidewalks. [Ord. 1144, passed 5-22-1995]
In all zoning districts the applicant shall provide along any and all abutting
streets a sidewalk conforming to Town standards found in Section 1371.03.
Sidewalks may be located in the buffer area where approved by Council.
An applicant may request an exception to this sidewalk requirement when
44.Editor's Note: Former  1313.16, Stormwater Drainage Facilities, was deleted 7-18-2005 by
Ord. No. 1318.
 1313.14 MCCANDLESS CODE  1313.17
C:474
the location of the particular parcel of land is such that the sidewalk would
cause undue hardship, serve no useful purpose or be a detriment to safety.
 1313.18. Maximum building height. [Ord. 906, passed 5-28-1985]
Where otherwise not specifically stated in this Zoning Code, the maximum
height of any building shall not exceed 65 feet.
 1313.19. Blasting. [Ord. 1004, passed 3-27-1989]
Blasting of any nature for construction or other purposes shall be prohibited
in the Town, except as approved by Council.
 1313.20. Land use. [Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994]
No new land use should detract from the value and usability of any existing
land use. Permitted principal and accessory uses and facilities are defined in
the various zoning districts, together with some of the uses and facilities not
permitted. It is the intent of this Zoning Code to prohibit uses and facilities
or structures which are not customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use.
 1313.21. Alterations or enlargements to commercial or
institutional structures or land uses. [Ord. 1144, passed 5-22-1995]
Any alteration or addition to commercial or institutional structures,
expansion of use, increase in floor area, or expansion of business use on
open ground, shall conform to the following:
 1313.22. Building standards. [Ord. 1264, passed 3-25-2002]
(a) The Zoning Officer may approve applications for zoning permits for
such changes which are under 25% of gross area of building, or 2,500
square feet, or five-tenths acre, or 20% of the land use, whichever is
less. These applications shall include sketches, drawings, plans and/or
sufficient information and description of plans in accordance with
Section 1345.01(c) to insure conformance with the Zoning Code.
(b) For changes in excess to those in subsection (a) hereof, the application
shall be submitted to the Planning Commission in accordance with
Section 1365.05.
(a) The following building standards shall apply to principal buildings in
the R-1 and R-2 zoned districts:
(1) The length-to-width ratio of any portion of a principal building 20
feet in length or greater shall be 2.5 units or less of length to one
unit of width as measured around the first floor perimeter of the
enclosed foundation.
 1313.17 CHARTER  1313.22
C:475
 1313.23. Accessory facilities. [Ord. 1334, passed 9-25-2006]
Article 1314
D DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
 1314.01. Intent. [Ord. 964, passed 10-26-1987]
The D Development District is a zoning district which permits a range of
uses appropriate to the McKnight Road corridor including the existing uses
permitted in the current zoning classifications. These uses are governed by
a series of standards designed to protect the sensitive natural resources
along the corridor and to insure that adjacent properties are adequately and
effectively buffered from dissimilar uses and intensities of development.
 1314.02. Land use intensity. [Ord. 964, passed 10-26-1987; Ord.
1052, passed 4-22-1991]
(2) Principal buildings shall be a minimum of 800 square feet as
measured around the first floor perimeter of the enclosed
foundation.
(3) Principal buildings shall be fully enclosed around its perimeter by a
masonry or concrete foundation wall.
Exceptions to Section 1313.22(a)(3):
A. Porches, decks and unenclosed areas.
B. Cantilevered areas.
C. Additions to the principal building of up to 500 square feet.
(b) Trailers, vehicles, parts of vehicles, whether licensed or not, or
manufactured structures of any type shall not be used as storage
structures or offices in the R-1 and R-2 zoned districts.
(a) Accessory facilities as permitted in Section 1315.04 to 1317.04 may not
have signs located on any exterior portion of the building.
(b) Trailers and portable storage units cannot be used as accessory
facilities.
(a) Introduction. Land use intensity refers to the magnitude of a given land
use on any site within the D Development District. The maximum
permitted use is determined by the site capacity analysis described in
Section 1314.03. Within the D Development District a range of different
uses is permitted as set forth in Article 1326. To allow for this flexibility
in types of uses, the intensity of site development is regulated to insure
adequate protection of adjacent land uses.
 1313.22 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.02
C:476
(b) Land use intensity class standards. The land use intensity class
standards, (see Figure 1), designate "class" ratings for permitted
intensity of land use within the district. Class I represents the least
intense and Class VIII represents the most intense use permitted within
the district. Each class has a series of corresponding regulations that
govern the permitted levels of site development, density of dwelling
units, requirements for site landscaping, building heights, open space
and recreational land. The specific categories are as follows:
(1) Maximum density (gross). This pertains to residential uses only and
is a measure of the total number of dwelling units permitted per
acre within the D Development District. Maximum density is the
quotient of the total number of dwelling units divided by the base
site area.
(2) Maximum impervious surface ratio. This is a measure of the land
use intensity which is determined by dividing the total area of all
impervious surfaces (asphalt, concrete, building coverage or any
other surface that does not permit water to penetrate into the
ground) by, in the case of residential uses, the base site area or, in
the case of nonresidential uses, by net buildable site area.
(3) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR). This is a measure of the maximum
allowable floor area for a given land use and is determined by
multiplying the FAR by the basic site area.
(4) Site design standards. There are FAR designations for these
standards - R, A, B and C. These standards are keys to Section
1314.05 and 1314.07. The site design standards specify the
minimum requirements under these sections for all classes.
(5) Maximum height (feet). This defines the permitted building height
permissible within the D Development District. It is measured by
taking the mean ground elevation along the perimeter of the
building and calculating the height to the eave line of the roof in
the case of a sloped roof or to the top of the roof structure for all
other roofs. Enclosed spaces within roof forms above the permitted
height shall remain as unoccupied spaces. Parapets, screening
walls, mechanical penthouses, and other architectural elements
intended to screen and/or shield rooftop mechanical equipment
shall be permitted to extend above the permitted height. The
maximum height for medical office, small-format hospital, and
institutional uses containing the lower maximum floor area ratio in
Land Use Classifications VI through VIII may exceed the maximum
heights set forth in Figure 1, provided that the maximum height
does not exceed 65 feet. [Amended 6-25-2018 by Ord. No.
1476]
(6) Minimum open space ratio (residential use only). This is a measure
of the minimum requirement for undeveloped open space on a
development site that shall be developed specifically for
 1314.02 CHARTER  1314.02
C:477
recreational purposes. Any portion of resource protection land
which is improved for recreation purposes may be included as
contributing to the total requirements for recreational land. This
ratio is used in the site capacity calculations for recreational land
(see Figure 1).
(7) Maximum density factor (residential use only). This measure of
intensity yields the maximum number of dwelling units per acre of
net buildable land. This factor is used in the determination of site
capacity calculations (see Figure 1).
(8) Recreation factor (residential use only). This is a measurement of
the minimum requirement for land to be developed for recreational
use. (See Figure 1.)
Figure 1
Land Use Intensity Standards
Land Use
Intensity Class
Number General
Use Category
Maximum
Density
(Gross)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
Ratio
Maximum
Floor
Area
Ratio
Site
Design
Standards
Maximum
Height
Minimum
Open
Space
Ratio
Maximum
Density
Factor
Recreation
Factor
Class II
Conventional
Subdivisions
Use Current R1 and R2 Standards
Performance
Subdivision1
1.2 -12 n/a R 0.25 12.5 .102
Class III
Conventional
Subdivision
Use Current R1 and R2 Standards
Performance
Subdivision1
5.2 -30 n/a R 0.25 12.5 .102
Class IV
Conventional
Subdivision
Use Current R1 and R2 Standards
Performance
Subdivision1
17.5 -52 n/a C -25 12.5 .102
Class V
Indoor Recreation
Institutional, and
Special Residential
n/a -30 -25 A 35
Office n/a -20 -11 A 20
Class VI
 1314.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.02
C:478
Figure 1
Land Use Intensity Standards
Land Use
Intensity Class
Number General
Use Category
Maximum
Density
(Gross)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
Ratio
Maximum
Floor
Area
Ratio
Site
Design
Standards
Maximum
Height
Minimum
Open
Space
Ratio
Maximum
Density
Factor
Recreation
Factor
Indoor recreation,
institutional, and
special residential
n/a -60 -49 B 4.0
Office Commercial/
entertainment
n/a -50 -24 B 60
Class VII
Indoor recreation,
Institutional, and
special residential
n/a -70 -57 C 45
Office Commercial/
entertainment
n/a -70 -36 C 60
Class VIII
Indoor recreation,
Institutional, and
special residential
n/a -80 -65 C 50
Office Commercial/
entertainment
n/a -90 -50 C 60
Class IX
Office Commercial/
entertainment
n/a 1.0 -70 C 60
Notes:
1 See Detailed Use Regulations.
(9) Existing zoning districts are assigned equivalent land use intensity
classifications as follows:
R-1 Class I
R-2 Class I
R-3 Class II
R-4 Class II
R-5 Class III
R-6 Class III
C-1 Class VII
C-2 Class IV
 1314.02 CHARTER  1314.02
C:479
 1314.03. Site capacity analysis. [Ord. 964, passed 10-26-1987;
Ord. 1360, passed 4-28-2008]
C-3 Class VII
C-4 Class VIII
C-5 Class V
C-6 Class IX
C-7 Class VI
C-8 Class VI
I Class IV
(a) Introduction. The intensity of use on any site within the D Development
District is governed by the site capacity analysis. This analysis is
performed to determine the physical qualities of the site that are
suitable for development. The calculations required by this Code to
determine the site capacity pertain to both residential uses and
nonresidential uses.
There are three basic steps in the site capacity analysis process which
are as follows:
(1) Determination of base site area;
(2) Determination of sensitive natural resources which shall be
preserved; (Residential uses only) determination of recreational
land to be provided; and
(3) Determination of site capacity.
The calculations establish the permissible intensity of development on a
given site. In the case of residential uses, the analysis yields the maximum
number of dwelling units permitted on the site for both single-family and
multi-family. Also, the minimum required open space and land dedicated to
recreation is determined. In the case of nonresidential uses, the maximum
permissible impervious surface area (see definitions, Section 1311.04) and
the maximum permitted floor area are determined.
This information is then cross-referenced with the land use intensity class
standards (Section 1314.02) to establish the appropriate classification for
a proposed development. These class standards also specify the site
development requirements for the individual classes.
(b) Base site area (all land uses). The first step in the determination of the
site capacity is to establish the Base Site Area.
 1314.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.03
C:480
(1) Gross site area as determined by actual on-site
survey.
_____acres
(2) Subtract land constituting roads and land within
ultimate rights of way of existing roads, rights of
way of utilities and easements of access.
- _____acres
(3) Subtract land which is not contiguous:
A. A separate parcel which does not abut, adjoin
or share common boundaries with the rest of
the development
- _____acres
B. Land which is cut off from the main parcel by
a road, railroad, existing land uses or major
stream, such that common use is hindered or
that the land is unavailable for building
purposes
- _____ acres
(4) Subtract land which in a previously approved
subdivision encompassing the same land, as part
or all of the subject parcel, was reserved for
resource reasons, such as flooding or for
recreation
- _____acres
(5) Subtract land used or proposed for residential
uses, whenever both nonresidential and
residential uses are proposed. (In the case of the
site capacity calculation for the proposed
residential use, subtract the land proposed for
nonresidential use.)
- _____acres
(6) Subtract estimated land required for bufferyard
area. (Do not subtract bufferyard areas where they
coincide with resource protection lands.)
- _____acres
(7) Equals base site area. = _____acres
(c) Resource protection land. One of the principal factors that shall
influence the intensity of development on a particular parcel of land is
the requirements for protecting the sensitive environmental resources
existing on the site.
Specific natural resources which are sensitive to development such
as forests, steep slopes, floodplains and streams are protected under
the provisions in this Code. All land area consisting of the natural
resources or natural features listed in the following table shall be
measured (reference definitions in Section 1311.04). The total acreage
of each resource shall be multiplied by its respective open space ratio
to determine the amount of resource protection land. When applying for
a grading permit, consult Town grading specifications. The maximum
slopes for cut and fill shall be as specified in Article 1705 of the Building
Code.
 1314.03 CHARTER  1314.03
C:481
Resource Protection and Special Natural Features Land
Resource/Natural Feature
(All Districts) Open Space Ratio
Acres of Land in
Resource
Resource
Protection Land
(Acres in Resource
x Open Space
Ratio)
Drainageways 0.50 _____ _____
Floodplains 1.00 _____ _____
Mature Woodlands 0.85 _____ _____
Woodlands 0.70 _____ _____
Young Woodlands 0.40 _____ _____
Steep Slopes (12% - 15%) 0.60 _____ _____
Steep Slopes (16% - 25%) 0.70 _____ _____
Steep Slopes (25% or greater) 0.95 _____ _____
Hazardous Soils 0.95 _____ _____
Landslide Prone Area (See
Section 1314.02(f))
_____ _____
TOTAL LAND IN RESOURCE _____ _____
TOTAL RESOURCE
PROTECTION LAND
_____
(d) Mature woodlands; woodlands; young woodlands.
(1) No more than 15% of any mature woodland may be cleared or
developed. The remaining 85% shall be maintained as permanent
open space. No more than 30% of any woodlands may be cleared or
developed. The remaining 70% shall be maintained as permanent
open space. No more than 60% of any young woodland shall be
cleared. The remaining 40% shall be maintained as permanent
open space.
(2) Replacement of woodlands credit. In the case of mature woodlands,
the developer may clear or develop more than the area otherwise
permitted to be disturbed by this subsection, provided that the total
mature woodland or woodland area disturbed shall not be
increased by more than 50% of the area otherwise permitted to be
disturbed. No more than 22.5% of mature woodlands may be
disturbed. No more than 45% of woodlands may be disturbed. In
addition:
A. The developer shall designate a new woodland area on a part
of the site not forested.
 1314.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.03
C:482
B. The new woodland area shall consist of 1.2 times the surface
acreage of the woodland area disturbed pursuant to this
subsection.
(3) No clearing or timbering of any woodlands may occur unless
connected with an approved site plan.
(e) Steep slopes. In areas of steep slopes, the following standards shall
apply:
(1) 12% to less than 15% slope: no more than 40% of such areas shall
be developed and/or regraded or stripped of vegetation.
(2) 15% of 25% slope: No more than 30% of such areas shall be
developed and/or regraded or stripped of vegetation, with the
exception that no more than 20% of such areas may be disturbed in
the case of landslide prone areas.
(3) More than 25% slope: no more than 15% of such areas shall be
developed and/or regraded or stripped of vegetation, with the
exception that no more than 5% of such areas may be disturbed in
the case of landslide prone area.
(4) The limitations on disturbance of landslide prone areas set forth in
parts (2) and (3) above may be waived pursuant to the modification
process in Article 1705 of the Town Code if the Developer presents
to the Town for approval fully engineered plans for the removal and
remediation of any rock, soils or other materials that create the
landslide prone condition and, upon a favorable recommendation
by the Town Engineer, the modification is approved by Council.
(f) Landslide prone area. An area where the downward and outward
movement of the slope-forming materials composed of rock, soils,
artificial fills or a combination of these materials exist. (See Article
1314 Appendix map on landslide prone areas, soil types and locations).
(g) Drainageways. Any area to which runoff from surrounding land flows
naturally or is caused to flow from existing land alterations and which
conveys such runoff to a watercourse. No more than 50% may be
developed.
(h) Existing plant material.
(1) Existing, healthy plant material may be counted as contributing to
the total plant material required by this Code except in the case of
establishment of new woodlands.
(2) Whenever an existing area meets the definition of woodland, it
shall satisfy any planting required by this Code regardless of the
mix of plant materials provided that understory trees and shrubs
constitute at least 70% of the individual trees and shrubs present.
If, understory trees and shrubs constitute less than 70% of the
trees and shrubs present, additional plant material shall be
 1314.03 CHARTER  1314.03
C:483
installed in order to meet the requirements otherwise imposed. No
tree greater than five inch caliper shall be counted if more than
one-eighth of the area under its canopy or drip line is closer than
15 feet from a building, parking area or road.
(i) Establishment and maintenance of woodlands.
(1) Establishment. The establishment of a woodland shall conform to
the following standards:
A. The minimum area shall be 1 1/2 acres.
B. No area of woodland shall be less than 50 feet wide.
C. The following plant material shall be provided per acre of
woodland to be established. Fractional requirements (resulting
from fractions of acres to be established) shall be rounded up.
Plant Materials Required
Per Acre
Minimum Size Plant
Materials
5 slower canopy trees 3 inch caliper
10 canopy trees 2 inch caliper
20 faster growing canopy trees 1 inch caliper
30 slower growing canopy
trees
5 feet (height)
10 understory trees 1 inch caliper
100 shrubs 3 feet (height)
D. All existing healthy trees shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible.
E. All areas of a newly established woodland shall be seeded as
lawn or prairie unless ground cover has already been
established.
(2) Maintenance of newly established woodland areas. Additional
plants established by natural succession shall be retained. Dead
trees shall be removed where they adjoin roads or buildings. Debris
and litter shall be cleaned on an annual or semiannual basis.
Damage to 15% or more of the stand due to disease, wind or fire
shall require the replacement of all such damaged, trees.
(j) Recreational land (residential uses only). This calculation is required of
all residential land uses with the exception of subdivisions which would
be required to provide less than one-quarter acre by the following
calculation. Total recreational land required for residential uses is
calculated as follows:
 1314.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.03
C:484
Take BASE SITE AREA __________
Subtract TOTAL ACRES OF LAND IN
RESOURCE
- __________
EQUALS TOTAL UNRESTRICTED LAND = __________
Multiply
by
Recreation factor x __________
EQUALS TOTAL RECREATIONAL LAND
REQUIRED
= __________
Subtract Any resource protection land in the
categories noted below provided
such land is improved, or shall be
improved for recreation.
Forest - __________
Pond Shore/Drainageway - __________
EQUALS TOTAL RECREATION LAND
REMAINING TO BE PROVIDED
= __________
(k) Determination of Site Capacity (All Residential Land Uses). Individual
site capacity is determined by calculating the Net Buildable Site Area.
For single-family, single-family cluster or performance subdivisions, the
number of dwelling units permitted is determined by multiplying the
density factor by the net buildable site area. The calculations are as
follows:
Take TOTAL RESOURCE PROTECTION
LAND
__________acres
Add TOTAL RECREATION LAND
REMAINING TO BE PROVIDED
+ __________acres
EQUALS TOTAL OPEN SPACE = __________acres
Take BASE SITE AREA __________acres
Multiply
by
District open space ratio x __________acres
EQUALS MINIMUM REQUIRED OPEN
SPACE
= __________acres
Take BASE SITE AREA __________acres
Subtract TOTAL OPEN SPACE or
MINIMUM REQUIRED OPEN
SPACE, whichever is greater
- __________acres
EQUALS NET BUILDABLE SITE AREA = __________acres
Multiply
by
District maximum density factor x __________acres
 1314.03 CHARTER  1314.03
C:485
EQUALS NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS
(do not round off: use lowest
whole number)
= __________units
(l) Determination of site capacity (all nonresidential uses). Individual site
capacity is calculated as follows. Both maximum impervious surface
area and maximum floor area shall be calculated.
Take BASE SITE AREA __________ acres
Subtract RESOURCE PROTECTION LAND - __________ acres
EQUALS BUILDABLE LAND = __________ acres
Take BUILDABLE LAND __________
Divide by BASE SITE AREA __________
Equals CALCULATED IMPERVIOUS
RATIO
= __________
Take IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO
(from land use intensity class of
proposed use or district
maximum, whichever is less)
__________
If IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO is equal to or less than the
CALCULATED IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO, then:
Take BASE SITE AREA __________
Multiply
by
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO x __________
Equals PERMITTED IMPERVIOUS AREA = __________
Take BASE SITE AREA __________
Multiply
by
FAR (from land use intensity class
of proposed use or district
maximum, whichever is less)
x __________
Equals PERMITTED FLOOR AREA = __________
If IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO is more than the CALCULATED
IMPERVIOUS RATIO, then:
Take BASE SITE AREA __________
Multiply
by
CALCULATED IMPERVIOUS
RATIO
x __________
Equals PERMITTED IMPERVIOUS AREA = __________
Take CALCULATED IMPERVIOUS
RATIO
__________
Divide by IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO __________
Equals REDUCTION FACTOR = __________
 1314.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.03
C:486
 1314.04. Bufferyards. [Ord. 964, passed 10-26-1987; Ord. 1373,
passed 6-15-2009]
Take FLOOR AREA RATIO (or
maximum floor area factor,
whichever is more restrictive)
__________
Multiply
by
REDUCTION FACTOR x __________
Equals REQUIRED FLOOR AREA
FACTOR
= __________
Multiply
by
BASE SITE AREA x __________
Equals PERMITTED FLOOR AREA = __________
(a) Purpose. Bufferyards are required to separate different land uses to
minimize or eliminate any potential negative impacts on adjacent uses.
The location, required amount of land to be designated as a bufferyard,
and the type and amount of planting is specified for each bufferyard.
The width of the buffer may vary, however, depending on the intensity of
planting and landscape configuration.
(b) Location. Bufferyards shall be located along the outer perimeter of a lot
or land parcel extending to the boundary line.
(c) Determination of type. To determine the type of bufferyard required
between two adjacent parcels or between a parcel and a street, the
following procedure shall be followed:
(1) Identify land use category of the proposed use;
(2) Identify the land use intensity class of the proposed use and all
adjacent property; and
(3) Determine the bufferyard types required along each boundary by
referring to the bufferyard type matrix. Each letter designates a
specific bufferyard type.
The bufferyard shall be flexible. A single standard for all uses or even
for any given pair of uses can both impose unnecessary hardship on the
developer of a particular parcel and also lead to monotony. Within each
class of bufferyard, a developer may choose from several options. Because
different land values and plant material costs are introduced, the developer
is given flexibility to make cost tradeoffs in deciding which option to select.
Depending on the size of the parcel, this flexibility may become extremely
relevant.
(d) Requirements.
(1) The following illustrations indicate the specifications for each
bufferyard.45 There are several options for bufferyard width with
 1314.03 CHARTER  1314.04
C:487
corresponding plant material requirements. The planting
requirements are expressed as the material required per 100 linear
feet of bufferyard. The "plant unit multiplier" assigned to each
optional bufferyard width would determine the amount of planting
material required for that particular width. Any calculations of fivetenths
or greater for a particular type of plant shall be counted as
a required plant material.
(2) Each illustration depicts the total bufferyard located between two
uses.
(3) When development occurs adjacent to vacant land, this
development shall provide the required bufferyard as specified in
Figure 2. The second use to develop shall provide all additional
planting and/or land necessary to provide the total bufferyard
required between the two uses.
(4) Existing plant material within the designated bufferyard area that
meets the requirements for planting materials as set forth in this
Code may be counted as contributing to the bufferyard planting
requirements.
(5) The following structures are equivalent and may be used
interchangeably, so long as both structures are specified in the
bufferyard illustrations in this section.
Structure Equivalent Structure
F-3 B-1
F-4 B-2
F-5 B-3
F-6 BW-1
B-1 F-3
B-2 F-4
B-3 F-5
BW-1 F-6
(6) Any existing plant material which otherwise satisfies the
requirements of this section may be counted toward satisfying all
such requirements.
(7) The exact placement of required plants and structures shall be the
decision of each user, except that the following requirements shall
be satisfied:
45.Editor's Note: The illustrations are included as an attachment to this chapter.
 1314.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.04
C:488
 1314.05. Landscaping. [Ord. 964, passed 10-26-1987; Ord. 1373,
passed 6-15-2009]
A. Evergreen (or conifer) plant materials shall be planted in
clusters rather than singly in order to maximize their chances
of survival.
B. Berms with masonry walls (BW-1, BW-2 and BW-3) required of
bufferyard J and K options are intended to buffer more
significant nuisances from adjacent uses and, additionally, to
break up and absorb noise, which is achieved by the varied
heights of plant materials between the masonry wall and the
noise source. When berms with walls are required, the
masonry wall shall be closer, than the berm to the higher
intensity use.
(8) All bufferyard areas shall be seeded with lawn unless ground cover
is already established.
(9) Use of bufferyards. A bufferyard may be used for passive
recreation; it may contain pedestrian or bike trails, provided that:
A. No plant material is eliminated;
B. The total width of the bufferyard is maintained; and
C. All other regulations of the Code are met.
(10) Ownership of bufferyards. Bufferyards may remain in the
ownership of the original developer (and assigns) of a land use, or
they may be subjected to deed restrictions and subsequently be
freely conveyed, or they may be transferred to any consenting
grantees, such as adjoining landowners, a park or forest preserve
district, municipality, or an open-space or conservation group,
provided that any such conveyance adequately guarantees the
protection of the bufferyards for the purposes of this article.
(11) Maintenance of bufferyards. Bufferyards shall be maintained by the
owner of the property. Debris and litter shall be cleaned on a semiannual
basis. Damage to 15% or more of the plant material for any
reason, including disease, shall require replacement of all such
damaged plant materials.
(12) All bufferyard plant materials must meet the Plant Material
Specifications set forth in Section 1314.05(d).
(13) In lieu of planting bufferyards as required, and subject to prior
approval of Town Council at its sole discretion, bufferyard plantings
along roadways may be concentrated at the site entry point. This
alternative shall not be applicable where double bufferyards are
required.
 1314.04 CHARTER  1314.05
C:489
(a) Introduction. Off-street parking landscape requirements and general
landscaping requirements: Each land use and intensity level have
specific requirements for site landscaping and landscaping in the offstreet
parking areas. A minimum square footage as well as planting
materials are specified (see Figures 3 and 4).
(b) General landscaping requirements. This section details the general
landscaping required of particular land uses. The number and type of
plant units required per 300 linear feet of nonresidential building(s)
perimeter comprising the subject land use are specified for standards
R, A, B and C. The landscaping requirement specified for residential
uses (R) is the requirements per 10 dwelling units. The definitions of
this Code (defining plant units) shall be applicable to the terms utilized
in this section. The requirements of this section shall be applied
proportionately when the total linear feet of building(s) perimeter
varies from 300 feet for nonresidential uses or 10 residential dwelling
units. All required planting shall be located in areas which do not
include any bufferyard or right of way. Existing plant materials which
meet the requirements of this Code may be counted as contributing to
the total landscaping required by this section.
The following table specifies the type and number of plant units
required by this section.
Figure 3
Landscaping
Standard
Number of Landscaping Units Required
(per 300 feet or 10 dwelling units)
Standard Canopy Understory Shrubs
R 5 5 0
A 5 5 25
B 7 7 30
C 8 8 35
(c) Off-street parking landscaping requirements. This section details the
landscaping required of all off-street parking areas exceeding five
parking stalls. The number and type of plant units required per 24
automobile spaces is specified for each standard (A, B, C or R). Also
specified is a minimum area within which the required planting shall be
provided. Existing plant materials which meet the requirements of this
Code may be counted as contributing to the total landscaping required
by this section. The requirements of this section shall be applied
proportionally to any number of spaces other than 24. Meeting the
requirements contained in Article 1346, Appendix A(b)(13) ("Parking
Lot Landscaping Requirements") shall constitute full compliance with
this section.
 1314.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.05
C:490
Figure 4
Site Design Standards
Landscaping
Requirements R A B C
Planting area per 24
stalls (square feet)
240 1080 720 360
Canopy Trees 2 5 3 2
Understory Trees 3 2 1
Shrubs 3 10 6 4
*Refer to Land Use Intensity Class Standards.
Example
(d) Plant material specifications.
(1) Size. All plant materials shall meet the following minimum size
standards:
Plant Material Type Minimum Size
A. Canopy tree (35-foot
minimum height - maturity)
2 1/2 inch caliper Bufferyard
A  D
2 inch caliper Bufferyard E - J
B. Understory tree (up to 35
foot height)
1 1/2 inch caliper Bufferyard
E - J
Single stem 2 inch caliper Bufferyard A -
D
Multi-stem 10 foot
C. Evergreen tree 5 foot height
D. Shrub
Deciduous 24 inch height
Evergreen 18 inch height
(2) Color. 30% of landscaping material shall bear flowers. A minimum
of 10% and up to 33% of flowering landscaping material may be
annual or perennial flowering plants planted at the rate of 16
square feet per shrub planted when in lieu of flowering shrubbery.
A minimum of 10%, up to a maximum of 33%, of the remaining 70%
 1314.05 CHARTER  1314.05
C:491
 1314.06. Traffic requirements. [Ord. 964, passed 10-26-1987]
of landscaping material shall have leaves that are a color other
than solid green.
(3) Species.
A. Species shall be selected to insure that flowers are present
throughout the growing season. Annuals used shall be planted
by June 1. The Town will maintain a current list of plants native
to Pennsylvania that may be used.
B. Species must not be on the U.S. Department of Agriculture
Pennsylvania noxious weed list.
C. Species, with the exception of annuals, are encouraged to be
native.
D. Species on the Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Natural Resources invasive species list are discouraged.
(e) Maintenance of landscaped areas. All landscaped areas shall be
maintained by the owner of the property. All such areas shall be kept
free of debris and litter at all times. Damage to 10% or more of the plant
material for any reason, including disease, shall require replacement of
all such damaged plant materials.
To ensure that all landscaped areas are properly maintained, the owner
of the property shall provide the Town prior to the receipt of an
occupancy permit, a letter of credit, bond or Pennsylvania approved
corporate surety or approved security in the amount of 10% of the cost
of the plant materials within the landscaped areas.
(a) General purposes. The general purpose of this section is to:
(1) Define the development approval process the applicant is required
to complete with respect to traffic impact of the site;
(2) Define the cost sharing of roadway improvements already
identified as necessary for development of the district;
(3) Identify the access plan for each site and improvements necessary
to access each site;
(4) Describe the traffic study required of the applicant; and
(5) Describe the required implementation process for construction of
roadway improvements within the district.
(b) Terms defined.
DISTRICT  The D Development District.
ROADWAY IMPROVEMENT ACCOUNT  An account to be established
by the Town to be used only for roadway improvements in the zoning
 1314.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.06
C:492
district. This interest, bearing account and interest earned shall only be
used for roadway improvements in the district.
ROADWAY IMPROVEMENTS  The required construction of roadways,
traffic signals, signs, etc., necessary to increase traffic capacity.
TRAFFIC STUDY  The McKnight Road Traffic Study by Wilbur Smith
Associates dated May 26, 1987, and any addenda thereto.
(c) Definition of roadway improvements.
(1) The required roadway improvements which benefit the total
district are defined in the traffic study under recommended
improvements, with the exception of the Duncan Avenue West
extension.
(2) The improvements required may be added to, deleted or modified
as necessary, as documented by addendums to the traffic study.
(3) Total costs to be shared by the district sites are based upon the
latest available cost estimates, construction bids or completed
project costs.
(4) If any of the required improvements are funded and constructed by
other agencies, such as the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation or developers outside the district, they shall be
deleted from the program of required roadway improvements.
(d) Site access improvements.
(1) Traffic access to each site shall be in accordance with the access
plan in the traffic study.
(2) All improvements required to obtain access as shown in the traffic
study shall be constructed by the applicant and not considered to
be within the improvements which benefit the district.
(3) Detailed plans of site access showing roadway design shall be
submitted for Town review and approval.
(4) All access improvements shall be approved by other agencies as
required prior to final site plan by the Town.
(e) Cost allocation formula.
(1) All sites within the district shall share in the costs for
implementation of the roadway improvements.
(2) Costs shall be allocated in accordance with a.m. and p.m. total
entering and exiting peak hour trip generation as defined in the
Institute of Transportation Engineers publication, Trip Generation
Manual, the latest edition.
 1314.06 CHARTER  1314.06
C:493
(3) The applicant shall be responsible for the costs, as determined by
the formula (Table 9 of the traffic study), to be deposited in the
Town's account for roadway improvements in the district.
(4) After the costs have been determined and they have been deposited
in the Town's account or improvements constructed, the costs shall
not be increased in the future to the applicant when total costs or
the allocation formula is revised. If refunds are due, the applicant
shall be provided a refund when the improvement account is
eliminated.
(f) Development approval process.
(1) The traffic study shall be updated to reflect the proposed site
development if it differs from the assumed development access,
size or land use.
(2) The applicant shall be responsible for the engineering costs to
update the traffic study.
(3) The updated traffic study shall determine if the required
improvements, cost estimates or allocation formula require
changes based upon the proposed development access, size or land
use.
(4) The study shall be updated prior to site plan approval.
(5) The updated study shall include the total study area as defined in
the traffic study and shall update all relevant sections as necessary
for revision.
(6) The updated traffic study shall be subject to approval by the Town.
(7) The cost of improvements shall be paid by the applicant to the Town
prior to signing of subdivision or land development agreement.
(g) Improvement implementation.
(1) All required access improvements to the site shall be completed
prior to issuance of the building occupancy permit.
(2) If the applicant so elects, improvements identified in the traffic
study which benefit the total district as approved by the Town and
improve access to the owner's site may be constructed by the
applicant in lieu of payment into the roadway improvement account
for an equal or greater value subject to approval by the Town. Value
shall be determined by the final construction costs and must be
approved by the Town Engineer.
(3) If the Town so elects, improvements may be constructed prior to
sufficient funds being available in the roadway improvement
account. The fund shall be reimbursed by applicant fees when
available.
 1314.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.06
C:494
 1314.07. Architectural guidelines. [Ord. 964, passed 10-26-1987;
Ord. 1373, passed 6-15-2009]
(4) If the applicant elects to construct traffic improvements benefitting
the district which cost the applicant more than that which is
required per the allocation formula, the Town shall reimburse the
applicant for these costs which exceed the required contribution
when funds are available in the roadway improvement account.
(5) All overall improvement plans and specifications shall be approved
by the Town and/or other cognizant agencies prior to
commencement of construction.
(6) The applicant shall be responsible for the costs of engineering,
design, and construction inspection if the owner elects to construct
improvements in lieu of contributing to the roadway improvement
account.
(7) When roadway improvements are completed by either the
applicant or the Town, the total costs to be allocated shall be
revised based upon actual costs in lieu of cost estimates. If this
revised total cost results in credit due applicants who have already
paid into the fund or constructed improvements, this credit shall be
noted by the Town Manager. If credits are due when all
improvements are completed and the roadway improvement
account is to be eliminated, refunds shall be distributed
proportionally at that time.
(8) There shall be no time limit as to when funds are being contributed
by the roadway improvement fund are received or expended.
(9) The Town Manager shall be responsible for administration of the
traffic improvements. The Town Manager has the authority to
modify the traffic study or cost formula in accordance with this
ordinance subject to the approval of Council.
(a) Development character. "Campus" Image. The Development District
encompasses rolling, wooded hills interlaced with residential
neighborhoods. The architectural character of projects developed
within this corridor should preserve this quality and respect the
residential scale through the appropriate massing and scale of the
proposed buildings as well as materials' use and landscaping of the
grounds. A "campus" character is the goal for developments within this
district which shall extend the existing residential vocabulary of
surrounding communities and preserve the environmental qualities of
the land.
This character shall be achieved by using basic guidelines defining
height restrictions (performance zoning), materials use, roof treatment,
landscaping, site lighting and signage requirements. Those basic
guidelines shall permit individual flexibility in design and treatment of
 1314.06 CHARTER  1314.07
C:495
proposed projects by specifying critical parameters. The Architectural
Review Board shall assist the developers in further defining the
intentions of quality and character guidelines and shall review
submitted designs to assure that the appropriate character within this
district is maintained. Council shall appoint three persons who own
property within the Town to the Board for a four-year term. The Board
shall advise the Planning Commission as to the acceptability of a
proposed project, as it relates to development character and
conformance with the architectural guidelines.
(b) Design guidelines. To insure that multi-family and office/commercial
projects within the district reflect a desirable image of the Town, the
following architectural guidelines shall be incorporated into the District
standards.
(1) Material use. All primary and accessory structures shall be
constructed primarily of a brick or clay tile material. Colors should
be compatible with the surrounding residential community. The
following materials are not permitted as primary exterior cladding
within the Development District:
A. Concrete block;
B. Metal;
C. Wood siding; or
D. Asphalt/fiberglass shingles.
(2) Glazing. Glazing areas shall not exceed 60% of the exterior skin of
the building. Mirrored glazing is not permitted within the
Development District, though solar absorption/reflective glazing is
an acceptable material.
(3) Roof structures. Buildings having up to and including two stories
shall have sloped roofs with a minimum 6:12 pitch. Buildings of
three stories or more may have sloped parapets that shall have the
appearance of a solid roof or fully enclosed sloped roofs. Minimum
parapet heights/slopes are as follows:
A. Three stories or 35 feet to 12 feet height at 12:12.
B. Four stories or 45 feet to 15 feet height at 12:12.
Buildings of three stories or more may also have fully enclosed roofs
with a minimum of 6:12 pitch or highly articulated roof forms that
express the building and at the same time shield exposed roof mounted
mechanical systems from view.
Permitted roof materials shall be metal (copper, pre-finished
aluminum, terne, stainless steel), slate or tile.
 1314.07 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.07
C:496
(4) Screening. All mechanical equipment and trash collection areas
shall be screened from public view and construction using
materials consistent with the primary building.
(5) Accessory structures. All accessory structures shall be constructed
using materials consistent with the primary building.
(c) Sign standards.46
(1) Each land use shall be permitted the following sign types:
A. One development sign per vehicular entry, if entries are
located on separate collector roads. No more than one
development sign along the same collector road.
B. One freestanding sign.
C. One of the following: projecting wall, graphic, supergraphic or
auxiliary.
(2) Definitions.
AUXILIARY SIGN  A sign which provides special information such
as direction, price, sales information, hours of operation or warning
and which does not include names, brand names or information
regarding product lines or services. Examples of such signs include
directories of tenants in buildings and "no trespassing" signs.
DEVELOPMENT SIGN  A sign which, by symbol or name,
identifies the development. It may also provide an index of uses
(tenants) included in the development.
FREESTANDING SIGN  A self-supporting sign resting on or
supported by means of poles, standards or any other type of base
on the ground.
GRAPHIC  A sign which is an integral part of a building facade.
The sign is painted directly on, carved in or otherwise permanently
embedded in the facade. Signs in shop windows are included unless
they qualify as auxiliary signs.
MARQUEE  The sign of a theater, auditorium, fairground or
museum, which advertises present and scheduled events.
PROJECTING SIGN  A sign, other than a wall sign, which is
attached to and projects from a structure or building face. The sign
face of double-faced projecting signs is calculated by measuring
one face of the sign only.
SIGN FACE  That area of a sign which:
In the case of freestanding, projecting and marquee signs
consists of the entire surface area of the sign on which copy
A.
46.Editor's Note: The Table of Sign Performance Standards is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
 1314.07 CHARTER  1314.07
C:497
SIGN LIGHTING  Methods of illumination which may be divided
into several types:
SUPER GRAPHIC  A sign consisting of a single word which
is an integral and permanent part of the facade and which is
distinguished only by relief and the shadows thereby created.
TEMPORARY SIGN  A sign or advertising display constructed of
cloth, canvas, fabric, paper, plywood or other light material and
intended to be displayed for a short period of time (30 consecutive
days). Included in this category are retailers' signs temporarily
displayed for the purpose of informing the public of a sale or
"special" offer.
WALL SIGN  A sign mounted parallel to a building facade or other
vertical building surface. Parallel signs shall not extend beyond the
edge of any wall or other surface to which they are mounted, nor
shall they project more than 18 inches from its surface.
could be placed. The supporting structure or bracing of a sign
shall not be counted as a part of sign face area unless such
structure or bracing is made a part of the sign's message.
Where a sign has two display faces back to back, the area of
only one face shall be considered the sign face area. Where a
sign has more than one display face, all areas which can be
viewed simultaneously shall be considered the sign face area.
In the case of a sign (other than freestanding, projecting or
marquee) whose message is fabricated together with the
background which borders or frames that message, sign face
area shall be the total of the entire background.
B.
In the case of a sign (other than freestanding, projecting or
marquee) whose message is applied to a background which
provides no border or frame, sign face area shall be the area of
the smallest rectangle which can encompass all words, letters,
figures, emblems and other elements of the sign message.
C.
General. The sign itself neither is lighted internally nor has an
external source of light specifically directed at it. Rather, the
sign depends on the general illumination of the area, such as
parking lot, traffic or pedestrian areas, for its illumination.
A.
Internal. The sign is made of translucent material with internal
lights.
B.
Backlight. The letters are raised beyond the sign's background
and the cover lighting sources which illuminate the
background.
C.
Spotlight. The sign is lighted by spotlights specifically directed
at it.
D.
(3) Development sign standards.
 1314.07 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.07
C:498
A. A development sign shall be limited to no more than six feet in
height above the natural grade in the area.
B. All development signs shall be freestanding.
C. Lighting of a development sign may be by internal lighting,
back lighting, the general lighting of the area, or by shielded
spotlights.
D. The standards below shall apply to all development signs:
Type of Lighting Maximum Sign Face Area
General 80 square feet plus 10 square feet for
every 100 feet of frontage over 500 feet
Backlighting or
spotlighting
60 square feet plus 8 square feet for
every 100 feet of frontage over 500 feet
Internal lighting 40 square feet plus 5 square feet for
every 100 feet of frontage over 500 feet
E. All development signs shall be located between the arterial or
collector roads on which they may be permitted and any
bufferyard required by the use on the site.
(4) General regulations.
A. No person shall erect, alter or relocate within the district any
sign without first obtaining a sign permit, with the following
exceptions:
1. Memorial signs and tablets displayed on public property
and in cemeteries;
2. Address numerals and signs not exceeding one square foot
in area and bearing the names of occupants of the
premises;
3. Legal notices;
4. Traffic and no parking signs which bear no advertising.
B. The repainting, changing of parts and preventive maintenance
of signs shall not be deemed alterations requiring a sign
permit.
C. Except for time and/or temperature signs, no flashing,
fluttering, undulating, swinging, rotating or otherwise moving
signs shall be permitted.
D. No sign, temporary or otherwise, shall be affixed to a tree or
utility pole.
 1314.07 CHARTER  1314.07
C:499
E. No signs including traffic signs and similar regulatory notices
except those of a duly constituted governing body shall be
allowed within road right-of-way lines.
F. Any spotlights permitted to illuminate signs shall be shielded
such that their light source cannot be seen from adjoining
roads or residential uses.
G. Height.
1. The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from
the curb level to the top of the sign.
2. The height of the projecting sign shall be measured from
the base of the sign face to the ground below.
3. The height of a wall sign shall be measured from the base
of the building below the sign to the top of the sign face.
The top of the sign shall be no higher than the maximum
permitted building height nor shall it be more than three
feet higher than the highest ceiling elevation in the
building.
4. The height of a graphic or supergraphic shall be measured
from the base of the ground to the top of the sign face.
H. A sign shall not be mounted on a roof.
(5) Additional regulations.
A. Marquee signs. Theaters, museums, auditoriums and
fairgrounds shall be permitted marquee signs up to an
additional 100% in area beyond that permitted for freestanding
signs, provided that the area of other signs to which the
theaters, museum, auditorium or fairground may be entitled is
reduced. The increase in area permitted the marquee sign
shall be equal to the reduction in area of other permitted signs.
B. Auxiliary signs. An auxiliary sign may be freestanding,
attached to freestanding structures or equipment, or may be
attached to the building or windows.
C. Freestanding signs. A freestanding sign shall not be located
within any bufferyards required by the use of the site on which
it is located.
D. Graphic signs. A graphic sign shall consist of or be constructed
of the same material as the facade of which it is an integral
part, with the exception that individual letters or symbols
which do not project more than one inch from the facade need
not be of the same material as the facade.
 1314.07 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.07
C:500
E. Super graphic. A super graphic shall consist or be constructed
of the same material as the facade of which it is an integral
part. No difference in material is permitted.
(d) Exterior lighting standards.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to regulate the spillover
of light and glare on operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians and
land uses in the proximity of the light source. With respect to motor
vehicles in particular, safety considerations form the basis of the
regulations contained herein. In other cases, both the nuisance and
hazard aspects of glare are regulated. This subsection is not
intended to apply to public street lighting.
(2) Definitions.
CANDLEPOWER  The amount of light that will illuminate a
surface one foot distant from a light source to an intensity of one
footcandle. Maximum (peak) candlepower is the largest amount of
candlepower emitted by any lamp, light source or luminaire.
CUTOFF  The point at which all light rays emitted by a lamp, light
source or luminaire are completely eliminated (cutoff) at a specific
angle above the ground.
CUTOFF ANGLE  The angle formed by a line drawn from the
direction of light rays at the light source and a line perpendicular to
the ground from the light source, above which no light is emitted.
CUTOFF-TYPE LUMINAIRE  A luminaire with elements such as
shields, reflectors or fractor panels which direct and cut off the
light at a cutoff angle that is less than 90.
FOOTCANDLE  A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all
points of which are one foot from a uniform point source of one
candle.
GLARE  The brightness of a light source which causes eye
discomfort.
LUMINAIRE  A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source
and all necessary mechanical, electrical and decorative parts.
MAXIMUM PERMITTED ILLUMINATION  The maximum
illumination measured in footcandles at the interior bufferyard line
at ground level in accordance with the standards of subsection
(d)(3) hereof.
(3) The following standards are required of all exterior lighting except
the outdoor recreational uses specifically exempted below. Many
uses have the option of providing a lower light post with a noncutoff
type luminaire or a higher pole, up to 60 feet, with a luminaire that
totally cuts off light spillover at a cutoff angle smaller than 90. The
maximum height light post permitted is dependent on amount of
cutoff provided. This is designed as a protection against excessive
 1314.07 CHARTER  1314.07
C:501
glare and light spilling over to neighboring properties. The
exceptions which are permitted provide adequate protection for
neighboring residential property. Exterior lighting shall meet one
of the following standards:
A. When light source or luminaire has no cutoff:
Standard
Maximum Permitted
Illumination
Maximum Permitted Height of
Luminaire
(feet)
R 0.20 10
A 0.20 15
B, C 0.30 20
Illustrations of this type of luminaire are provided below.
B. When a luminaire has total cutoff of an angle greater than 90,
the maximum illumination and the maximum permitted
luminaire height shall be:
Standard
Maximum Permitted
Illumination
Maximum Permitted Height of
Post
(feet)
R 0.3 15
A 0.5 20
B 0.75 25
C 1.0 30
An illustration of this type of luminaire is illustrated below.
C. When a luminaire has total cutoff of light at an angle less than
90 and is located so that the bare light bulb, lamp or light
source is completely shielded from the direct view of an
observer five feet above the ground at the point where the
cutoff angle intersects the ground, then the maximum
permitted illumination and the maximum permitted height of
the luminaire shall be:
 1314.07 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.07
C:502
Standard
Maximum Permitted
Illumination
Maximum Permitted Height of
Luminaire
(feet)
R 0.5 20
A 1.0 25
B 2.0 30
C 3.0 40
D. Exemption for specified outdoor recreational uses.
1. Because of their unique requirements for nighttime
visibility and their limited hours of operation, ball
diamonds, playing fields and tennis courts are exempted
from the exterior lighting standards of this section. These
outdoor recreational uses shall meet all other
requirements of this section and this Code.
2. The outdoor recreational uses specified above shall not
exceed a maximum permitted post height of eight feet.
3. The outdoor recreational uses specified above may exceed
a total cutoff angle of 90, provided that the luminaire is
shielded to prevent light and glare spillover to adjacent
residential property. The maximum permitted illumination
at the interior bufferyard line shall not exceed two
footcandles.
E. Additional regulations. Notwithstanding any other provision of
this section to the contrary:
1. No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted.
2. Light sources or luminaires shall not be located within
bufferyard areas except on pedestrian walkways.
F. Measurement.
1. Metering equipment. Lighting levels shall be measured in
footcandles with a direct-reading, portable light meter.
The meter shall have a color and cosine-corrected sensor
with multiple scales and shall read within an accuracy of
plus or minus 5%. It shall have been tested, calibrated and
certified by an independent commercial photometric
laboratory of the manufacturer within one year of the date
of its use.
2. Method of measurement. The meter sensor shall be
mounted not more than six inches above ground level in a
horizontal position. Readings shall be taken by qualified
personnel only after the cell has been exposed long
 1314.07 CHARTER  1314.07
C:503
 1314.08. Detailed use regulations. [Ord. 964, passed 10-26-1987]
enough to provide a constant reading. Measurements shall
be made after dark with the light sources in question on,
then with the same sources off. The difference between the
two readings shall be compared to the maximum permitted
illumination. This procedure eliminates the effects of
moonlight and other ambient light.
G. Exterior lighting plan. At the time any exterior lighting is
installed or substantially modified, and whenever a zoning
certificate is sought, an exterior lighting plan shall be
submitted to the zoning office in order to determine whether
the requirements of this section have been met.
(a) Residential use regulations. This section specifies the minimum lot
dimensions and other requirements for each type of residential unit
permitted by this Code. The regulations provide for lot sizes that vary
with the number of bedrooms or size of house and with the type of
housing. This gives the developer considerable freedom. For example,
in areas where the site is best suited to smaller lots or dwellings, these
can be accommodated without a zoning change so long as the overall
intensity is balanced by the use of larger lots on other portions of the
site.
Any type of single-family detached dwelling unit for which particular
standards are not specified in this section shall comply with the
requirements of a single-family house.
When a lot exceeds the minimum permitted area, all other standards
applicable to the minimum lot area shall nevertheless apply. The figures
specified in the tables of this section are expressed in terms of square
feet, feet or a ratio, whichever applies. The off-street parking figures
specify minimum number of off-street parking spaces. When the offstreet
parking is to be provided entirely on a lot and the required
number of spaces is not a whole number, the number of required spaces
shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number.
Reduction in number of off-street parking spaces: when a development
is specifically designed to be used for senior citizens, all such units shall
be required to provide one parking space for each such unit.
(1) Conventional subdivisions. Use current R-1 and R-2 standards.
(2) Performance subdivision. (Replaces R-3, R-4 and R-5 standards).
Performance subdivisions may contain one or more of the housing
types that are specified in this subsection. Refer to Section 1701 of
the Building Code for regulations governing fire detection, fire wall
separation and suppression.
A. Single-family house. This dwelling type consists of a singlefamily
residence located on a privately owned lot which has
 1314.07 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.08
C:504
private yards on all four sides of the house. The following table
specifies the minimum standards for single-family homes in a
performance subdivision.
2 Bedrooms
3 Bedrooms or
More
Minimum lot area 6,600 square feet 7,400 square
feet
Minimum on-lot
impervious
16% 22%
Maximum floor area
ratio
0.16 0.24
Minimum yards
Street 25 25
Side 8 8
Rear 25 30
Minimum lot width 60 70
Off-street parking
spaces
2 3
B. Lot-line house. This dwelling type consists of a single-family,
fully detached residence located on an individual lot which is
set on the lot line. House windows are prohibited in that wall of
the house on the lot line. Either a five-foot maintenance
easement shall be provided for the neighboring property, or
the lot line house may be set back five feet from the line and a
recreation, planting and use easement may be granted to the
adjacent lot owner. In addition, the following table specifies the
minimum standards for a lot-line house.
2 Bedrooms
3 Bedrooms or
more
Minimum lot area 5,500 square
feet
6,200 square
feet
Maximum on-lot
impervious
22% 28%
Maximum floor area
ratio
0.20 0.27
Minimum yards
Street 20 20
Rear 30 30
Side* 28 30
 1314.08 CHARTER  1314.08
C:505
2 Bedrooms
3 Bedrooms or
more
Minimum building
spacing**
28 30
Minimum lot width 55 60
Off-street parking spaces 2 3
Notes:
* This standard applies when units are located on the lot
line
** This standard applies when units are set back from the
lot line and the easement described above is provided.
C. Village house. This dwelling type is a single-family residence
which is fully detached from neighboring structures. The
village house is distinguished by very small front and side
yards. The placement of the unit close to the street requires
special landscaping or architectural treatment, specified in
detail below. The required landscaping is a definitional element
of the unit. The following table and text specify the minimum
standards for a village house.
3 Bedrooms or More
3 Bedrooms or More
2 Bedrooms
1 car
garage 2 car garage
Minimum lot
area
4,200 4,600 5,000
Maximum on-lot
impervious
23% 23% 27%
Maximum floor
area ratio
0.26 0.28 0.34
Minimum yard
Street 15 15 15
Side 5 5 5
Rear 25 30 30
Minimum lot
width
46 50 55
Off-street
parking spaces
2 3 3
 1314.08 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.08
C:506
The yards of village houses that front on street shall be
landscaped or the units built to include the installation of at
least two of the following seven landscaping or architectural
treatments:
1. Two canopy trees and three evergreen or understory trees
or six evergreen or understory trees.
2. A porch which is roofed but not enclosed and extends
across three-fourths of the front of the house and is at least
seven feet in width.
3. A front yard raised above the grade of the sidewalk by at
least 24 inches and four flowering or evergreen shrubs
along each street face.
4. An ornamental fence or wall between 24 and 36 inches in
height, and five flowering shrubs or evergreen shrubs per
street face.
5. Twenty flowering or evergreen shrubs or 10 flowering or
evergreen shrubs, 20 hedge plants and two understory
trees.
6. A hedge consisting of shrubs planted on eighteen-inch
centers and two understory or evergreen trees.
7. A berm or raised area averaging 18 inches above the
average grade of the rest of the yard and covering 40% of
such yard, with four understory or evergreen trees and six
flowering or evergreen shrubs.
D. Twin house. This dwelling type consists of a semi-detached
dwelling for a single family. It has only one dwelling unit from
ground to roof and only one wall in common with another
dwelling unit. The following table specifies the minimum
standards for a twin house.
Number of Bedrooms
1 2
3 with 1
car Garage
3 with 2 car
Garage 4 5
Minimum lot area 2,700 3,200 3,400 3,900 4,000 4,400
Maximum on-lot
impervious
33% 33% 32% 40% 41% 40%
Maximum floor
area ratio
0.29 0.32 0.32 0.29 0.32 0.35
Minimum lot
width
36 40 40 45 45 50
Minimum yards
 1314.08 CHARTER  1314.08
C:507
Number of Bedrooms
1 2
3 with 1
car Garage
3 with 2 car
Garage 4 5
Street 20 25 25 25 25 25
Side 8 10 10 10 10 10
Rear 20 20 20 20 20 20
Off-street parking
spaces
2 2 2 3 3 4
E. Patio house. This dwelling type is a detached or semi-detached
unit, for a single family, with one dwelling unit from ground to
roof. Each dwelling unit's lot shall be fully enclosed by a wall
located at the lot line, thus creating a private yard between the
house and the wall. Side and rear walls shall be seven feet in
height, and the front wall shall average six feet in height. That
portion of the yard or patio area comprising "minimum patio
area" is this housing type's minimum yard area. All living
spaces, such as living rooms, dens and bedrooms, shall face
into the yard or patio. The following table specifies the
minimum standards for a patio house.
Number of Bedrooms
1 2 3 4 5
Minimum lot area
1 story 2,100 2,700 3,300 3,700 4,100
2 story 1,800 2,300 2,700 3,000 3,300
Maximum on-lot
Impervious
1 story 46% 51% 53% 53% 52%
2 story 32% 36% 37% 37% 36%
Maximum floor
area ratio
1 story 0.39 0.37 0.33 0.36 0.36
2 story 0.47 0.48 0.40 0.44 0.45
Minimum lot
width
36 38 40 40 45
Minimum yard
width
6 8 8 8 8
Minimum patio
area (square feet)
700 750 800 850 900
 1314.08 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.08
C:508
Number of Bedrooms
1 2 3 4 5
Minimum patio
area width
25 25 25 25 28
Off-street parking
spaces Height
1.75 2 2.5 2.5 3
1 story 15 15 15 15 15
2 story 25 25 25 25 25
F. Atrium house. This dwelling type consists of an attached onestory
unit with private individual access for a single family.
Each dwelling unit shall have a private yard(s) or atria. The
entire lot area of atria and house shall be enclosed by a wall.
The wall shall be at least eight feet in height in the rear or
sides of the lot or may average six and 1/2 feet if located in the
front. All living spaces, that is, living rooms, dens or bedrooms,
shall face an atrium. The following table specifies minimum
standards for an atrium house.
Number of Bedrooms
1 2 3 4 5
Minimum lot area
With on-lot
parking
1,800 2,050 2,400 2,600 2,900
With off-lot
parking
1,550 1,750 2,000 2,250 2,500
On-lot impervious
With on-lot
parking
65% 65% 65% 65% 65%
With off-lot
parking
58% 58% 58% 58% 59%
Maximum floor
area ratio
With on-lot
parking
0.48 0.50 0.48 0.49 0.51
With off-lot
parking
0.58 0.58 0.58 0.58 0.59
Minimum lot
width
36 38 40 40 45
Minimum atrium
area (square feet)
400 500 500 500 600
 1314.08 CHARTER  1314.08
C:509
Number of Bedrooms
1 2 3 4 5
Minimum atrium
width
18 20 20 20 22
Off-street parking
spaces
1.75 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.0
G. Weak-link town house. This dwelling type consists of an
attached dwelling unit, a single unit from ground to roof, with
individual outside access housing a single family. Each unit
shall have both a one and two-story section. The one-story
section shall be at least 10 feet wide or 30% of the lot width,
whichever is greater. A group of attached, weak-link town
houses shall average no more than eight dwelling units per
group. The following table specifies minimum standards for a
weak-link town house.
Number of Bedrooms
1 2 3 4 5
Minimum lot area
With 2-car
garage
2,400 2,700 2,800 3,000 3,300
With on-lot
parking
2,000 2,300 2,400 2,600 2,900
With off-lot
parking
1,700 2,000 2,100 2,300 2,600
Maximum on-lot
impervious
With 2-car
garage
51% 51% 51% 51% 50%
With on-lot
parking
44% 42% 43% 44% 42%
With off-lot
parking
35% 33% 35% 36% 36%
Maximum floor
area ratio
With 2-car
garage
0.36 0.36 0.38 0.42 0.46
With on-lot
parking
0.43 0.41 0.45 0.50 0.50
With off-lot
parking
0.50 0.46 0.51 0.55 0.57
 1314.08 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.08
C:510
Number of Bedrooms
1 2 3 4 5
Minimum lot
width
With 2-car
garage
36 38 40 40 42
With on-lot
parking
28 30 30 30 32
With off-lot
parking
28 28 30 30 32
Minimum yards
Front 15 20 20 20 20
Rear 20 20 22 22 24
Off-street parking
spaces
1.75 2.5 2.5 3.0 3.0
H. Town house. This dwelling type consists of a single-family
attached unit, with a single unit going from ground to roof, and
with individual outside access. Row of attached town houses
shall average no more than 10 dwelling units. The minimum
amount of exterior walls shall be double the minimum lot
width. The following table specifies the minimum standards for
a town house.
Number of Bedrooms
1 2 3 4 5
Minimum lot area
With 2-car
garage
1,700 2,000 2,000 2,400 2,600
With on-lot
parking
1,400 1,700 1,800 2,300 2,500
With off-lot
parking
1,100 1,400 1,500 1,800 2,000
Maximum on-lot
impervious
With 2-car
garage
59% 55% 58% 66% 56%
With on-lot
parking
57% 52% 53% 55% 54%
With off-lot
parking
45% 42% 43% 41% 42%
 1314.08 CHARTER  1314.08
C:511
Number of Bedrooms
1 2 3 4 5
Maximum floor
area ratio
With 2-car
garage
0.48 0.50 0.56 0.54 0.59
With on-lot
parking
0.57 0.57 0.62 0.58 0.60
With off-lot
parking
0.72 0.70 0.73 0.71 0.74
Minimum lot
width
With 2-car
garage
28 28 28 30 32
With on-lot
parking
22 22 24 26 26
With off-lot
parking
18 20 22 24 24
Minimum yards -
front
15 20 20 20 20
Off-street parking
spaces
1.75 2.5 2.5 3.0 3.0
I. Multiplex. This dwelling type may be either a single-family
attached dwelling or a multiple family unit. Each unit may take
direct access to a private yard or access point, or units may
share yards and access. The units may be arranged in a variety
of configurations, including back to back, side to side, or
vertically; however, no more than six units shall be attached in
any single building.
Number of Bedrooms
Efficiency 1 2 3 4
Minimum lot area 1,450 1,650 1,700 1,750 2,150
Maximum on-lot
impervious
59% 59% 56% 58% 60%
Maximum floor
area ratio
0.43 0.52 0.60 0.65 0.61
Minimum lot
width (per
structure)
60 70 70 75 75
Minimum yards
 1314.08 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.08
C:512
Number of Bedrooms
Efficiency 1 2 3 4
Street 25 25 25 25 25
Side 5 5 5 5 5
Off-street parking
spaces
1.5 2.0 2.5 2.5 3.0
J. Apartment buildings. Apartment buildings are buildings
comprising multiple dwelling units which share common
access to individual units and yards. The yard required shall be
the sum of the areas required for each unit within the
structure. Apartments shall contain three or more units in a
single structure. The following table specifies the minimum
standards for apartment buildings:
Number of Stories
2 3 4
Minimum lot area per
dwelling unit (D.U.)
Efficiency 1,050 1,100 1,050
1 Bedroom 1,450 1,400 1,250
2 Bedrooms 1,650 1,550 1,450
3 Bedrooms 1,850 1,600 1,450
4 Bedrooms 2,050 1,850 1,600
Maximum on-lot impervious
surface ratio
Efficiency 66% 61% 59%
1 Bedroom 65% 63% 59%
2 Bedrooms 71% 65% 61%
3 Bedrooms 68% 65% 65%
4 Bedrooms 69% 65% 67%
Maximum floor area ratio
Efficiency 0.49 0.54 0.55
1 Bedroom 0.50 0.58 0.58
2 Bedrooms 0.64 0.70 0.71
3 Bedrooms 0.67 0.77 0.87
4 Bedrooms 0.69 0.76 0.88
Maximum height 30 45 60
 1314.08 CHARTER  1314.08
C:513
 1314.09. Parking. [Ord. 964, passed 10-26-1987; Ord. 1163,
passed 4-22-1996]
The following minimum number of parking spaces shall be required of the
nonresidential uses specified below. The minimum size of each parking stall
shall be nine feet by 18 feet. Aisle widths are shown on the following page.
Number of Stories
2 3 4
Maximum number dwelling
units per building
24 36 48
Minimum street frontage of
lot
100 100 100
Minimum spacing between
buildings
40 60 40
Number of Bedrooms
Efficiency 1 2 3 4
Off-street parking
spaces
1.5 1.75 2.5 3 3
(a) Definitions.
CAPACITY  The maximum number of persons which may be
accommodated by the use as determined by its design or by fire code
regulations, whichever is greater.
EMPLOYEE(S) ON THE LARGEST WORK SHIFT  The maximum
number of employees employed at the facility regardless of the time
period during which this occurs and regardless of whether any such
person is a full-time employee. The largest work shift may be a
particular day of the week or a lunch or dinner period in the case of a
restaurant.
(b) Minimum of spaces.
(1) Office uses. One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
(2) Other office uses. Beauty and barber shops: Three spaces per
operator or one space per 100 square feet of gross floor area,
whichever is larger, plus one space per employee on the largest
shift.
(3) Medical offices. Six spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross space.
(4) Personal services. One space per 200 square feet of basement and
first floor gross floor area, plus one space per 300 square feet of
any additional floor area for customer service, plus one space per
employee on the largest shift.
 1314.08 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.09
C:514
(5) Commercial and entertainment uses, except as specifically
designated below: One space per 200 square feet of gross floor
area of customer sales and service, plus one space per 250 square
feet of storage and/or office gross floor area, or, if the use has at
least 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, 5 1/2 spaces per 1,000
square feet of gross floor area.
(6) Other commercial and entertainment uses.
A. Banks. One space per 200 square feet gross floor area, plus
five spaces off-street waiting (loading) spaces per drive-in lane,
plus one space per employee on the largest work shift.
B. Private clubs. One space per three persons to the maximum
capacity of the facility.
C. Restaurant, standard. One space per 100 square feet of gross
floor area.
D. School, commercial or trade. One space per three students,
plus one space per employee (including faculty) at capacity
class attendance period.
E. Theaters and auditoriums. One space per three patrons based
on maximum capacity. This requirement may be satisfied on a
space-by-space basis by a facility's providing written proof that
it has the use of a nearby parking lot available to its patrons,
for example, by contractual arrangement.
F. Institutional, indoor, recreational, and special residential uses.
One space per three patrons to the maximum capacity, plus one
space per employee on the largest shift.
(7) Other institutional, indoor, recreational and special residential
uses.
A. Community and recreation center. One space per 250 square
feet of gross floor area, or one space per four patrons to the
maximum capacity, plus one space per employee on the largest
shift.
B. Day or nursery school. One space per teacher/employee on the
largest shift, plus one off-street loading space per six students.
C. Libraries and museums. One space per 250 square feet of floor
area or one space per four seats to the maximum capacity,
whichever is greater, plus one space per employee on the
largest shift.
D. Nursing homes. One space per six patient beds, plus one space
per employee on the largest shift, plus one space per staff
member and visiting doctor.
 1314.09 CHARTER  1314.09
C:515
E. Schools.
1. Elementary and junior high. One space per teacher and
staff member, plus one space per two classrooms.
2. Senior high. One space per teacher and staff member on
the largest shift, plus one space per five nonbused
students.
3. College. One space per staff member on the largest shift,
plus one space per two students of the largest class
attendance period.
F. Swimming facility. One space per 75 square feet of gross water
area, plus one space per employee on the largest shift.
G. Skating rink, ice or roller. One space per 300 square feet of
gross floor area.
H. Tennis, racquetball, handball courts. Four spaces per court,
plus one space per employee on the largest shift.
I. Bowling alley. Five spaces per lane, plus one space per
employee on the largest work shift.
J. Personal care facilities. One space per two occupants.
K. Small-format hospital. One off-street parking space for each
inpatient bed and for each emergency room bay. When a smallformat
hospital is contained within the same building or lot as
a medical office, the combined off-street parking shall be six
off-street parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of medical
office plus one off-street parking space per each inpatient bed.
[Added 6-25-2018 by Ord. No. 1476]
(8) Multi-use parking. If more than one use occupies a lot, the
minimum number of spaces shall be provided in accordance with
providing the minimum number of spaces for each use on the lot.
[Added 6-25-2018 by Ord. No. 1476]
Minimum Standard Size Parking Stall, Aisle and Bay Dimensions
Angle (A) 45 (1) 60 (1) 70 (1) 80 (1) 90
W (width) 12.73 10.39 9.58 9.14 9.0
W' 9.0 9.0 9.0 9.0 9.0
X 27.00 22.50 21.08 19.56 18.00
L (length) 19.09 19.49 19.81 19.26 18.00
L' 18.00 18.00 18.00 18.00 18.00
Aisle Width 13.6' 15.1' 16.0' 18.1' 24.0'
Bay Width 51.8' 54.1' 55.6' 56.6' 60.0'
 1314.09 MCCANDLESS CODE  1314.09
C:516
 1314.10. Submission procedures. [Ord. 964, passed 10-26-1987]
The submission requirements for a site development proposal shall be as
follows:
Notes:
(1) These dimensions are for one way parking.
(a) Submission content. A comprehensive site development plan or plans
(maximum sheet size 30 inches by 42 inches) bearing the seal of a
registered architect, engineer or surveyor shall be submitted and
approved prior to any building permit request. The site plan shall be
accompanied by the following:
(1) A general map showing the site location;
(2) Building elevations;
(3) Building floor plans; and
(4) Three dimensional model of site development.
(b) The site development submission shall provide the following
information:
(1) Owner and zoning district classification of the site immediately
prior to the creation of the D Development District;
(2) Owner, use and zoning, and land use intensity classification of all
adjacent properties;
(3) Height, bulk and placement of buildings;
(4) Area, actual and required; floor area ratio/impervious surface area;
(5) Scale, north arrow and date;
(6) Tract boundary and lot lines;
(7) Road access, public and private internal roads and walks;
(8) Grades, existing and proposed;
(9) Drainage, existing and proposed, including:
A. Full topo map of entire watershed in plan and above plan with
calculation of area;
B. Topo of plan with calculation of all areas and sub-areas
draining to each catch basin;
C. Calculations for all storm sewer sizing;
D. Calculation of required retention and permissible release;
 1314.09 CHARTER  1314.10
C:517
Article 1315
R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
 1315.01. Purpose. [Ord. 948, passed 2-23-1987]
The purpose of the R-1 District is to provide areas of large lots for singlefamily
dwellings. Only one dwelling is permitted on each lot. An R-1 lot
within a subdivision may be used as a neighborhood park or playground
when authorized by the Town Council as a conditional use. (See Section
1315.07).
E. Details of retention facility with calculations;
F. Details of release facility with calculations; and
G. Rights of way and lot lines on the plan for storm sewers;
(10) Utility availability and easements;
(11) Existing and proposed wooded areas;
(12) Existing slope areas 15% and greater;
(13) Floodplain (100-year storm) and landslide prone areas;
(14) Soil characteristics;
(15) Erosion and sedimentation controls;
(16) Designated and natural resource protection areas;
(17) Yard depths and widths net buildable area of site;
(18) Parking area, proposed and required, and loading berths;
(19) Signs; number, type and location;
(20) Illumination, type and extent;
(21) Landscaping (general and off-street parking);
(22) Bufferyards;
(23) Open space and recreational areas, site capacity calculations;
(24) Plans of proposed structures;
(25) Sidewalks; and
(26) Any other information specifically requested.
 1314.10 MCCANDLESS CODE  1315.02
C:518
 1315.02. Dimensional standards. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord.
906, passed 5-28-1985; Ord. 1004, passed 3-27-1989; Ord. 1120,
passed 5-23-1994]
(a) Lot area (unless it is part of a plan
recorded prior to November 30,
1971)
20,000 square feet min.
(b) Lot width at building line 100 feet min.
If part of plan recorded prior to
November 30, 1971
75 feet min.
(c) Front yard depth 35 feet min.
(d) Rear yard depth 40 feet min.
(e) Side yard width:
One-story dwelling 15 feet min.
Two-story dwelling 20 feet min.
Abutting a street 25 feet min.
(f) Height of building 45 feet max.
Height of accessory facilities
within 100 feet of lot line
15 feet max.
 1315.03. Story height. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord. 1177,
passed 12-16-1996]
No dwelling shall be more than two stories in height on any side facing a
street nor more than three stories in height on any other side.
The attic or other space immediately under a sloped roof constitutes a story
if the space has one or more windows on the side under consideration.
The driveway shall not be included in determining the average elevation of
the ground.
 1315.04. Accessory facilities. [Ord. 1004, passed 3-27-1989; Ord.
1127, passed 8-22-1994; Ord. 1235, passed 7-17-2000]
 1315.05. Accessory uses. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
The following accessory uses are permitted:
(a) A garage, greenhouse for personal use, storage or utility building,
swimming pool, tennis court, satellite dish, animal enclosure, and leash
run for household pets or privacy screen is permitted in the rear yard
but not closer than 15 feet to any lot line nor closer than 25 feet to any
road right-of-way. The total area of accessory buildings shall not exceed
25% of the total rear yard. A privacy screen is also permitted in the side
yard, provided it meets the above requirements.
 1315.02 CHARTER  1315.05
C:519
 1315.06. Conditional use: swimming club. [Ord. 741, passed
7-3-1978]
Council may authorize a non-profit swimming club on an R-1 lot as a
conditional use if the requirements in Section 1327.03 are met, provided in
its opinion the existence of such a swimming club would be an improvement
rather than a detriment to the residential character of the neighborhood.
This decision may be part of the subdivision approval.
 1315.07. (Reserved)47
 1315.08. Recreational area. [Ord. 1027, passed 2-26-1990]
(a) Rental of rooms without cooking facilities. The number of non-family
roomers is limited to two per dwelling unit.
(b) A home occupation by the resident. No one living outside the home may
be employed nor any commodity sold or warehoused.
(a) An area at least equal to 800 square feet per dwelling unit shall be
provided for active and/or passive recreation. In no event shall the total
area provided be less than 20,000 square feet. Of this area, at least 400
square feet per dwelling unit shall be developed and prepared for
specific uses.
(b) The area shall be easily and safely accessible from all areas of the
development to be served, have good ingress and egress and have a
minimum of 100 feet of frontage on a public road.
(c) The area shall have suitable topography and soil conditions for use as a
recreation area. Water surfaces and continuously wet soils shall be
deleted from the gross area for all calculations, unless the area is a
floodplain.
(d) Size and shape of the area shall be suitable for development as a park.
No single side of a property with a rectangular configuration shall
amount to more than 40% of the perimeter of the tract.
(e) The area shall be easily accessible to essential utilities including power,
water, sewerage and telephone. If any of these facilities are placed
underground, no part of them or their supportive equipment shall
protrude above ground level except as approved by Council.
(f) The finished grade of the recreational area provided shall have a slope
of 3% or less.
(g) A dedication of this recreational area shall be made in accordance with
Section 1371.12 of the Land Development and Subdivision Regulations
or a fee of $400 per dwelling unit in lieu of the provision of active/
47.Editor's Note: Former  1315.07, Conditional use: neighborhood park or playground, was
repealed 2-26-1990 by Ord. No. 1027.
 1315.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  1315.08
C:520
 1315.09. Conditional use: farms. [Ord. 1235, passed 7-17-2000]
Council may approve a farm on an R-1 zoned lot as a conditional use,
provided the criteria stated in Section 1341.03 are met.
 1315.10. Conditional use: riding horses and small animals. [Ord.
1235, passed 7-17-2000]
Council may approve riding horses and outdoor pets on an R-1 zoned lot as
a conditional use, provided the criteria stated in Section 1341.031 are met.
Article 1317
R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING
DISTRICTS
 1317.01. Purpose. [Ord. 948, passed 2-23-1987]
The purpose of the R-2 District is to provide areas for single and two-family
dwellings. Only one dwelling is permitted on each lot. An R-2 lot within
a subdivision may be used as a neighborhood park or playground when
authorized by the Town Council as a conditional use. (See Section 1317.08).
 1317.02. Dimensional standards. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord.
1052, passed 4-22-1991; Ord. 1120, passed 5-23-1994]
(a) Lot area with public water and
sewer:
Single-family (unless part of a
plan recorded prior to May 9,
1989)
12,000 square feet min.
Two-family 24,000 square feet min.
Lot area without public water or
sewer:
Per dwelling unit 20,000 square feet min.
(b) Lot width at building line:
Single-family 90 feet min.
Two-family 160 feet min.
(c) Front yard depth: 35 feet min.
passive recreational area within the development may be made in
accordance with Section 1371.12 of the Land Development and
Subdivision Regulations.
(h) This section applies to subdivisions approved after the adoption of this
section consisting of at least 48,000 square feet of which contain five or
more lots.
 1315.08 CHARTER  1317.02
C:521
If both adjacent dwellings have a
front yard less than 35 feet deep,
the minimum front yard depth is
then the greater of the two
adjacent front yard depths.
(d) Rear yard depth 40 feet min.
(e) Side yard width:
One-story dwelling 10 feet min.
Two-story dwelling 15 feet min.
Abutting a street 25 feet min.
(f) Height of building 45 feet max.
Height of accessory facilities
within 100 feet of lot line
15 feet max.
 1317.03. Story height. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord. 1177,
passed 12-16-1996]
No dwelling shall be more than two stories in height on any side facing a
street nor more than three stories in height on any other side.
The attic or other space immediately under a sloped roof constitutes a story
if the space has one or more windows on the side under consideration.
The driveway shall not be included in determining the average elevation of
the ground.
 1317.04. Accessory facilities. [Ord. 1004, passed 3-27-1989; Ord.
1127, passed 8-22-1994; Ord. 1235, passed 7-17-2000]
 1317.05. Accessory uses. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
The following accessory uses are permitted:
(a) A garage, greenhouse for personal use, storage or utility building,
swimming pool, tennis court, satellite dish, animal enclosure, and leash
run for household pets or privacy screen is permitted in the rear yard
but not closer than 10 feet to any lot line nor closer than 25 feet to any
road right-of-way. The total area of accessory buildings shall not exceed
25% of the total rear yard. A privacy screen is also permitted in the side
yard, provided it meets the above requirements.
(a) Rental of rooms without cooking facilities. The number of non-family
roomers is limited to two per dwelling unit.
(b) A home occupation by the resident. No one living outside the home may
be employed nor any commodity sold or warehoused.
 1317.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  1317.06
C:522
 1317.06. Conditional use: two-family dwellings. [Ord. 741, passed
7-3-1978]
Council may authorize as a conditional use the construction of two-family
dwellings only if no variance is required and only if either of the following
conditions exist:
 1317.07. Conditional use: swimming club. [Ord. 741, passed
7-3-1978]
Council may authorize a non-profit swimming club on an R-2 lot as a
conditional use if the requirements in Section 1327.03 are met, provided in
its opinion the existence of such a swimming club would be an improvement
rather than a detriment to the residential character of the neighborhood.
This decision may be part of the subdivision approval.
 1317.08. (Reserved)48
 1317.09. Recreational area. [Ord. 1027, passed 2-26-1990]
(a) As part of a separate and distinct grouping or development of such
structures that will not conflict or interfere with the use and enjoyment
of single-family dwellings in the area; or
(b) As a transition between single-family dwellings and other zoning
districts, or between R-3 and R-4 Districts.
(a) An area at least equal to 600 square feet per dwelling unit shall be
provided for active and/or passive recreation. In no event shall the total
area provided be less than 12,000 square feet. Of this area, at least 300
square feet per dwelling unit shall be developed and prepared for
specific uses.
(b) The area shall be easily and safely accessible from all areas of the
development to be served, have good ingress and egress and have a
minimum of 100 feet of frontage on a public road.
(c) The area shall have suitable topography and soil conditions for use as a
recreation area. Water surfaces and continuously wet soils shall be
deleted from the gross area for all calculations, unless the area is a
floodplain.
(d) Size and shape of the area shall be suitable for development as a park.
No single side of a property with a rectangular configuration shall
amount to more than 40% of the perimeter of the tract.
(e) The area shall be easily accessible to essential utilities including power,
water, sewerage and telephone. If any of these facilities are placed
48.Editor's Note: Former  1317.08, Conditional use: neighborhood park or playground, was
repealed 2-26-1990 by Ord. No. 1027.
 1317.06 CHARTER  1317.09
C:523
 1317.10. Conditional use: farms. [Ord. 1235, passed 7-17-2000]
Council may approve a farm on an R-2 zoned lot as a conditional use,
provided the criteria stated in Section 1341.03 are met.
 1317.11. Conditional use: riding horses and small animals. [Ord.
1235, passed 7-17-2000]
Council may approve riding horses and small animals on an R-2 zoned lot as
a conditional use, provided the criteria stated in Section 1341.031 are met.
Article 1319
R-3 TOWNHOUSE AND GARDEN APARTMENT DISTRICT
 1319.01. Purpose. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
The purpose of the R-3 District is to provide areas for townhouses and
garden apartments. A one or two story garage and a community or similar
building are permitted within the buildable area.
 1319.02. Dimensional standards. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord.
770, passed 7-23-1979; Ord. 818, passed 5-18-1981; Ord. 974,
passed 12-21-1987; Ord. 1004, passed 3-27-1989; Ord. 1052, passed
4-22-1991; Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994]
The required standards are:
(a) Maximum density per acre of net
lot area:
Townhouses 10 units per acre
Garden apartments 14 units units per acre
(b) Front yard depth:
underground, no part of them or their supportive equipment shall
protrude above ground level except as approved by Council.
(f) The finished grade of the recreational area provided shall have a slope
of 3% or less.
(g) A dedication of this recreational area shall be made in accordance with
Section 1371.12 of the Land Development and Subdivision Regulations
or a fee of $400 per dwelling unit in lieu of the provisions of active/
passive recreational area within the development may be made in
accordance with Section 1371.12 of the Land Development and
Subdivision Regulations.
(h) This section applies to subdivisions approved after the adoption of this
section consisting of at least 48,000 square feet or which contain five or
more lots.
 1317.09 MCCANDLESS CODE  1319.02
C:524
Abutting R-1 and R-2 Districts and
streets abutting such Districts
100 feet min.
Abutting all other zoning districts
and/or a street
30 feet min.
(c) Rear yard depth:
Abutting R-1 and R-2 Districts and
streets abutting such Districts
100 feet min.
Abutting all other zoning districts
and/or a street
20 feet min.
(d) Combined front yard depth and rear
yard depth between buildings not
adjacent to R-1 and R-2 Districts
80 feet min.
(e) Side yard width:
Abutting R-1 and R-2 Districts and
streets abutting such Districts
100 feet min.
Abutting all other zoning districts
and/or a street
25 feet min.
If a townhouse building is perpendicular to a street, the side yards
are in front and back of the townhouse units. At no time shall there
be less than 80 feet between the back of the townhouse unit and the
front of a second townhouse unit.
(f) Apartment units per building 24 max.
(g) Townhouse units per building 8 max.
(h) Bufferyards as described in Section
1314.04.
(1) Adjacent to residential districts
and street rights of way
abutting these districts.
Bufferyard D
(2) Adjacent to all other street
rights of way.
Bufferyard C
(3) Adjacent to commercial and
institutional.
As stated in Section 1314.04.
(i) Height:
Townhouses 35 feet max.
Garden apartments 45 feet max.
(j) Distance between buildings:
Townhouses 50 feet min.
Garden apartments 60 feet min.
(k) Coverage based on net lot area 30% max.
 1319.02 CHARTER  1319.03
C:525
 1319.03. Accessory facilities. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991]
Accessory buildings for swimming pools, tennis courts and similar facilities
for recreation are permitted in the buildable area. Other accessory
buildings are not permitted.
 1319.04. Accessory uses. [Ord. 906, passed 5-28-1985]
The Zoning Hearing Board may as a special exception authorize retail and
service businesses which they and the majority of the residents consider
reasonably necessary to the convenience of the residents if the development
contains more than 50 dwelling units. Any such business shall be located in
one of the apartment buildings and shall be limited in area to 1% of the total
residential floor area. A day care center shall be a permitted use.
 1319.05. Road access. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
Access shall be from an arterial or collector road.
 1319.06. Recreational area. [Ord. 1027, passed 2-26-1990]
(a) An area at least equal to 200 square feet per dwelling unit shall be
provided for active and/or passive recreation. Of this area, at least 100
square feet per dwelling unit shall be developed and prepared for
specific uses.
(b) The area shall be easily and safely accessible from all areas of the
development to be served, have good ingress and egress and have a
minimum of 100 feet of frontage on a public road.
(c) The area shall have suitable topography and soil conditions for use as a
recreation area. Water surfaces and continuously wet soils shall be
deleted from the gross area for all calculations, unless the area is a
floodplain.
(d) Size and shape of the area shall be suitable for development as a park.
No single side of a property with a rectangular configuration shall
amount to more than 40% of the perimeter of the tract.
(e) The area shall be easily accessible to essential utilities including power,
water, sewerage and telephone. If any of these facilities are placed
underground, no part of them or their supportive equipment shall
protrude above ground level except as approved by Council.
(f) The finished grade of the recreational area provided shall have a slope
of 3% or less.
(g) A dedication of this recreational area shall be made in accordance with
Section 1371.12 of the Land Development and Subdivision Regulations
or a fee of $400 per dwelling unit in lieu of the provision of active/
passive recreational area within the development may be made in
 1319.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  1319.06
C:526
Article 1321
R-4 HI-RISE APARTMENT DISTRICT
 1321.01. Purpose. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
The purpose of the R-4 District is to provide areas for hi-rise apartments
with at least four and not more than 12 residential floors.
 1321.02. Dimensional standards. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord.
818, passed 5-18-1981; Ord. 1004, passed 3-27-1989; Ord. 1127,
passed 8-22-1994]
The required standards are:
(a) Maximum density per acre of
net lot area
30 units units per acre
(b) Front yard depth:
Abutting R-1 and R-2 Districts and
streets abutting such Districts
100 feet min.**
Abutting all other zoning districts
and/or a street
60 feet min.*
(c) Side yard width and rear yard
depth:
Abutting R-1 and R-2 Districts and
streets abutting such Districts
100 feet min.**
Abutting all other zoning districts
and/or a street
60 feet min.*
(d) Bufferyards as described in Section
1314.04.
(1) Adjacent to residential
districts and street rights of
way abutting these districts.
Bufferyard D
(2) Adjacent to all other street
rights of way
Bufferyard C
(3) Adjacent to commercial and
institutional
As stated in Section 1314.04
(e) Overall horizontal dimension of a
building
250 feet max.
(f) Height 150 feet max.
(g) Distance between buildings 60 feet min.*
(h) Coverage based on net lot area 10% max.
accordance with Section 1371.12 of the Land Development and
Subdivision Regulations.
 1319.06 CHARTER  1321.02
C:527
* Plus one foot for each two feet of height over 45 feet.
** An additional 12 feet shall be added for every floor over four floors in
height.
 1321.03. Accessory facilities. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991]
Accessory buildings for swimming pools, tennis courts and similar facilities
for recreation are permitted in the buildable area. Other accessory
buildings are not permitted.
 1321.04. Accessory uses. [Ord. 906, passed 5-28-1985]
The Zoning Hearing Board may as a special exception authorize retail and
service businesses which they and the majority of the residents consider
reasonably necessary to the convenience of the residents if the development
contains more than 50 dwelling units. Any such business shall be located in
one of the apartment buildings and shall be limited in area to 1% of the total
residential floor area. A day care center shall be a permitted use.
 1321.05. Road access. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
Access shall be from an arterial or collector road.
 1321.06. Recreational area. [Ord. 1027, passed 2-26-1990]
(a) An area at least equal to 200 square feet per dwelling unit shall be
provided for active and/or passive recreation. Of this area, at least 100
square feet per dwelling unit shall be developed and prepared for
specific uses.
(b) The area shall be easily and safely accessible from all areas of the
development to be served, have good ingress and egress and have a
minimum of 100 feet of frontage on a public road.
(c) The area shall have suitable topography and soil conditions for use as a
recreation area. Water surfaces and continuously wet soils shall be
deleted from the gross area for all calculations, unless the area is a
floodplain.
(d) Size and shape of the area shall be suitable for development as a park.
No single side of a property with a rectangular configuration shall
amount to more than 40% of the perimeter of the tract.
(e) The area shall be easily accessible to essential utilities including power,
water, sewerage and telephone. If any of these facilities are placed
underground, no part of them or their supportive equipment shall
protrude above ground level except as approved by Council.
(f) The finished grade of the recreational area provided shall have a slope
of 3% or less.
 1321.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  1321.06
C:528
Article 1323
R-5 PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
 1323.01. Purpose. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
The purpose of Planned Residential Developments is to encourage
innovations in residential development and renewal so that the demand
for housing may be met by a greater variety in type, design and layout of
dwelling units and by the conservation and more efficient use of the open
space ancillary to such dwelling units; to extend greater opportunity for
better housing and recreation to all citizens and residents of the Town; to
encourage a more efficient use of available land and public services; and to
reflect changes in the technology of land development so that the economies
secured may work to the benefit of those who need homes.
 1323.02. Use. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
The use of land for Planned Residential Developments is permitted to
provide a procedure which can relate the type, design and layout of
residential development to the particular site and the particular demand for
housing existing at the time of development in a manner consistent with the
preservation of the property values within the residential area. The dwelling
units provided in a Planned Residential Development may be single-family
dwellings, two-family dwellings, garden apartments, townhouses or any
combination thereof.
 1323.03. Area standards. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
A Planned Residential Development shall be at least 30 acres in gross area.
It shall conform to all design standards specified in the Subdivision and
Land Development Code, unless specific modifications of these standards
are authorized by Council in the interest of improving the overall plan.
The adjusted net area shall be large enough to provide at least 10,900
square feet for each single-family dwelling unit, 7,000 square feet for each
two-family dwelling unit, 4,400 square feet for each townhouse dwelling
unit, and 3,100 square feet for each garden apartment dwelling unit.
When a Planned Residential Development is constructed in stages, each
stage when combined with preceding stages shall conform with these area
standards.
(g) A dedication of this recreational area shall be made in accordance with
Section 1371.12 of the Land Development and Subdivision Regulations
or a fee of $400 per dwelling unit in lieu of the provision of active/
passive recreational area within the development may be made in
accordance with Section 1371.12 of the Land Development and
Subdivision Regulations.
 1321.06 CHARTER  1323.04
C:529
 1323.04. Dimensional standards. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord.
818, passed 5-18-1981; Ord. 1004, passed 3-27-1989; Ord. 1127,
passed 8-22-1994]
The required standards are:
(a) Height of apartment building 45 feet max.
(b) Height of townhouse 35 feet max.
(c) Number of apartments per building 24 max.
(d) Number of townhouses per building 8 max.
(e) Yard depth adjacent to any external street
Front yard depth: 30 feet min.
Abutting R-1 and R-2 Districts and streets
abutting such Districts
200 feet min.
Abutting all other zoning districts and/or a
street
30 feet min.
Rear yard depth and/or side yard width:
Abutting R-1 and R-2 Districts and streets
abutting such Districts
200 feet min.
Abutting all other zoning districts and/or a
street
30 feet min.
(f) Distance between two houses: 30 feet min.
Two townhouse buildings 50 feet min.
Two apartments 60 feet min.
(g) Coverage based on net lot area 30% max.
(h) Bufferyards as described in Section 1314.04.
(1) Adjacent to residential districts and
street rights of way abutting these
districts
Bufferyard D
(2) Adjacent to all other street rights of
way
Bufferyard C
(3) Adjacent to commercial and
institutional
As stated in Section 1314.04
Council may approve less restrictive standards if by so doing a more desirable spacing of
buildings may be obtained.
 1323.05. Accessory facilities. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
No accessory facilities are permitted in any yard adjoining a street nor
closer than 15 feet to any lot line.
 1323.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  1323.06
C:530
 1323.06. Accessory uses. [Ord. 906, passed 5-28-1985]
The Zoning Hearing Board may as a special exception authorize such retail
and service business which the Board and the majority of the residents
consider reasonably necessary to the convenience of the residents if the
development contains more than 50 dwelling units. Any such business shall
be located in one of the apartment buildings and shall be limited in area to
1% of the total residential area. A day care center shall be a permitted use.
No other accessory uses are permitted.
 1323.07. Road access. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
Access shall be from an arterial or collector road.
 1323.08. Recreational area. [Ord. 1027, passed 2-26-1990]
(a) An area at least equal to 200 square feet per dwelling unit shall be
provided for active and/or passive recreation. Of this area, at least 100
square feet per dwelling unit shall be developed and prepared for
specific uses.
(b) The area shall be easily and safely accessible from all areas of the
development to be served, have good ingress and egress and have a
minimum of 100 feet of frontage on a public road.
(c) The area shall have suitable topography and soil conditions for use as a
recreation area. Water surfaces and continuously wet soils shall be
deleted from the gross area for all calculations, unless the area is a
floodplain.
(d) Size and shape of the area shall be suitable for development as a park.
No single side of a property with a rectangular configuration shall
amount to more than 40% of the perimeter of the tract.
(e) The area shall be easily accessible to essential utilities including power,
water, sewerage and telephone. If any of these facilities are placed
underground, no part of them or their supportive equipment shall
protrude above ground level except as approved by Council.
(f) The finished grade of the recreational area provided shall have a slope
of 3% or less.
(g) A dedication of this recreational area shall be made in accordance with
Section 1371.12 of the Land Development and Subdivision Regulations
or a fee of $400 per dwelling unit in lieu of the provision of active/
passive recreational area within the development may be made in
accordance with Section 1371.12 of the Land Development and
Subdivision Regulations.
 1323.06 CHARTER  1323.09
C:531
 1323.09. Application for preliminary approval. [Ord. 906, passed
5-28-1985]
The information furnished in this application should be complete and
accurate since any changes after the grant of preliminary approval may
impair and delay a grant of final approval.
The application shall state:
 1323.10. Site plan for preliminary approval. [Ord. 906, passed
5-28-1985]
The site plan accompanying the application for preliminary approval shall
provide the following information:
(a) Nature of applicant's interest in the land;
(b) Legal description of the land;
(c) Proposed type of ownership;
(d) Proposed type of organization to own and maintain the common
elements;
(e) Substance of proposed covenants, grants of easement, or other
restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of land and
structures;
(f) Deviations from any Town code;
(g) Proposed construction schedule showing stages;
(h) Proposed guarantee of construction completion as per approved plan;
(i) Reasons why the applicant feels the proposed development would be in
the best interest of the Town and would be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan;
(j) Any other pertinent information that has been specifically requested by
the Town.
The application shall be accompanied by a map of the general area showing
location of the development and a site plan or plans at a minimum scale of 50
feet to one inch on a maximum sheet size of 30 inches by 42 inches prepared
by a registered engineer or surveyor.
(a) Owner, size and zoning district of the site;
(b) Owner, use and zoning districts of all adjacent properties;
(c) Height, bulk, and placement of proposed buildings;
(d) Net area, actual and required;
(e) Scale, north arrow and date of plan;
 1323.09 MCCANDLESS CODE  1323.10
C:532
 1323.11. Review of application. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
The Zoning Officer shall review the application and promptly present it
to the Planning Commission if complete, or return it to the applicant for
necessary additional information. If during or after review by the Planning
Commission the applicant wishes to revise the data submitted, he shall
withdraw his application and submit a new application.
 1323.12. Public hearing. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
Council shall schedule a public hearing within 60 days after the application
is received unless an applicant has agreed to an extension of time. Notice
of the hearing shall be given in the manner prescribed in Section 1351.04.
Council may subpoena witnesses and shall arrange for all testimony to be
given under oath and for each party of record to have an opportunity to
cross-examine adverse witnesses. The hearing may be continued to a later
date or dates but must be concluded within 60 days. A verbatim record of
the hearing shall be caused to be made by Council whenever such records
are requested by any party to the proceedings; but the costs of making
and transcribing such a record shall be borne by those who wish to obtain
such copies. All exhibits accepted in evidence shall be identified, and duly
(f) Tract boundaries and lot lines with dimensions;
(g) Road access, public and private internal roads, and walks;
(h) Grades, existing and proposed;
(i) Drainage, existing and proposed;
(j) Utility availability and easements;
(k) Wooded areas;
(l) Slope areas over 25%;
(m) Floodplain (100-year storm) and landslide-prone areas;
(n) Soil characteristics;
(o) Erosion and sedimentation controls;
(p) Yard depths and widths;
(q) Parking spaces, proposed and required;
(r) Signs: numbers, type and location;
(s) Illumination;
(t) Landscaping;
(u) Screening; and
(v) Common open space and recreation area.
 1323.10 CHARTER  1323.12
C:533
preserved or, if not accepted in evidence, shall be properly identified and
the reason for the exclusion clearly noted in the record.
 1323.13. Preliminary approval. [Ord. 906, passed 5-28-1985]
 1323.14. Application for final approval. [Ord. 741, passed
7-3-1978]
The application for final approval shall be filed within the time interval
specified in Section 1323.17 or as amended by mutual consent and shall
include the following information:
(a) Within 60 days but not sooner than six days after conclusion of the
hearing, Council shall:
(1) Grant approval;
(2) Grant approval with conditions;
(3) Deny approval.
Failure of Council to act within 60 days is deemed approval of the plan.
(b) A certified copy of Council's action and findings of fact and conclusions
shall be mailed to the applicant in accordance with Section 709b of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. Comment shall be made on:
(1) Consistency of the Planned Residential Development with the
concepts of the Comprehensive Plan;
(2) Deviation from Town codes;
(3) Adequacy of common open areas and the provisions for their
maintenance;
(4) Adequacy of public services;
(5) Impact on the neighborhood;
(6) Adequacy of construction completion guarantee;
(7) Time interval for application for final approval;
(8) Other vital matters.
(c) When a preliminary approval is granted with conditions, the applicant
must accept all the conditions in writing within three months or the
application is deemed to have been denied.
(d) A grant of preliminary approval does rezone the property, but does not
authorize a plat to be recorded or any on-site work to begin.
(a) An update of all information previously submitted;
 1323.12 MCCANDLESS CODE  1323.14
C:534
 1323.15. Final approval. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
The Zoning Officer shall review the application and forward it promptly
to the Planning Commission if complete, or return it to the applicant for
necessary additional information. Within 30 days after receipt by the
Planning Commission, Council shall grant final approval unless the
application was not timely or the plans or information present has been
changed from that on which tentative approval was based and the change
is deemed not to be in the Town's best interest.
If the grant of final approval is for only part of the development, the Town's
communication to the applicant shall specify the mutually agreed upon time
interval during which the application for the next stage shall be filed.
If the application is denied, Council's communication to the applicant shall
state the reason(s) for the denial.
Failure of Council to act within the above 30 days shall be deemed as a grant
of final approval.
(b) Complete engineering plans including profiles and cross-section of all
roads, storm sewers and sanitary sewers;
(c) A plat map on a sheet not larger than 30 inches by 42 inches, suitable
for recording, and containing:
(1) Name of development;
(2) Owner;
(3) Scale, north arrow and date;
(4) Lot numbers and street names; and
(5) Certification by a registered engineer or surveyor of the calculated
distances and bearings of the development boundaries, lot lines,
easements, streets, walkways, building lines and areas reserved for
community purpose;
(d) Evidence of conformance with all conditions imposed at time of
tentative approval;
(e) Performance bond or other mutually agreed upon guarantee of
construction completion in accord with approved plans;
(f) Covenants, grants of easement and other restrictions to be imposed
upon use of the land and structures in a form suitable for recording;
and
(g) Any additional information that has been specifically requested by the
Town.
 1323.14 CHARTER  1323.16
C:535
 1323.16. Further action after denial. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
Within 30 days of the denial of his application for final approval the
applicant may:
 1323.17. Time intervals. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
Unless different intervals of time are agreed upon by mutual consent, the
following shall apply:
 1323.18. Abandonment. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
Should a project be abandoned, all approvals are void; and if a change in
zoning district has been made, the property reverts to its previous zoning,
and the Zoning Map shall be revised to show this reversion.
No further development shall take place on property included in an
abandoned Planned Residential Development until a new site plan is
approved.
Article 1324
R-6 ELDERLY HOUSING DISTRICT
 1324.01. Purpose. [Ord. 1258, passed 12-17-2001]
(a) Abandon the project; or
(b) Delete the objectionable changes and file a new application; or
(c) Request a public hearing on the plans as they now are. Such a public
hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as though the
application was for a grant of tentative approval. Within 30 days after
conclusion of the hearing, Council shall grant or deny final approval.
The form of communication advising the applicant of Council's decision
shall be similar to that described in Section 1323.13.
(a) The application for final approval of all or the first stage of construction
shall be filed not sooner than three months nor longer than nine months
after grant of tentative approval.
(b) The application for final approval for the next stage of construction
shall be filed not sooner than 12 months nor longer than 24 months
after grant of final approval for the previous stage.
(c) The start of on-site construction shall not be later than 12 months after
grant of final approval for the construction involved.
Extensions to these or other mutually agreed upon time limitations may be
made by mutual consent. Failure to meet stipulated or agreed upon time
schedules shall constitute abandonment.
 1323.16 MCCANDLESS CODE  1324.01
C:536
 1324.02. Dimensional standards. [Ord. 1258, passed 12-17-2001]
The required standards are:
(a) Minimum acreage required 5 acres
(b) Unit density per gross acre:
Single-family dwelling unit (DU) 5 DU max.
Duplex, townhouses, garden
apartments, high-rises
14 DU max.
Personal Care Homes 45 beds max.
(c) Front yard depth:
(a) The purpose of the R-6 zoning district is to provide residential areas for
housing of older persons. Separate dwellings, including single family,
duplexes, condominiums, townhouse buildings and apartments are
permitted structures. Older Adult Day Care Centers and Personal Care
Homes are permitted as conditional uses. At least 80% of the separate
dwellings which are rented shall be occupied by at least one person
who is 55 years of age or older. The sale or resale of a separate dwelling
unit shall be made to (and/or) occupied by an individual(s), one of whom
is at least 55 years of age.
(b) An application for rezoning land to an R-6 district shall include a total
concept plan for the entire district, which shall be included as part of
the rezoning approval. When a phased development is proposed, the
plan shall include complete details and timing for each phase.
(c) An R-6 Zoned parcel or lot shall be maintained by a person, entity,
group, association, or any combination of the aforementioned.
(d) It shall be stated on drawings submitted for approval that complete and
continuing maintenance of all facilities, structures, dwelling units,
common ground, recreation facilities, undeveloped or open land, shall
be provided in all phases of development. Any change in that statement
shall be submitted to the Town for approval by Town Council.
(e) Covenants, which run with the land in perpetuity, shall incorporate all
restrictions, regulations, maintenance, and other requirements
described herein, and these recorded covenants shall be presented to
the Town prior to any building or grading permit issuance. The
covenants may include a provision for the creation and maintenance of
a community association to manage common elements of the
community. The community association may impose assessments on
residents to cover the costs of such management. The covenants and
any existing association documents, including bylaws and regulations,
shall be made available to all prospective buyers and renters, and
referenced in any sales agreement or lease.
 1324.01 CHARTER  1324.02
C:537
Abutting R-1 and R-2 zoning
districts and streets abutting
such districts
60 feet min.
Abutting all other zoning
districts and/or a street
60 feet min.
(d) Rear yard depth
Abutting R-1 and R-2 zoning
districts and streets abutting
such districts
60 feet min.
Abutting all other zoning
districts and/or a street
60 feet min.
(e) Side yard depth
Abutting R-1 and R-2 zoning
districts and streets abutting
such districts
60 feet min.
Abutting all other zoning
districts and/or a street
60 feet min.
(f) Bufferyards as described in
Section 1314.04
Adjacent to residential districts
and street rights-of-way abutting
these districts
Bufferyard H
Adjacent to all other street
rights-of-way
Bufferyard D
Adjacent to commercial and
institutional
As stated in Section 1314.04
(g) Height 45 feet max.
EXCEPTION: Building may be 75 feet in height provided an additional
12 feet in front, side and rear yard depth is added for every 10 feet or
fraction thereof in building height exceeding 45 feet.
(h) Distance between buildings,
including single and two-family
dwellings.
One Story 20 feet min.
Two Stories 30 feet min.
Over Two Stories 60 feet min.
(i) Coverage based on net lot area 30% max.
(j) Parking Spaces for Independent
Living
1.5 spaces per unit
 1324.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  1324.02
C:538
(k) Each driveway to a building in the plan shall directly access a public
road serving only the R-6 development. The public road serving the
plan shall directly access an arterial or collector road. The developer
shall be responsible for the construction of the public road and any
improvements required to the intersection of the public road with the
arterial or collector road and any other improvements to roadways
affected by the plan. A traffic study may be required by Town Council
to be conducted on behalf of the applicant to determine required
public improvements. The traffic study, if required, shall be at the
applicant's expense.
EXCEPTION: A gated community shall be served by a private road.
The road must be installed according to Town specifications for a
public road in effect at the time of approved. Covenants and
maintenance specifications must address maintenance of the roads to
all buildings.
(l) Street number addresses shall be prominently displayed on the front
of each dwelling unit and within 20 feet of the roadway.
 1324.03. Accessory facilities. [Ord. 844, passed 7-19-1982]
Accessory buildings are not permitted. Swimming pools, tennis courts and
similar recreation facilities are permitted in the buildable area. Also
permitted are garages to be utilized for storing buses used for transporting
residents.
 1324.04. Road access. [Ord. 844, passed 7-19-1982]
Access shall be from an arterial or collector road.
 1324.05. Recreational areas. [Ord. 1258, passed 12-17-2001]
 1324.06. Deed covenants. [Ord. 1258, passed 12-17-2001]
Age restrictions and general ground and recreation area maintenance
responsibilities shall be incorporated in deed covenants that run with the
land in perpetuity. A copy of these recorded covenants shall be presented to
the Town prior to any building or grading permit issuance for any property
(a) An area at least equal to 200 square feet per dwelling unit shall be
provided for active and passive recreation.
(b) The mixture of passive and active recreation uses shall be shown on the
plan, subject to the approval of Town Council.
(c) Swimming pools, tennis courts, and similar recreation facilities are
permitted in the buildable area.
(d) The finished grade of the recreation area provided shall meet the
grades established at the time of zoning approval.
 1324.02 CHARTER  1324.06
C:539
zoned R-6 with development taking place after the effective date of this
section.
Article 1325
I INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT
 1325.01. Purpose. [Ord. 1192, passed 11-24-1997]
The purpose of the Institutional District property is to provide areas for
churches, cemeteries, firehouses, government buildings, hospitals,
libraries, nursing homes, assisted living/personal care homes, schools
(academic) and utility structures.
 1325.02. Dimensional standards. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord.
1004, passed 3-27-1989; Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994; Ord. 1192,
passed 11-24-1997]
The required standards are:
(a) Gross lot area:
(1) Assisted Living/Personal Care
Home
5 acres min.
(2) All others 2 acres min.
(b) Front or rear yard depth or side
yard width:
Abutting nonresidential property 30 feet min.
Abutting residential property or a
street
100 feet min.
(c) Bufferyards as described in Section
1314.04.
(1) Adjacent to residential
districts and street rights of
way abutting these districts.
Bufferyard F
(2) Adjacent to all other street
rights of way.
Bufferyard E
(3) Adjacent to commercial and
institutional.
As stated in Section 1314.04
(d) Coverage based on gross lot area 20% max.
(e) Distance between buildings 50 feet min.
(f) Assisted living/personal care homes shall have a minimum of 300
feet of continuous frontage on an arterial or collector road. Ingress
and egress shall be taken from this frontage.
(g) Ingress and egress must be from an arterial or collector road.
(h) Unit density per gross acre:
 1324.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  1325.02
C:540
(1) Assisted Living/Personal Care
Home
30 beds max.
Council may modify these dimensional standards where the principal use
is for an ambulance station, firehouse or utility structure.
 1325.03. Recreation area; assisted living/personal care home.
[Ord. 1192, passed 11-24-1997]
Article 1326
D DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
 1326.01. Purpose. [Ord. 964, passed 10-26-1987]
The D Development District zoning classification is a zoning district which
is being created initially for the parcels of land adjacent to McKnight Road
in the Town of McCandless. Various uses are permitted, as are hereafter
specifically listed and defined including residential, institutional, indoor
recreational, special residential, offices and commercial. The intensity of
land use and development for the various permitted uses on the properties
within the district are governed by a series of performance standards set
forth in Article 1314.
(a) An area at least equal to 200 square feet per bed shall be provided for
active and/or passive outdoor recreation.
(b) The area shall have suitable topography and soil conditions for use as a
recreation area. Water surfaces and continuously wet soils shall be
deleted from the gross area for all calculations.
(c) The area shall be easily accessible to utilities essential for the intended
use.
(d) The finished grade of the recreational area shall be handicapped
accessible.
(e) The area shall be suitably maintained by the applicant for the purposes
proposed.
(f) The recreation area shall include a combination of two or more of the
following suggested types of uses:
(1) Walking trails.
(2) Sitting areas.
(3) Gardens.
(4) Lawn recreation, shuffleboard, boccie, croquet.
 1325.02 CHARTER  1326.02
C:541
 1326.02. Permitted uses. [Ord. 964, passed 10-26-1987; Ord.
1163, passed 4-22-1996; Ord. 1360, passed 4-28-2008]
(a) Residential uses.
(1) Conventional residential. Conventional residential uses are singlefamily
dwelling units.
(2) Performance residential. Performance residential uses shall consist
of the following:
Single-family houses
Zero-lot houses
Village houses
Twin houses
Patio houses
Atrium houses
Townhouses
Weak-link townhouses
Multiplex units
Apartment buildings
These uses, with the exception of single-family houses, are limited
to parcels which were previously zoned R-2 on the west side of
McKnight Road, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 and I within the D Development
District.
(3) Accessory facilities. Accessory buildings are not permitted.
Swimming pools, tennis courts and similar facilities for recreation
for the exclusive use of the related residential development are
permitted in the buildable area.
(4) Accessory uses. A day care center shall be a permitted use in a
development containing more than 50 dwelling units. The Zoning
Hearing Board may as a special exception authorize retail and
service businesses which the Board and the majority of the
residents consider reasonably necessary to the convenience of the
residents if the development contains more than 50 dwelling units.
Any such business shall be located in one of the apartment
buildings and shall be limited in area to 1% of the total residential
floor area.
(b) Indoor recreational, institutional and special residential uses.
(1) These uses are aquariums, community or recreational centers, daycare
centers (day or nursery schools), older adult day-care centers,
 1326.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  1326.02
C:542
small-format hospitals, gymnasiums, libraries or museums, nursing
homes, personal care homes, public or private schools, indoor
recreational centers, indoor skating rinks (ice or roller), indoor
swimming pools, indoor tennis, indoor racquetball and indoor
handball courts, and hotels. [Amended 6-25-2018 by Ord. No.
1476]
(2) No outside storage and no outbuildings shall be permitted.
(c) Commercial uses.
(1) Office. Permitted office uses are governmental offices, business or
professional offices, medical offices or outpatient clinics.
(2) Commercial/entertainment. The following uses may constitute up
to 20% of the gross floor area within an office development:
Banks, savings and loans, trust companies and other credit related
services
Furniture, home furnishings and equipment
Sporting goods, recreation goods and hobby supplies
Photographic/photostat/blueprint
Toys
Apparel and accessories
Full service restaurant and supplemental liquor and lounge
optional
Photographic studio and supplies
Beauty shop and barber shop
Shoe repair
Drug store and related health supplies
Art gallery and bookstore
Gourmet food stores
Health food stores
Specialty foods
Office supplies and equipment
Travel agency
Meat market
Liquor/wine store
 1326.02 CHARTER  1326.02
C:543
 1326.03. Sexually oriented businesses. [Ord. 1215, passed
5-24-1999]
Permitted as a special exception in the D Development District.
 1326.04. Anchor building. [Ord. 1360, passed 4-28-2008; Ord.
1397, passed 8-22-2011]
A single anchor building, (hereinafter "Anchor Building"), is permitted as a
conditional use in the D Development area subject to the following express
criteria:
Card shop and accessories
Private indoor clubs
Hardware stores
Dry cleaning
Light mechanical/electronic repair stores
Commercial or trade schools
Home improvement store
Movie theaters/cinemas
(a) The parcel on which the building is located must be within an initial
land development containing no less than 65 acres within the D
Development Zoning District and under unified ownership or control at
the time of initial final land development approval (hereinafter "Initial
Land Area"). Upon approval and recording of the initial land
development, the land contained therein cannot be used as part of
another Initial Land Area for the purpose of meeting this condition. The
Initial Land Area cannot be separated by a public road existing at the
time of approval and recording of the first land development.
(b) The Anchor Building may be up to 150,000 square feet in size. The
Anchor Building may be used for a single furniture store or home
improvement store of up to 150,000 square feet in size, or for anyone or
combination of the uses described in Section 1326.02(e)(2); provided,
however, that:
(1) Subject to compliance with Section 1326.04(c), below, a furniture
store, home improvement store, and all of the uses described in
Section 1326.02(c)(2) are permitted within the Anchor Building
without the need for a separate office development, however, other
than a furniture store or home improvement store, none of the
other uses may have a sales floor area (exclusive of office space,
storage areas, interior corridors and other areas not open to the
public) greater than 45,000 square feet of space within the Anchor
Building; and
 1326.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  1326.04
C:544
(2) The Anchor Building may contain two or more of the uses described
in Section 1326.02(c)(2), subject to the conditions of (1), above.
(3) Any use or re-use of the Anchor Building requires conditional use
approval, subject to all express criteria contained herein and
subject to other reasonable conditions established by Council.
(4) Exclusive areas (office space, storage areas, interior corridors and
other areas not open to the public) referred to in subsection (1)
above and subsection (i) below, may only be used for uses accessory
to the principal uses of the building.
(c) The 80/20 gross floor area ratio of office to commercial/entertainment
uses contained in Article 1326 may be increased by 3% for every one
acre of conservation easement, created by the applicant, as described
by the Conservation and Preservations Easement Act ("Act") (Act 29 of
2001, Pub L No. 330), and granted to an entity permitted by the Act, not
to exceed a ratio of 50% commercial/entertainment (including the
Anchor Building) to 50% residential, indoor recreation, institutional and
special residential and office. Parking structures are excluded from the
ratio calculation. Any conservation easement must be a minimum of
seven acres.
(d) If an anchor building is part of the 50% retail within the Initial Land
Area, an additional acre of conservation easement beyond the seven
acre minimum easement must be granted for each acre of impervious
surface over seven acres that is related to the anchor building up to 12
acres. For every acre or part of an acre of impervious surface greater
than 12 acres, an additional two acres of conservation easement must
be dedicated. The conservation easement area must be either:
(1) Adjacent to Town property and capable of being incorporated into
such Town holdings, or
(2) Within the D Development Zoning District provided that it is not
resource protection land utilized for a D Development land
development or open space land required within a Traditional
Neighborhood project.
The area for the increase of the gross floor area ratio and the impervious
surface ratio may be the same areas.
(e) The architectural guidelines in Section 1314.07 or the design standards
in Article 1346 must be met.
(f) An Anchor Building parcel must be established which will permit the
building, parking and landscaping to be contained on a single parcel.
An Anchor Building parcel is not required to meet the D Development
calculations for site capacity. All other requirements of D Development
must be met.
 1326.04 CHARTER  1326.04
C:545
Article 1327
C-1 COMMERCIAL RECREATION DISTRICT
 1327.01. Purpose. [Ord. 1177, passed 12-16-1996]
The purpose of the C-1 District is to provide areas for commercial recreation
and leisure activities and those retail services essential thereto. The
permitted uses include bowling alleys, clubs, sport activities and theaters.
An office building is permitted as a conditional use. Access to a C-1 Zoning
District, for any use, shall be from an arterial or collector road.
(g) None of the Initial Land Area may be located in a Traditional
Neighborhood Development Overlay District (TND) and none of the
Initial Land Area can subsequently be part of a TND.
(h) The Anchor Building parcel shall not directly abut a residential district
but may abut a residential district across a public street which exists at
the time of conditional use approval, provided the required buffer zone
is doubled both in width and density of planting. The required
bufferyard abutting an institutional district shall be doubled in width
and density of planting.
(i) An Anchor Building which occupies more than 45,000 square feet,
which was originally approved for use as a home improvement store or
furniture store pursuant to the Code, may not be converted to another
authorized use as described in Article 1326 unless:
(1) The sales floor area of the converted area (exclusive of office space,
storage areas, interior corridors, and other areas not open to the
public) is less than 45,000 square feet; and
(2) Not more than 5,000 square feet may be used for the sale of
apparel or apparel accessories, and not more than 5,000 square
feet may be used as a pharmacy. Any such conversion shall be
subject to conditional use approval as provided under this section.
(j) At the time of the first land development approval and any subsequent
modification, division, re-division, consolidation within the Initial Land
Area or land development on a parcel created with the Initial Land
Area, a site capacity analysis must be submitted for the entire site,
demonstrating compliance with subsection (c) hereof. The initial land
development, as recorded, shall contain a notice thereon of this
condition. No future land development shall be approved unless
compliance with subsection (c) hereof is met.
(k) The Town Council reserves the right to set any additional conditions it
deems necessary to protect adjacent properties and uses, to minimize
vehicular traffic impacts, to minimize visual and light pollution and to
assure that the Anchor Building is contextural with the surrounding
development.
 1326.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  1327.02
C:546
 1327.02. Dimensional standards. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord.
818, passed 5-18-1981; Ord. 1004, passed 3-27-1989; Ord. 1127,
passed 8-22-1994]
The required standards are:
(a) Gross lot area 20,000 square feet min.
(b) Lot width at building line 100 feet min.
(c) Front yard depth:
Abutting R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5
Districts and streets abutting such
Districts
100 feet min.
Abutting all other zoning districts
and/or a street
60 feet min.
(d) Rear yard depth and/or side yard
width:
Abutting R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5
Districts and streets abutting such
Districts
100 feet min.
Abutting all other zoning districts 10 feet min.
Abutting all other streets 30 feet min.
(e) Bufferyards, as described in Section
1314.04.
(1) Adjacent to residential districts
and street rights of way
abutting these districts
Bufferyard G
(2) Adjacent to all other street
rights of way
Bufferyard C
(3) Adjacent to commercial and
institutional
As stated in Section 1314.04.
(f) Height 35 feet max.
(g) Height of accessory buildings 15 feet max.
(h) Coverage based on gross area 25%
max.
 1327.03. Swimming clubs. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
(a) The minimum distance from any swimming club pool or poolside
lounging area to residential property shall be 200 feet.
(b) The pool and poolside lounging area shall be enclosed with a fence or
other barrier six feet in height, and this fence shall be kept locked when
the pool is not attended to prevent unauthorized or accidental entry.
 1327.02 CHARTER  1327.04
C:547
 1327.04. Road access. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
Access shall be from an arterial or collector road.
Article 1328
R-C RESIDENTIAL-COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
 1328.01. Purpose. [Ord. 1114, passed 1-24-1994]
(a) The R-C Residential-Commercial District zoning classification is a
zoning district created for the parcels of land fronting on Perry
Highway (U.S. Route 19), a four lane arterial highway from the
intersection of Prescott Drive and Charles Street south to the Town of
McCandless/Ross Township boundary line. The R-C District is intended
to control the growth of this Perry Highway (U.S. Route 19) area to
assure harmony with the present residential nature of this area and at
the same time, allow for neighborhood business and institutional
facilities to provide needed goods and services to neighborhood
residents.
(b) The District includes and is bordered on either side by small to mediumsized
homes, generally in excess of 25 years old, well-maintained with
attractive yards. The topography of the District exposes these
surrounding residences to the sound, view and traffic of the District,
especially east of the District where the exposure at places extends as
far as one-quarter mile. Continuing the healthful and pleasant qualities
of such neighboring areas is, therefore, a primary determinant for the
regulations for the District. Spillover onto residential properties from
exterior lighting and noise, conflict between commercial and residential
street traffic, and intrusion on the residential atmosphere of parking
lots, dumpsters and garish commercial exterior, if uncontrolled, would
quickly and drastically deteriorate this bordering residential area.
(c) In consonance with the stated objectives of the Municipality pursuant
to Section 301(a)(2:1) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, these regulations promote the conservation of neighboring sound
existing housing, while permitting compatible commercial and
institutional development within the mixed use R-C area. Specifically,
these design standards were developed to reduce the contrast between
commercial and residential structures and yards sufficient to provide
the harmony of atmosphere necessary for the welfare of affected
residents without undue detriment to the permitted commercial
function.
 1327.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  1328.01
C:548
 1328.02. Dimensional standards. [Ord. 1114, passed 1-24-1994]
Single Family
Residential
Multi-Family
Residential/Commercial/
Institutional
(a) Gross lot area, minimum 12,000 square feet 18,000 square feet
(b) Lot width at building line,
minimum
60 feet 90 feet
(c) Front yard depth, minimum 35 feet 35 feet
(d) Rear yard depth, minimum 100 feet 100 feet
(e) Side yard width, minimum
abutting a street
20 feet 20 feet
(f) Height, maximum 35 feet 35 feet
(g) Floor area, maximum per
building
N/A 10,000 square feet
Note: Any materials, products, equipment, etc., which are stored, displayed or sold in an outside
area, shall meet the yard setback and dimensional specifications herein.
 1328.03. Front yard. [Ord. 1114, passed 1-24-1994]
No vehicular parking is permitted within the front yard. The thirty-five-foot
front yard shall be grassed and landscaped.
 1328.04. Story height. [Ord. 1114, passed 1-24-1994]
No building shall be more than two stories in height.
 1328.05. Buffer areas. [Ord. 1114, passed 1-24-1994]
This Perry Highway (U.S. Route 19) corridor shall be designated by the
Municipality as an R-C District and shall conform to the regulations
as outlined below. When applying and interpreting these regulations
to a particular parcel, owners and reviewing bodies should consider
each proposed feature in relation to the entire affected area in order
to achieve the purpose for this R-C District.
(a) A fifteen-foot side yard buffer shall be provided on commercial and
institutional property when abutting a residence or residential district.
The buffer shall be planted in accordance with Section 1314.04,
Bufferyard E, ten-foot buffer requirements.
(b) A twenty-foot rear yard buffer shall be provided on commercial and
institutional property when abutting a residence or residential district.
The buffer shall be planted in accordance with Section 1314.04,
Bufferyard E, with the addition of a six-foot high solid fence.
 1328.01 CHARTER  1328.05
C:549
 1328.06. Property connections. [Ord. 1114, passed 1-24-1994]
Vehicle access shall be provided between abutting commercial properties
to provide for a connection from one property to the next unless waived by
Council. Location of the connections shall be coordinated with Municipal
administration.
 1328.07. Accessory or recreation facility. [Ord. 1114, passed
1-24-1994]
Storage, utility or recreation facilities are permitted in the rear yard of
single-family residential uses, but shall be located in the buildable area.
Patios and play areas attached to the building conforming to building
setback limits are permitted in the commercial uses.
 1328.08. Sidewalks. [Ord. 1114, passed 1-24-1994]
Sidewalks, five feet wide, shall be provided in all R-C Districts and are to
be located so that the front edge of the sidewalk is along the street right-ofway
line.
 1328.09. Architectural standards. [Ord. 1114, passed 1-24-1994;
Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994]
(c) A five-foot side yard buffer shall be provided on commercial and
institutional developments when abutting another commercial or
institutional development or undeveloped lot. The buffer shall be
provided in accordance with Section 1314.04, Bufferyard A.
(a) Applicability. The following regulations relate to exterior building
design only; interior design is not covered by these regulations. Site
design elements are covered elsewhere in these zoning district
standards.
(b) Exterior building design. The exterior of the building is to be treated as
an overall design concept. Colors, materials and finishes are to be
coordinated on all exterior elevations of the building to achieve total
design continuity.
(c) Material standards.
(1) Prohibited materials.
A. The following materials shall not be used on any exterior wall
surface:
1. Corrugated or sheet metal;
2. Any form of concrete block;
3. Plywood, masonite or other form of sheet siding; or
4. Unfinished concrete.
 1328.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  1328.09
C:550
B. The following materials shall not be used on any exposed roof
surface:
1. Corrugated metal; or
2. Asphaltic roll roofing.
(2) Allowable materials.
A. The following materials may be used on exterior wall surfaces:
1. Stone;
2. Brick masonry or clay tile;
3. Glass and metal curtain walls;
4. Individual board wood siding, painted or stained;
5. Stucco materials such as Drvvit;
6. Aggregate faced or textured concrete; and
7. Architectural metal: extruded aluminum, stainless steel,
porcelain enamel, anodized aluminum, copper.
8. Vinyl or aluminum siding.
B. The following materials are permitted to be used on any
exposed roof surface:
1. Standing-seam architectural metal roof;
2. Clay or concrete tile; and
3. Heavy-gauge asphalt-fiberglass shingles.
(d) Other materials.
(1) Materials, other than those allowed in subsection (c) hereof, may
be used only with the approval of the Planning Commission and
Council. It is the responsibility of the applicant to present graphic
information such as building elevations, perspectives, color
schemes, etc., to illustrate how these materials relate to the overall
design concept and relate to the surrounding neighborhood.
(e) Definition of substantial improvement. "Substantial improvement",
means:
(1) Any addition;
(2) Any house or structure built and used for residential purposes
converted to a commercial use;
(3) Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds valuation of the property based upon
 1328.09 CHARTER  1328.09
C:551
 1328.10. Road access. [Ord. 1163, passed 4-22-1996]
 1328.11. Conditional use standards. [Ord. 1114, passed
1-24-1994]
the current deed and assessment registry of the County of
Allegheny.
A. Before the improvement is started; or
B. Before the damage occurred, if the structure has been
damaged and is restored.
(f) Remodeling of existing buildings.
(1) Existing buildings, when remodeled or which undergo substantial
improvement and when used for other than single family use, shall
meet the material standards noted above if any of the following
conditions apply:
A. When an addition of any size is added to the structure; or
B. When any facade or visible roof is being changed in
appearance by adding or replacing exterior materials, all
facades or visible roofs must be changed accordingly.
Exceptions to this rule would consist of painting existing
materials and replacing windows and doors.
(a) All ingress/egress from a lot used for other than a single family dwelling
shall be from Perry Highway (Route 19). Council may approve an
additional access from or to a residential street if the following
conditions are met:
(1) The lot is a corner lot.
(2) There shall be no loading or off-loading from a residential street.
(3) If it is determined that such access will not substantially alter the
character of the residential area.
(4) It is determined that such access does not contribute to a safety
hazard.
(a) In addition to the general restrictions, Council may impose additional
restriction on access to a lot, storage of vehicles, equipment, materials
and any products for use or resale on the lot, hours of operation,
parking and such other requirements as they deem necessary to insure
that there is no adverse impact on the residential areas, and that the
facility and/or use shall meet the objectives and intent of this article and
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Act.
(b) Applications for uses not listed may be considered by the Municipality if
the proposed use shall produce a total environmental effect which is
 1328.09 MCCANDLESS CODE  1328.11
C:552
consistent with, and not harmful to, the environment of the
neighborhood and meets the restrictive conditions proposed for a
similar use and the proposed use will not have an adverse impact on
adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof.
(1) Service station. A service station is a facility used primarily for
dispensing motor fuel into vehicles. The pump island and any
canopy shall be in the buildable area. All repairs shall be done
inside the building. Body repairs is not permitted.
Gross lot area: 30,000 square feet minimum.
Distance from another gas station: 1,500-foot minimum.
Required parking shall be sufficient to accommodate the maximum
number of employees and the number of cars which are normally
left for repair or for service.
A rear yard buffer shall be provided along residential property in
accordance with Section 1314.04 Bufferyard H. Side yard buffers
shall be furnished in accordance with Section 1314.04, Bufferyard
C.
In addition to other signs permitted under this section, gas stations
may erect changeable copy signs advertising the prices of fuels,
provided that:
A. Such signs are permanently mounted either to the fuel pumps
or to the supports of a canopy covering the fuel pumps;
B. Such signs shall not be mounted higher than 14 feet above the
ground;
C. There shall be no more than four sign faces per pump island;
D. The combined surface area of all such signs at each pump
island does not exceed 24 square feet;
E. Signs shall not be illuminated externally.
(2) Car wash.
Gross lot area: 25,000 square feet minimum.
Distance from another similar facility: 1,000-foot minimum.
Required parking shall be sufficient to accommodate the maximum
number of employees and the number of cars normally left for
service. A rear yard buffer shall be provided along residential
property in accordance with Section 1314.04, Bufferyard H. Side
yard buffers shall be furnished in accordance with Section 1314.04,
Bufferyard C.
(3) Restaurant/drive-through.
 1328.11 CHARTER  1328.11
C:553
Gross lot area: 30,000 square feet minimum.
Distance from another drive-through restaurant: 2,000-foot
minimum.
A restaurant (drive-through) is a restaurant with a drive-through
window for food service.
A rear yard buffer shall be provided along, residential property in
accordance with Section 1314.04, Bufferyard H. Side yard buffers
shall be furnished in accordance with Section 1314.04, Bufferyard
C.
Closed containers shall be provided for all waste and properly
maintained to prevent spillage onto the lot.
There shall be sufficient parking provided to accommodate the
maximum number of employees and one car for each 25 square feet
of public area with a minimum often spaces.
There shall be sufficient space available in the drive-through area
to accommodate a minimum of five cars without extending to the
sidewalk.
There shall be a passing lane at all points to permit passing of cars
in the drive-through area.
(4) Group home or bed and breakfast.
Gross lot area: 30,000 square feet minimum.
Distance from another similar facility: 3,000-foot minimum.
Maximum number of occupants/guests:
Group home 8
Bed and
breakfast
10
All County, State and Federal permits shall be obtained prior to
final approval for a land development or zoning permit.
For bed and breakfast uses, the owner/operator shall reside on the
premises and food service shall be provided only for the overnight
guests.
A rear yard buffer shall be provided along residential property in
accordance with Section 1314.04, Bufferyard H. Side yard buffers
shall be furnished in accordance with Section 1314.04, Bufferyard
C.
There shall be sufficient parking provided to accommodate the
maximum number of employees and three cars for each two
 1328.11 MCCANDLESS CODE  1328.11
C:554
residents in a group home and one for each guestroom in a bed and
breakfast home.
All group homes shall be fire suppressed and meet all requirements
of this Zoning Ordinance relating to safety.
(5) Ice cream retail store.
Gross lot area: 30,000 square feet minimum.
Parking Requirements:
Building Size
(Square feet) Number of Spaces
0 to 400 30 stalls + 1/employee
401 to 800 35 stalls + 1/employee
Over 801 35 stalls + 1/employee
+ 1 stall/50 square feet in
excess of 801 square feet
No business to be open beyond 11:00 p.m.
No similar facility located any closer than 1,000 linear feet.
(6) Funeral home.
Gross lot area: one acre.
Parking requirements: 20 stalls/parlor.
(7) Uses.
A. Permitted uses:
Single Family Dwelling
Day Care Center
Garden Apartment
Church
Club
Office
Bank
Townhouse
*Retail (Local)
Senior Day Care Center
 1328.11 CHARTER  1328.11
C:555
Article 1329
C-2 NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING DISTRICT
 1329.01. Purpose. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord. 770, passed
7-23-1979]
The purpose of the C-2 District is to provide a number of small commercial
areas to conveniently serve the nearby residents. It is intended that the
areas be of limited size so as not to affect adversely the residential
character of surrounding property and that the uses permitted be limited
to those of providing goods and services to nearby residents. The principal
uses permitted are retail stores, service shops and office space. Office
space area shall not exceed areas designated for retail stores and/or service
shops.
 1329.02. Dimensional standards. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord.
770, passed 7-23-1979; Ord. 818, passed 5-18-1981; Ord. 1004,
passed 3-27-1989; Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994]
The required standards are:
(a) Gross lot width at building time 2 1/2 acre min.*
(b) Lot width at building line 75 feet min.
(c) Front yard depth:
Restaurant
B. Conditional uses:
Service Stations
Group Home
Bed and Breakfast
Restaurant (Drive-Through)
Car Wash
Ice Cream Retail Store
Funeral Home
C. * Definition. "Retail (Local)" means any retail establishment
which caters to and can be located in close proximity to
residential districts without creating excessive vehicular
congestion, noise or other objectionable influence. To prevent
congestion, local retail uses include only those enterprises
which serve only the day-to-day convenience needs on one
neighborhood within the community, and shall have a gross
floor area no greater than 6,000 square feet.
 1328.11 MCCANDLESS CODE  1329.02
C:556
Abutting R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and
R-5 Districts and streets abutting
such Districts.
100 feet min.
Abutting all other zoning districts
and/or a street
60 feet min.
(d) Rear yard depth and/or side yard
width:
Abutting R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and
R-5 Districts and streets abutting
such Districts
100 feet min.
Abutting all other zoning districts 10 feet min.
Abutting all other streets 50 feet min.
(e) Bufferyards, as described in Section
1314.04
(1) Adjacent to residential
districts and street rights of
way abutting three districts
Bufferyard G
(2) Adjacent to all other street
rights of way
Bufferyard C
(3) Adjacent to commercial and
institutional
As stated in Section 1314.04
(f) Height 35 feet max.
(g) Floor area 20,000 square feet max. per lot
* Recorded lots whether or not part of a recorded plan with an area of at
least 10,900 square feet and with both public water and sewer, if zoned
C-2 prior to the enactment of the previous Zoning Code (October 25,
1971) are exempt from the 2 1/2 acre minimum area standard.
 1329.03. Road access. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
Access shall be from an arterial or collector road.
 1329.04. Restaurants. [Ord. 1456, passed 2-22-1916]
Restaurants are authorized as a principal permitted use in the C-2 District
subject to the following standards and criteria:
(a) Restaurants may only be located on a lot that is at least five contiguous
acres in lot area.
(b) A parking study, performed by a professional traffic engineer at the
expense of the applicant, shall be required if requested by the Town to
assist in the determination of the parking requirement for the
restaurant. The number of off-street parking spaces and/or loading
spaces required by this Zoning Code may be reduced if the parking
study demonstrates that the required number of spaces exceeds the
 1329.02 CHARTER  1329.04
C:557
Article 1331
C-3 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
 1331.01. Purpose. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
The purpose of the C-3 District is primarily to recognize the existing pattern
of commercial development along major highways. A wide variety of
commercial uses are permitted and are listed in Section 1341.01.
 1331.02. Dimensional standards. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord.
818, passed 5-18-1981; Ord. 961, passed 9-28-1987; Ord. 1004,
passed 3-27-1989; Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994]
The required standards are:
(a) Gross lot area 20,000 square feet min.
(b) Lot width at building line 100 feet min.
(c) Front yard depth:
Abutting R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5
Districts and streets abutting such
Districts
100 feet min.
Abutting all other zoning districts
and/or a street
60 feet min.
(d) Rear yard depth and/or side yard
width:
Abutting R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5
Districts And streets abutting such
Districts
100 feet min.
Abutting all other zoning districts 10 feet min.
Abutting all other streets 50 feet min.
(e) Bufferyards, as described in Section
1314.04.
(1) Adjacent to residential districts
and street Rights of way
abutting these districts
Bufferyard G.
(2) Adjacent to all other street
rights of way
Bufferyard D.
total parking demand of all uses on the subject lot at any one time.
If the Town determines that the proposed parking can satisfy the offstreet
parking needs of the combined uses on the subject lot, then the
applicant shall be permitted to provide parking in an amount consistent
with the parking study.
(c) Restaurant(s) shall not include a drive-through window for food service.
 1329.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  1331.02
C:558
(3) Adjacent to commercial and
institutional
As stated in Section 1314.04
(f) Height 35 feet max.
(g) Coverage based on gross area 25% max.
(h) In the event the zoning classification of any C-3 Highway Commercial
District property is changed to R-1, 2, 3, 4 or 5, the change shall not
impose any more stringent set-back requirements upon any abutting
C-3 properties. The depth or set-back requirements as to front yard,
rear yard or side yard of the abutting C-3 properties shall remain as
set forth in subsections (c) and (d) hereof, as though the C-3
properties still abutted a zoning district other than R-1, 2, 3, 4 or 5,
that is the required front yard depth would still be 60 feet and the
required rear yard or side yard depths would still be 10 feet abutting
all zoning districts and 50 feet abutting all streets.
 1331.03. Road access. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
Access shall be from an arterial or collector road.
 1331.04. Streetscape and landscape standards for the Route 19
Boulevard District.49
Article 1333
C-4 REGIONAL SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICT
 1333.01. Purpose. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
The purpose of the C-4 District is to provide areas for regional shopping
centers which would include a broad variety of retail stores and service
shops. The permitted uses are listed in Section 1341.01.
 1333.02. Dimensional standards. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord.
818, passed 5-18-1981; Ord. 1004, passed 3-27-1989; Ord. 1127,
passed 8-22-1994]
The required standards are:
(a) Gross lot area 25 acres min.
(b) Front yard depth:
Abutting R-1 and R-2 Districts and
streets abutting such Districts
200 feet min.
49.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Resolution 8-2007 Town Council has created Streetscape
Planting and Greenspace development standards along both sides of Route 19 to improve
the visual and pedestrian friendly qualities of the Route 19 corridor within the "Boulevard
District." Copies are on file at Town Hall.
 1331.02 CHARTER  1333.02
C:559
Abutting R-3, R-4 and R-5 Districts
and streets abutting such Districts
100 feet min.
Abutting all other zoning districts
and/or all other streets
50 feet min.
(c) Rear yard depth and/or side yard
width:
Abutting R-1 and R-2 Districts and
streets abutting such Districts
200 feet min.
Abutting R-3, R-4 and R-5 Districts
and streets abutting such Districts
100 feet min.
Abutting all other zoning districts
and/or all other streets
50 feet min.
(d) Bufferyards, as described in Section
1314.04.
(1) Adjacent to residential districts
and street rights of way
abutting these districts
Bufferyard I
(2) Adjacent to all other street
rights of way
Bufferyard F
(3) Adjacent to commercial and
institutional
As stated in Section 1314.04.
(e) Height 35 feet max.
(f) Building area 20,000 square feet min.
(g) Coverage based on gross lot area 20% max.
 1333.03. Road access. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
Access shall be from an arterial road by means of a marginal access road
in order that the number of curb cuts on the arterial road can be kept to a
minimum.
Article 1335
C-5 COMMERCIAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
 1335.01. Purpose. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord. 1433, passed
12-16-1913]
The purpose of the C-5 Commercial Residential District is to provide areas
of mixed use development in a unified manner. It is desired to encourage
innovation in development planning by allowing an intermixing of
compatible commercial and residential uses in an integrated complex, and
to effect conservation and more efficient use of available land and public
services. Such developments shall be subject to final site development
approval by Council.
 1333.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  1335.02
C:560
 1335.02. Standards. [Ord. 1433, passed 12-16-2013; amended
4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 1487]
The required standards are:
(a) Minimum gross lot area: 24,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum front, side and rear yards:
(1) Lots used for dwelling - one-family, dwelling - two-family, and
personal care home: 100 feet minimum.
(2) Lots used for all other uses when abutting R-1 and R-2 Districts and
streets abutting such districts: 200 feet minimum.
(3) Lots used for all other uses when abutting R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6
Districts: 100 feet minimum.
(4) Lots used for all other uses when abutting all other districts: 50
feet minimum.
(c) Bufferyards shall be established in accordance with  1314.04 and
Subsection (c)(1) through (4) below.
(1) The zoning districts shall be assigned an existing land use intensity
classification in accordance with  1314.02.
(2) The bufferyard type shall be determined by applying the land use
intensity classification, as determined above, to  1314.04, Figure
2.
(3) The resulting bufferyard type requirement may be planted in any of
the widths and intensities prescribed by the Bufferyard Type
Charts contained in  1314.04.
(4) Structures required as part of a prescribed bufferyard may use the
equivalent structures provided for in  1314.04(d)(5).
(d) Density:
(1) One- and two-family dwellings and townhouses: maximum 14 per
gross acre.
(2) Garden apartments: maximum 14 per gross acre.
(3) Personal care homes: maximum 45 beds per gross acre.
(e) One- and two-family dwelling units on separately subdivided lots must
meet R-2 requirements contained in Article 1317.
(f) Maximum building footprint area (per building): 90,000 square feet.
(g) Maximum gross floor area (per building): 180,000 square feet.
(h) Maximum building height:
 1335.02 CHARTER  1335.02
C:561
 1335.03. Road access. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; amended
4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 1487]
Access shall be from an arterial street, collector street or marginal access
street.
 1335.04. Rezoning. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
Any rezoning to C-5 classification shall be conditional on the submittal of
the site plan within 12 months. Should the site plan not be approved, the
zoning of the property reverts to its previous zoning.
 1335.05. Transportation impact study. [Ord. 1433, passed
12-16-2013]
The applicant shall cause a Transportation Impact Study (TIS) to be
performed in accordance with Policies and Procedures for Transportation
Impact Studies (related to Highway Occupancy Permits) Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Bureau of Highway Safety and Traffic
Engineering dated January 28, 2009, as amended or replaced, and shall
apply the TIS to state, county, Town and private roads impacted by the
development as determined by the Town. The TIS shall be submitted to
the Town and the Town Engineer, and the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation and Allegheny County, if applicable, for review and approval
prior to action on a proposed development by Town Council. The applicant
shall be required to mitigate any adverse impacts identified by the TIS as a
result of the development at the applicant's expense.
 1335.06. Incentive development. [Ord. 1433, passed 12-16-2013]
If parking for a minimum of 300 vehicles is provided for use of commuters
and at least 24 acres of floodplain as determined by the FEMA maps along
Pine Creek between McKnight Road and Blazier Drive is dedicated to a
Conservation Easement, then the following would apply:
(1) Forty five feet for a building with a roof pitch of equal to or less
than five vertical inches for every 12 horizontal inches (5/12 roof
pitch);
(2) Fifty-five feet for a building with a roof pitch greater than five
vertical inches for every 12 horizontal inches (5/12 roof pitch).
(i) No less than 50% of the total building square footage within a land
development shall be used for commercial purposes, including a
personal care home, except for any parcel that abuts residential
property on three sides at the time of adoption of this ordinance.50
(j) Building area based on gross lot area coverage shall not exceed 25%.
50.Editor's Note: "This ordinance" refers to Ord. No. 1487, adopted 4-22-2019.
 1335.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  1335.06
C:562
 1335.07. Master plan. [Added 4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 1487]
(a) Parking space size may be reduced to nine feet by 18 feet with modified
double striping as depicted in the illustration in Section 1313.06.
(b) In lieu of compliance with Section 1313.06(a), parking standards may
be based on the Urban Land Institute (ULI) Shared Parking Manual,
latest edition.
(c) Yard depth requirements may be the following:
(1) Yard depth abutting R-1 and R-2 zoned districts must be 200 feet.
(2) All other yard depths must be in accordance with the required
bufferyard depth or 20 feet, whichever is greater.
(3) If Bufferyard "A" is required by Section 1335.02(d), the five-foot
Bufferyard "A" planting requirements shall be required and may be
spread throughout the 20 feet minimum required yard.
(d) Lot coverage may be increased up to a maximum of 35%.
(e) The building area may be increased to 175,000 square feet.
(f) A master landscaping plan may be submitted in lieu of individual lot
landscaping plans. The landscaping plan may eliminate landscaping
buffers ordinarily required between lots but landscaping buffers must
be provided along streets in accordance with the Town Planning and
Zoning Code. The landscaping plan must be approved by Town Council.
(a) Any contiguous area of land within the C-5 District comprising 10 acres
or more and under single or unified ownership at the time of application
may be developed pursuant to a master plan.
(b) A master plan shall show locations for all buildings and uses and shall
establish interior lot lines and bufferyards, the locations of common
open space, civic art and shared parking facilities or structures.
(c) A master plan may propose development of one or more buildings for
any use permitted in the C-5 District.
(d) A bufferyard shall be maintained along at least 90% of the perimeter of
the master plan area; however, no bufferyard is required for interior lot
lines within the master plan area.
(e) Minimum yard requirements shall only be applicable to the perimeter of
the master plan area. The front, rear and side yards for any building or
lot located within the master plan need not comply with the front, rear
and side yard requirements otherwise set out in  1335.02(b). In lieu of
those yard requirements:
(1) No building within a master plan shall be placed closer than 10 feet
from the curbline of a street;
 1335.06 CHARTER  1335.07
C:563
Article 1337
C-6 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
 1337.01. Purpose. [2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 148551]
The purpose of the C-6 Light Industrial District is to provide areas of mixeduse
development, wholesale establishments, personal storage facilities,
light industrial uses, including medical marijuana growers/processors, and
research and development plants in a unified manner. It is desired to
encourage innovation in development planning by allowing an intermixing
of compatible light industrial, commercial, and multifamily residential uses
in an integrated complex and to effect conservation and more-efficient use
of available land and public services. Such developments shall be subject
to final site development approval by Council. Light industrial uses shall
be completely within buildings and shall not involve processes generating
smoke, fumes, odors, dust, noise or vibrations in an amount noticeable
outside the building.
(2) No building used only for residential purposes shall be placed
closer than 15 feet from another building used only for residential
purposes; and
(3) No building used for other than residential purposes shall be
placed closer than 25 feet from any other building regardless of the
use of the other building.
(f) No building within a master plan shall exceed the building footprint
area specified in  1335.02(f).
(g) A master plan shall demonstrate compliance with  1335.02(j).
(h) The total of all impervious surfaces within a master plan shall not
exceed 60% of the gross site area of the master plan. At least 40% of the
gross site area of the master plan shall be designed, developed,
installed or set aside for pervious surfaces that allow for the growth of
grass, trees, shrubs or other plants to be used for such purposes as: (i)
landscaped or vegetative areas, including gardens, bufferyards, lawns
and the like; (ii) stormwater control or mitigation areas; or (iii) remain
as naturally growing areas or watercourses consistent with
predevelopment conditions. Unless designed, developed and installed
using pervious materials that allow for the growth of grass, trees,
shrubs or other plants, any gravel, aggregate or loose stone drives or
parking areas and outdoor recreational or community facilities, such as
tennis courts, walking paths, fountains, or outdoor public assembly/
seating areas, shall be included in the calculation of impervious
surfaces for purposes of this  1335.07(h).
51.Editors Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. 1337, C-6
Industrial District, adopted 7-3-1978 by Ord. No. 741, as amended.
 1335.07 MCCANDLESS CODE  1337.02
C:564
 1337.02. Dimensional standards. [2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 1485]
The required standards are:
(a) Gross lot area one acre minimum.
(b) Lot width at building line 100 feet minimum
(c) Front yard depth:
Abutting R-1 and R-2 Districts
and streets abutting such
districts
200 feet minimum
Abutting R-3, R-4 and R-5
Districts and streets abutting
such districts
100 feet minimum
Abutting all other zoning
districts and/or all other streets
abutting such districts
50 feet minimum
(d) Rear yard depth and/or side yard
widths:
Abutting R-1 and R-2 Districts
and streets abutting such
districts
200 feet minimum
Abutting R-3, R-4 and R-5
Districts and streets abutting
such districts
100 feet minimum
Abutting all other zoning
districts and/or all other streets
abutting such districts
50 feet minimum
(e) Bufferyards shall be established in accordance with  1314.04
and Subsection (e)(1) through (4) below.
(1) Adjacent to residential districts and street rights-of-way
abutting these districts: Bufferyard I.
(2) Adjacent to all other street rights-of-way: Bufferyard F.
(3) Adjacent to commercial and institutional districts:
Bufferyard A.
(4) Structures required as part of a prescribed bufferyard
may use the equivalent structures provided for in
 1314.04(d)(5).
(f) Dwelling unit density per acre of net lot area:
(1) Garden apartments: 14 maximum.
(g) Maximum building footprint: 150,000 square feet.
(h) Maximum total building area square footage: 200,000 square
feet.
(i) Maximum height: 85 feet.
 1337.02 CHARTER  1337.02
C:565
(j) Building coverage shall not exceed 25% of gross lot area.
 1337.03. Street access. [2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 1485]
Access shall be from an arterial or collector street. A marginal access street
shall be provided if its use will reduce the number of curb cuts on the
arterial or collector street as determined by Council.
 1337.04. Transportation impact study. [2-25-2019 by Ord. No.
1485]
The applicant shall cause a transportation impact study (TIS) to be
performed in accordance with Policies and Procedures for Transportation
Impact Studies (related to Highway Occupancy Permits), Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Bureau of Highway Safety and Traffic
Engineering, dated January 28, 2009, as amended or replaced, and shall
apply the TIS to state, county, Town and private roads impacted by the
development as determined by the Town. The TIS shall be submitted to
the Town and the Town Engineer, and the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation and Allegheny County, if applicable, for review and approval
prior to action on a proposed development by Town Council. The applicant
shall be required to mitigate any adverse impacts identified by the TIS as a
result of the development at the applicant's expense.
 1337.05. Conditional use: personal storage establishment/facility.
[2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 1485]
See  1341.21 of the Zoning Code.
 1337.06. Conditional use: medical marijuana grower/processor.
[2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 1485]
See  1341.24 of the Zoning Code.
Article 1339
C-7 OFFICE BUILDING DISTRICT
 1339.01. Purpose. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
The purpose of the C-7 District is to provide areas in addition to those
provided in the C-3 District for professional type offices for use by doctors,
dentists, therapists, lawyers, architects, engineers, accountants, insurance
firms, real estate firms, manufacturers' representatives, etc. A retail outlet
for prescription drugs and eyeglasses is permitted in an office building
primarily devoted to doctors' offices.
 1337.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  1339.02
C:566
 1339.02. Dimensional standards. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord.
818, passed 5-18-1981; Ord. 1004, passed 3-27-1989; Ord. 1127,
passed 8-22-1994]
The required standards are:
(a) Gross lot area:
With public water and sewer 10,900 square feet min.
Without public water or sewer 20,000 square feet min.
(b) Lot width at building line
(c) Front yard depth: 75 feet min.
Abutting R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5
Districts and streets abutting such
Districts
100 feet min.
Abutting all other zoning districts
and/or all other streets
60 feet min.
(d) Rear yard depth and/or side yard
width:
Abutting R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5
Districts and streets abutting such
Districts
100 feet min.
Abutting all other zoning districts 10 feet min.
Abutting all other streets 30 feet min.
(e) Bufferyards, as described in Section
1314.04
(1) Adjacent to residential districts
and street rights of way
abutting these districts.
Bufferyard G
(2) Adjacent to all other street
rights of way.
Bufferyard D
(3) Adjacent to commercial and
institutional.
As stated in Section 1314.04
(f) Heights 35 feet max.
(g) Coverage based on gross area 25% max.
 1339.03. Road access. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
Access shall be from an arterial or collector road.
 1339.04. Conditional use. [Ord. 1334, passed 9-25-2006]
A Personal Storage Establishment/Facility meeting the following expressed
criteria is permitted in a C-7 zoned district as a conditional use:
(a) The site is a minimum of 4.0 acres.
 1339.02 CHARTER  1339.04
C:567
(b) Lot frontage on a public road is 200 feet minimum.
(c) 40% of the site remains pervious.
(d) Wall surfaces (excluding doors) of buildings shall be constructed of
brick, stone, split face block and/or glass.
(e) The roofs are constructed of standing seam metal, color coordinated to
the surrounding area.
(f) The roof pitch shall be a minimum of 5:12.
(g) Garage door colors must be consistent and coordinated with the
buildings and roof colors.
(h) Ratio of storage space to office space: Maximum of 3:1 square foot.
(i) Front yard depth:
(1) One hundred feet from R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6 districts or
street rights-of-way abutting those districts.
(2) Abutting all other districts or streets abutting those districts is 60
feet.
(j) Rear yard depth and/or side yard width:
(1) Abutting R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6 districts and streets
abutting such districts is 200 feet minimum.
(2) Abutting all other zoning districts and all other streets is 20 feet
minimum.
(k) Bufferyards as described in Section 1314.04.
(1) Adjacent to residential districts and street rights-of-way abutting
these districts: Bufferyard I.
(2) Adjacent to all other street rights-of-way: Bufferyard I.
(3) Adjacent to commercial and institutional: As stated in Section
1314.04.
(4) A Bufferyard "A" landscaped island shall be placed between
buildings. A twenty-foot break in the island may be provided.
(l) A landscaping plan shall be submitted with the site plan showing the
cited buffer area in accordance with Section 1313.02. The buffer shall
exist around the entire perimeter of the site.
(m) Height: 25 feet maximum.
(n) Building coverage based on gross area is 25% maximum.
(o) Road access shall be from an arterial or collector street.
 1339.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  1339.04
C:568
(p) Distance from face of building to face of building:
(1) Thirty feet minimum for units less than 15 feet in depth.
(2) Fifty feet minimum for units 15 feet or more in depth.
(q) Distance from end of building to end of building: 20 feet minimum.
(r) Maximum length of building: 120 feet.
(s) Maximum facility unit size: 15 feet wide, 45 feet deep. If units are
placed back, the maximum width of the building shall not exceed 40
feet.
(t) The driveway width between buildings shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
(u) All driveways shall be paved.
(v) The site shall be fenced around its perimeter. The fence shall not be
chain link and must be coordinated with the required buffers. The fence
must be approved by Town Council.
(w) Lighting shall not interfere with surrounding area or distract traffic.
(x) A fire hydrant shall be provided on site with the location to be
determined by the Town.
(y) Fire truck access via designated fire lanes shall be provided to the front
and rear of buildings.
(z) No storage may take place outside of the building.
(aa) Personal storage units shall not have water or sanitary sewer service.
(bb)No signs may be placed on the buildings or their rooftops. Freestanding
or monument signs conforming to C-7 sign regulations denoting the site
shall be the only type of sign permitted.
(cc) The design of personal storage facilities shall be by a registered
Pennsylvania architect.
(dd) Hours of operation shall be no earlier than 7:00 a.m. or later than 9:00
p.m.
(ee) A caretaker may reside on a personal storage site in a residence
compliant with the building code in effect at the time of approval.
(ff) No hazardous materials or substances are permitted in personal
storage facilities beyond the allowances of the Building Code or Fire
Code. Both the landlord and the tenant of such personal storage facility
shall be responsible for the prevention of the storage of hazardous
materials or substances in personal storage facilities that would be
beyond the allowance of the Building Code or the Fire Code.
 1339.04 CHARTER  1339.04
C:569
Article 1340
C-8 GENERAL OFFICE AND LIMITED RETAIL DISTRICT
 1340.01. Purpose. [Ord. 1144, passed 5-22-1995]
The purpose for establishing a C-8 District is to provide areas for office use
plus limited commercial use that shall complement that office use by having
various shops and retail outlets available for proprietors, employees and
customers of and visitors to the offices. The C-8 District shall be broader in
scope than the present C-7 General Office Building District which is quite
restrictive as to retail operations.
The primary use of this C-8 District is intended for office space which shall
comprise a minimum of 50% of the total available floor(s) area.
It is contemplated that the C-8 District would be an appropriate use of
some of the property abutting the only limited access highway in the Town,
McKnight Road.
In view of the limited access nature of McKNight Road within the Town, it
is also the judgment of Council that C-3 Highway Commercial development
in any form consisting of small, individually developed parcels of land
would be completely inappropriate since access to McKnight Road shall
only be allowed by way of existing intersecting public roads. Therefore, all
commercial development shall necessarily need to be served by a service
road and individual commercial lot development would make the
construction and installation of a service road impractical.
The C-8 District shall, therefore, be limited to land abutting McKnight Road,
as set forth in the dimensional standards.
 1340.02. Dimensional standards. [Ord. 1110, passed 12-20-1993;
Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994; Ord. 1144, passed 5-22-1995]
The required standards are:
(a) Gross lot area 10 acres min.
(b) Yard depth from any street 60 feet min.
(c) Front yard depth, rear yard depth
and side yard widths:
Abutting R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5
Districts
100 feet min.
Abutting all other zoning districts 35 feet min.
(d) Bufferyards, as described in Section
1314.04.
(gg) A public restroom meeting the requirements of Town Building Code
must be on-site and accessible during the hours of operation.
 1339.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  1340.02
C:570
(1) Adjacent to residential
districts and street rights of
way abutting these districts.
Bufferyard G
(2) Adjacent to all other street
rights of way.
Bufferyard E
(3) Adjacent to commercial and
institutional.
As stated in Section 1314.04.
(e) Distance between McKnight Road
right-of-way and any internal road
right-of-way
15 feet min.
(f) Height of building 35 feet max.*
(g) Distance between buildings 20 feet min.
(h) Coverage based on gross area 20% max. of the C-8
development area
(i) Planted area A minimum of 5% of the area
excluding the buffer area shall
be planted.
(j) Permitted retail uses shall be limited to a maximum of 5,000 square
feet of gross floor area.
(k) Any building in excess of 5,000 square feet containing retail uses
shall have a minimum of 20% office space unrelated to the retail
uses contained therein.
* 5% of the total gross lot area may exceed 35 feet but shall not exceed
75 feet and six floors.
 1340.03. District common standards. [Ord. 822, passed
7-27-1981]
No outside storage and no outbuildings shall be permitted.
 1340.04. Road access. [Ord. 822, passed 7-27-1981]
No access street shall directly intersect McKnight Road, a limited access
road.
 1340.05. Rezoning. [Ord. 822, passed 7-27-1981]
Request for a C-8 District classification shall require the submission of a
concept plan in conjunction with the rezoning request. The concept plan
shall be submitted with the rezoning request and shall include the
development of all land contained within the rezoning request.
For the purpose of establishing concept plan criteria, the concept plan
shall contain the appropriate information specifically stated under "Site
Plans" in the Zoning Code and/or preliminary plat submission under the
Land Development Code with the exception of drainage, erosion and
 1340.02 CHARTER  1340.05
C:571
sedimentation control, signage, illumination, sidewalks and plans of
structures, road profiles, cross sections and construction details of
proposed street and drainage structures and other improvements that may
be required. The concept plan shall also include a preliminary soils study to
establish the general suitability of the site for the proposed development.
Upon approval of the rezoning, the applicant shall have a maximum of three
months to submit a preliminary plat and/or preliminary site plan whichever
is appropriate by ordinance. For the purpose of establishing preliminary
site plan criteria, the preliminary site plan shall consist of all information
specifically stated under "Site Plan" in the Zoning Code. Preliminary plat
criteria shall adhere to that as stated in the Land Development Code. The
preliminary plat and/or preliminary site plan shall include all the land and
the development of same as was proposed in the rezoning request, and shall
adhere to and be consistent with the provisions of the concept plan.
Upon approval of the preliminary plat and/or preliminary site plan, the
applicant shall have one year to submit a final plat and/or site plan. The final
plat and/or site plan shall include all land and the development of same as
was proposed in the rezoning request.
Upon approval of the final plat and/or final site plan, the applicant shall have
one year from the date of final approval to initiate construction.
If the preliminary plat and/or site plan has not been submitted within three
months of the rezoning approval, or if the final plat and/or site plan has
not been submitted within one year after the approval of the preliminary
plat and/or site plan, or if construction has not been initiated prior to the
expiration of one year after the final plat and/or site plan approval, all
approvals shall be deemed to have expired and the C-8 zoning shall revert
back to the previous zoning classification(s).
Council shall have authority to extend any of these time periods.
 1340.06. Permitted uses. [Ord. 1110, passed 12-20-1993; Ord.
1144, passed 5-22-1995]
The permitted uses in the C-8 District are:
(a) Offices.
(b) Retail.
Banks, savings and loans, trust companies and other credit related
services
Sporting goods, recreation goods and hobby
Photographic
Apparel and accessories
Photographic studio and supplies
 1340.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  1340.06
C:572
 1340.07. Conditional uses. [Ord. 1110, passed 12-20-1993]
Beauty shop and barber shop
Shoe repair
Drug and related health
Art gallery and book store
Gourmet food stores
Health food stores
Specialty foods
Travel agency
Meat market
Liquor/wine store
Card shop and accessories
(a) Conditional uses permitted in the C-8 District are:
(1) Home furniture and furnishings, retail sales.
(2) Office furniture and equipment, retail sales.
(b) _____
(1) Size limitation. The maximum area for occupancy by these uses
shall not exceed 36,000 square feet for each use.
(2) Combined uses. Unrelated office and/or retail uses, as permitted
under Section 1340.06, may be included in combination with the
conditional uses.
(3) Parking requirements.
A. Required minimum parking for the conditional uses shall be
one space for each 275 square feet of gross floor area.
B. Required minimum parking for uses combining the conditional
uses with retail and/or office uses, permitted under Section
1340.06, shall conform to the parking requirements in Section
1313.06 for such uses and to subsection (b)(3)A. hereof.
(4) Ratio of office space to retail. For calculating the ratio of office to
retail use, in the total C-8 District, only 75% of the gross area for
the conditional uses shall be used to calculate the retail floor area.
(5) Buffers and landscaping.
 1340.06 CHARTER  1340.07
C:573
Article 1341
USES
 1341.01. Permitted principal uses.
The permitted principal uses in each zoning district are:52
 1341.02. Churches. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord. 770, passed
7-23-1979]
A church or any building used primarily for worship and religious education
must have direct access from an arterial or collector road.
A manse is considered a single-family dwelling. Dormitories are considered
apartments and shall meet the requirements for R-3 or R-4 Districts
depending upon the height of the building(s) and/or number of stories.
 1341.03. Farm and farm building. [Ord. 1235, passed 7-17-2000]
A. Bufferyards and landscaping for any building used only for
these conditional uses shall conform to the following:
1. 10% of the total lot area shall be planted with canopy and
understory trees, evergreen/conifers and shrubs, in
accordance with a landscape plan approved by Council.
2. Minimum bufferyards. (As per Section 1314.04)
Adjacent to an R-1, R-2 District and
streets abutting such district
Bufferyard "D"
Adjacent to all other zoning districts Bufferyard "A"
Adjacent to all other streets Bufferyard "C"
B. Bufferyards for uses combining the conditional uses with retail
and/or office uses, permitted under Section 1340.06, shall
conform to the requirements of Section 1313.02.
(a) Council may approve farms and farm buildings as conditional uses in
R-1 and R-2 zoned districts.
(b) If any of the provisions of this section are contrary to any State or
Federal regulations or laws, it is the intent that such regulations or laws
shall supersede these conditions.
(c) Applications for a farm or farm building shall be submitted in
accordance with Article 1365 and shall include a plan showing
conformance with all regulations for collection and management of
52.Editor's Note: The Table of Permitted Principal Uses is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
 1340.07 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.03
C:574
manure and wastes as required by all State and Federal regulations,
including Chapter 101 of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection Regulations, Special Water Pollution
Regulations, or its successor regulations and Pennsylvania's Nutrient
Management Act.
(d) The approval of an application shall not be granted until a public
hearing is conducted on the application and Town Council has
determined the application is an appropriate use for the site and will
not cause a direct adverse effect on the public health, safety or welfare,
and evidence presented shows conformance with the standards herein.
In the event of conflict, the following conditions take precedence over
other requirements set forth in each zoning district.
(1) One residential dwelling unit is allowed on five acres; one
additional dwelling unit is permitted on each additional 10 acres. A
farm shall have a minimum of five acres.
(2) No large or medium size farm animals are permitted on less than
10 acres. Two large or medium size farm animals are permitted on
10 acres. Two additional large or medium size farm animals are
permitted on each acre over 10 acres. If these limitations are
exceeded as a result of a newborn, the owner is permitted six
months to adjust the number of animals in accordance with these
limitations.
(3) Small animals are permitted and shall be restrained by an
enclosure, fence or leash run area, in the rear yard, not closer than
30 feet to a lot line and the total of these areas shall not exceed
25% of the rear yard.
(4) For a farm less than 10 acres, the total ground area covered by
agricultural commodities other than large and medium size farm
animals, but including farm buildings, enclosures, fences and
leashed areas, shall not exceed 50% of the lot area.
(5) No farm animal or farm building is permitted in the front yard
except buildings used exclusively for on-site sales. An on-site sales
structure must be set back a minimum of 35 feet and off-site
parking provided.
(6) Required fences or leashed areas shall be set back 50 feet
minimum from any lot line provided that enclosures, fences or
buildings for pigs, sheep or goats shall be set back 175 feet
minimum. Areas planted with agricultural commodities shall be set
back 20 feet minimum.
(7) Farm buildings, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be set
back a minimum of 175 feet from any lot line.
(8) Open manure piles or farm buildings storing manure shall be
located, constructed and managed in strict conformance with all
 1341.03 CHARTER  1341.03
C:575
 1341.031. Riding horses and small animals. [Ord. 1235, passed
7-17-2000]
Council may approve the keeping of a horse, pony or small farm animal for
personal use or enjoyment only as a conditional use in R-1 and R-2 zoned
districts. In the event of conflict, the following conditions take precedence
over other requirements in the Zoning Ordinance:
State and Federal regulations, including the State's Nutrient
Management Act, Chapter 22, and regulations promulgated under
this Act, and managed so as to prevent a direct adverse effect on
the health, safety and general welfare of the surrounding area.
Leachate or water runoff from the farm must be controlled to
prevent pollution of wells and State waterways.
(9) Bufferyard E is required on side and rear lot lines, as deemed
necessary by Council to buffer adjacent homes.
(10) Electric fences may be approved by Council.
(11) Boarding of horses and riding academies are permitted on farms
larger than 15 acres.
(12) Direct commercial sales of agricultural commodities on the land or
farm is permitted, if at least 50% of the commodities sold are
produced on the farm.
(13) Storage of all farm equipment and farm vehicles shall be inside a
farm building.
(14) Fence lines and pastures cannot cross streams with defined banks.
(15) Except as set forth herein, dimensional requirements shall conform
to the zoning district regulations.
(16) Erosion and sedimentation control regulations must be followed.
(a) Lot size shall be a minimum of eight acres for a horse or pony. Up to two
horses or ponies are permitted on eight to 10 acres. A maximum of
three horses or ponies are permitted on more than 10 acres.
(b) The side and rear yards shall be planted in accordance with Bufferyard
D.
(c) A horse or pony shall be restrained by a fence or enclosure located in
the rear yard. Fences shall not be closer than 50 feet from a property
line.
(d) Small animals shall be restrained by an enclosure, fence or leash run
area, in the rear yard, not closer than 30 feet to a lot line. The total of
these areas shall not exceed 25% of the rear yard.
 1341.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.031
C:576
 1341.04. Gas stations. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord. 770,
passed 7-23-1979]
A gas station is a facility used primarily for dispensing motor fuel into
vehicles. A gas station is permitted only when authorized as a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board. The pump island and any canopy
must be in the buildable area. Repairs must be done inside the building.
Body repair is not permitted.
Additional dimensional standards for a gas station shall be as follows:
 1341.05. Motor vehicle sales and service. [Ord. 741, passed
7-3-1978]
Outside sales area must be paved, dust free and adequately drained. Repair
and wash operations must be done inside a building. Minimum yard depth
from any repair or wash operation to any residential property is 100 feet.
 1341.06. (Reserved)53
(e) Farm buildings for housing animals shall be set back 175 feet minimum
for any lot line. Other farm buildings shall be set back 100 feet
minimum from any lot line.
(f) Leachate or water runoff from the farm must be controlled to prevent
pollution of wells and State waterways.
(g) Farm buildings or areas used for collection or storage of excrement or
manure shall be set back 300 feet minimum from any lot line.
(h) Open manure piles or farm buildings storing manure shall conform to
all State, Federal and County regulations, including the State's Nutrient
Management Act, Chapter 22, and regulations promulgated under this
Act, and managed so as to prevent an adverse effect on the health,
safety or general welfare of the surrounding area and shall comply with
Article 705, "Health, Safety and Sanitation", Section 705.07 Garbage
and Rubbish, of the Codified Ordinances of the Town of McCandless.
(a) Distance from another gas station not located at the same road
intersection: 1,500 feet min.
(b) Lot area: 20,000 square feet min.
(c) Lot width: 150 feet min.
(d) Side and rear yard depth abutting nonresidential property: 15 feet min.
(e) Curb cut length: 25 feet max.
(f) Clear distance between curb cuts: 20 feet max.
(g) Clear distance between curb cuts and lot line: 20 feet max.
 1341.031 CHARTER  1341.07
C:577
 1341.07. Schools: academic. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord.
770, passed 7-23-1979]
An academic school is any educational institution, kindergarten through
university, public, private or parochial. Schools of specialized training
operated for a profit are not academic schools. Off-street loading of school
buses shall be provided. Recreational areas must be at least 15 feet from
any lot line. Athletic activity attracting spectators must be 200 feet from
any lot line. Dormitories are considered apartments and shall meet the
requirements for R-3 or R-4 Districts depending upon the height of the
building(s) and/or number of stories.
 1341.08. Heliports or other aircraft landing fields. [Ord. 986,
passed 6-27-1988]
Heliports or other aircraft landing fields may be permitted as a conditional
use upon approval by Council in I-Institutional Districts as an accessory
use to hospitals or nursing homes for the movement of emergency medical
cases. Heliports or other aircraft landing fields may be permitted as
conditional uses by Council in C-6 Institutional District, C-7 Office Building
District and C-8 General Office and Limited Retail District whenever Council
is satisfied that a heliport or other aircraft landing field can be safely
operated, would be a valuable adjunct to the business or businesses being
operated in such districts and would not adversely affect the peace, privacy
and general welfare of the occupants of any residences located in the
vicinity of the proposed heliport or other aircraft landing field. Heliports
or other aircraft landing fields shall be constructed and installed to meet
all of the requirements of the Building Officials Conference of America
(BOCA) Basic Fire Prevention Code, latest edition, and shall be approved
by the Bureau of Aviation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania prior to
commencement of operation. Heliports or other aircraft landing fields shall
not be permitted in any other commercial district within the Town and shall
not be permitted in any residential zoning district within the Town.
Prior to the approval of a heliport or other aircraft landing field, a plan
of the property owned by the applicant shall be submitted to Council and
the site shall be physically inspected by the Town Manager, the Town Fire
Marshall and the Town Building Inspector prior to any final approval. Prior
to the approval, Council may require such physical demonstrations as to the
suitability of the site, as may be determined appropriate by Council.
 1341.09. Heavy equipment or vehicle parking or storage. [Ord.
1127, passed 8-22-1994]
(a) Parking.
53.Editor's Note: Former  1341.06, Neighborhood park or playground, was repealed
3-27-1989 by Ord. No. 1004.
 1341.07 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.09
C:578
 1341.10. Vehicle off-site parking lots. [Ord. 1127, passed
8-22-1994]
Lots or parcels used primarily for parking of client, customer, patron or
student vehicles, is a conditional use in all commercial and institutional
districts, and shall conform to the following:
(1) Parking, display or storage of heavy equipment and vehicles, as an
accessory or principal use and which are not in daily use, is a
conditional use and shall conform to the following:
(2) Parking of equipment or vehicles, as used in the daily operation of a
business, shall be designated on the site plan which is submitted
for Town approval.
(3) Construction equipment used in an on-going land development
project, for road building, municipal, utility, authority projects and
service or for emergency operations, does not come under this use
classification.
(4) Heavy equipment/vehicles includes dump trucks, farm tractors, hilifts,
bulldozers, semi-trailers, large machinery and similar large
equipment and mobile homes.
(b) Parking areas.
(1) Parking areas shall be paved. Council may waive this requirement
where it is not suitable such as track vehicles, etc.
(2) Parking areas shall be located 100 feet from residential districts
and streets abutting such districts.
(3) Parking areas shall be located 35 feet from all other zoning districts
and streets.
(c) Bufferyards. Bufferyards shall be provided as follows:
(1) Bufferyards adjacent to residential districts and streets abutting
these districts shall be planted in accordance with bufferyard H,
Section 1314.04.
(2) Bufferyards adjacent to other zoning districts and streets shall be a
minimum of 25 feet, planted in accordance with bufferyard F,
Section 1314.04.
(a) Parking areas.
(1) Parking areas shall be paved;
(2) Parking areas shall be located 30 feet from residential districts and
streets abutting such districts; and
(3) Parking areas shall be located 20 feet from all other zoning districts
and streets.
 1341.09 CHARTER  1341.10
C:579
 1341.11. Greenhouse and nurseries. [Ord. 1127, passed
8-22-1994]
Outdoor storage, display and sales of nursery products, materials, goods
and merchandise is permitted as an accessory use in C-3 Zoning Districts,
and shall conform to the following conditions:
 1341.12. Advertising signs. [Ord. 1316, passed 3-28-2005]
(b) Bufferyards. Bufferyards shall be provided as follows:
(1) Bufferyards adjacent to residential districts and streets abutting
these districts shall be planted in accordance with bufferyard E,
Section 1314.04.
(2) Bufferyards adjacent to other zoning districts and streets shall be
planted in accordance with bufferyard D, Section 1314.04.
(a) Any structures used for shelter of merchandise, goods and/or products
shall be designed and including in the plat submission.
(b) All parking areas and driveways shall be paved.
(c) Display areas shall be set back from R-1 and R-2 Districts a minimum of
40 feet. Setback for all other districts is 20 feet.
(d) Operation of heavy equipment, as defined in Section 1341.09, shall not
be operated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. prevailing
time.
(e) The design and arrangement of the facility shall be such as to prevent
chemicals and toxic substances from filtering into the groundwater.
(a) Except as noted in (b) below, advertising signs shall comply with the
following:
(1) Advertising signs shall be no larger than 200 square feet and shall
be landscaped with year-round materials to screen the sign
support.
(2) Advertising signs shall comply with all C-3 (Highway Commercial)
provisions and shall receive site plan approval.
(3) Zoning permits are required for the installation or modification of
the structure supporting the advertising signs.
(4) Illumination of the display shall be designed so that it shall be
focused on the face of the display itself so as to prevent glare upon
the surrounding area. All sources of illumination shall be external
and equipped with shields to prevent spillage of light off the
display.
(5) Lighting shall not exceed 1/2 foot candle, 15 feet from the structure
of the advertising sign at a height of three feet above ground level.
 1341.10 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.12
C:580
 1341.13. Towers and antennas. [Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994;
Ord. 1449, passed 5-18-2015]
(6) Advertising signs shall not have flashing lights or copy changeable
by mechanical and/or electronic means.
(b) Advertising signs on Public Transit Shelters may be permitted as
follows:
(1) Advertising signs may be permitted on Town approved Public
Transit Shelters located in commercially zoned districts, multifamily
zoned districts and institutionally zoned districts or rightsof-
way adjacent to those districts as outlined in Section 907.
(2) Advertising signs shall not exceed 24 square feet in display surface
per sign.
(3) No more than two advertising signs may be placed on each shelter.
Each sign may have two faces.
(4) Sign display and lighting must be integral to the design of the
structure and may not extend beyond the face or height of the
structure.
(5) Advertising signs shall not have flashing lights or copy changeable
by mechanical and/or electronic means.
(6) The advertising sign shall not project beyond the bounds of the
structure. All signage shall be lighted with diffused internal
lighting not to exceed 400 watts per sign. The source of the lighting
shall not be visible. Lighting shall not exceed 1/2 foot candle, 15
feet from any point on the perimeter of the shelter.
(a) Towers and antennas may be allowed as a principal use in commercial
and institutional districts for governmental entities, for fire, police and
emergency purposes, for authorities and for other nonprofit purposes to
serve the community, subject to conditions in subsection (b) hereof.
(b) Towers and antennas (structures) are permitted as an accessory use in
all zoning districts, subject to the following conditions:
(1) Towers or antennas shall be located in the buildable area, but in no
event, closer to the lot line than the intersection of an arc
prescribed from the ground elevation and the top of the structure.
(2) Towers and antennas shall be free and clear of all overhead utilities
and designed such that the failure of the structure will not
endanger such utilities. Generally the safe distance of the structure
from the utility lines is twice the height of the structure.
(3) All building mounted towers and antennas in excess of eight feet
high and ground mounted structures in excess of 14 feet, shall be
 1341.12 CHARTER  1341.13
C:581
designed by a professional engineer or company experienced in
such work.
(4) All building mounted towers and antennas in excess of 10 feet high
and ground mounted structures in excess of 18 feet, shall be
installed by a professional engineer or company experienced in
such work.
(5) All building mounted towers and antennas shall be limited to 14
feet in height above the roof or structure mounting in residential
districts.
(6) All ground mounted towers and antennas shall be limited to 40 feet
in height above the ground in residential districts.
(7) All antennas and towers required to be professionally designed by
subsection (b)(3) hereof, shall be inspected annually by a
professional engineer or company experienced in such work and
marked with hazard or warning labels as may apply.
(c) General requirements for all communications antennas.
(1) The following regulations shall apply to all Communications
Antennas that do not Substantially Change the physical dimensions
of the Wireless Support Structure to which they are attached:
A. Prohibited on certain structures. Commercial Communications
Antennas shall not be located on single-family dwellings, two
family dwellings, multi-family dwellings, or any accessory
residential structure.
B. Permit required. Applicants proposing the modification of an
existing Communications Tower, in order to co-locate an
Antenna, shall obtain a Permit from the Town Zoning Office. In
order to be considered for such permit, the Applicant must
submit a permit application to the Town Zoning Office.
C. Standard of care. Any Communications Antenna shall be
designed, constructed, operated, maintained, repaired,
modified and removed in strict compliance with all current
applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes, including
but not limited to the most recent editions of the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical
Safety Code, and National Electrical Code. Antennas shall at
all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and
repair by qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so
that the same shall not endanger the life of any person or any
property in the Town.
D. Related equipment. Ground-mounted Related Equipment
greater than three cubic feet shall not be located within 25 feet
of a lot in residential use or zoned residential.
 1341.13 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.13
C:582
E. Wind. All Communications Antenna structures shall be
designed to withstand the effects of wind according to the
standard designed by the American National Standards
Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of the
Electronics Industry Association, and Telecommunications
Industry Association (ANSI/TIA-222-E, as amended).
F. Public safety communications. No Communications Antenna
shall interfere with public safety communications or the
reception of broadband, television, radio or other
communication services enjoyed by occupants of nearby
properties.
G. Aviation safety. Communications Antennas shall comply with
all federal and state laws and regulations concerning aviation
safety.
H. Radio frequency emissions. No Communications Antenna may,
by itself or in conjunction with other Antennas, generate radio
frequency emissions in excess of the standards and regulations
of the FCC, including but not limited to, the FCC Office of
Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
I. Removal. In the event that use of a Communications Antenna is
discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the
Town of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use
shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned Antennas or
portions of Antennas shall be removed as follows:
1. All abandoned or unused Antennas and accessory facilities
shall be removed within two months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved
by the Town.
2. If the Antenna or accessory facility is not removed within
two months of the cessation of operations at a site, or
within any longer period approved by the Town, the
Antenna and/or associated facilities and equipment may be
removed by the Town and the cost of removal assessed
against the owner of the Antenna.
J. Timing of approval for applications that fall under the WBCA.
Within 30 calendar days of the date that an application for a
Communications Antenna is filed with the Town, the Town shall
notify the Applicant in writing of any information that may be
required to complete such application. Within 60 calendar days
of receipt of a complete application, the Town shall make its
final decision on whether to approve the application and shall
advise the Applicant in writing of such decision. If additional
information was requested by the Town to complete an
 1341.13 CHARTER  1341.13
C:583
application, the time required by the Applicant to provide the
information shall not be counted toward the Town's sixty-day
review period.
K. Permit fees. The Town may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Town's actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a
Communications Antenna. Such fees shall be adopted by
resolution of Town Council. For applications that fall under the
WBCA, the fee assessed shall not exceed the maximum fees
established under the WBCA.
L. Insurance. Each Person that owns or operates a
Communications Antenna shall provide the Town with a
certificate of insurance evidencing general liability coverage in
the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and
property damage coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per occurrence covering the Communications
Antenna.
M. Indemnification. Each Person that owns or operates a
Communications Antenna shall, at its sole cost and expense,
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Town, its elected and
appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against
any and all claims for personal injury, including death, and
property damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or
connected with any act or omission of the Person, its officers,
agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited
to, the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of the Communications Antenna. Each Person that
owns or operates a Communications Antenna shall defend any
actions or proceedings against the Town in which it is claimed
that personal injury, including death, or property damage was
caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of a Communications Antenna. The
obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall
include, but not be limited to, the obligation to pay judgments,
injuries, liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys' fees,
reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs of
indemnification.
(2) The following regulations shall apply to all Communications
Antennas that do Substantially Change the Wireless Support
Structure to which they are attached:
A. Prohibited on certain structures. Communications Antennas
shall not be located on single-family dwellings, two-family
dwellings, or any residential accessory structure.
B. Permits required. Any Applicant proposing the construction of
a new Communications Antenna, or the modification of an
 1341.13 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.13
C:584
existing Communications Antenna, shall first obtain a Permit
from the Town Zoning Office. New construction and
modifications shall be prohibited without a Zoning Permit and
Building Permit, as required. After receipt of the Permit
application, the Town Zoning Officer shall determine whether
zoning relief is necessary under the Town Code.
C. Standard of care. Any Communications Antenna shall be
designed, constructed, operated, maintained, repaired,
modified and removed in strict compliance with all current
applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes, including
but not limited to the most recent editions of the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical
Safety Code, and National Electrical Code. All Antennas shall
at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order
and repair by qualified maintenance and construction
personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life of any
person or any property in the Town.
D. Wind. Any Communications Antenna structures shall be
designed to withstand the effects of wind according to the
standard designed by the American National Standards
Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of the
Electronics Industry Association, and Telecommunications
Industry Association (ANSI/TIA-222-E Code, as amended).
E. Public safety communications. No Communications Antenna
shall interfere with public safety communications or the
reception of broadband, television, radio or other
communication services enjoyed by occupants of nearby
properties.
F. Historic buildings. No Communications Antenna may be
located on a building or structure that is listed on either the
National or Pennsylvania Registers of Historic Places, or is
eligible to be so listed, or is listed on the official historic
structures and/or historic districts list maintained by the Town,
or has been designated by the Town to be of historical
significance.
G. Aviation safety. Communications Antennas shall comply with
all federal and state laws and regulations concerning aviation
safety.
H. Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall
apply:
1. The Communications Antenna shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for
maintenance or emergency repair.
 1341.13 CHARTER  1341.13
C:585
2. Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the
upkeep of the facility in order to promote the safety and
security of the Town's residents.
3. All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than
the best available technology for preventing failures and
accidents.
I. Radio frequency emissions. No Communications Antenna may,
by itself or in conjunction with other Antennas, generate radio
frequency emissions in excess of the standards and regulations
of the FCC, including but not limited to, the FCC Office of
Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
J. Removal. In the event that use of a Communications Antenna is
discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the
Town of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use
shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned Antennas or
portions of Antennas shall be removed as follows:
1. All abandoned or unused Antennas and accessory facilities
shall be removed within two months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved
by the Town.
2. If the Antenna or accessory facility is not removed within
two months of the cessation of operations at a site, or
within any longer period approved by the Town, the
Antenna and/or associated facilities and equipment may be
removed by the Town and the cost of removal assessed
against the owner of the Antenna.
K. Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a Communications Antenna is filed with the
Town, the Town shall notify the Applicant in writing of any
information that may be required to complete such application.
Within 90 calendar days of receipt of a complete application,
the Town shall make its final decision on whether to approve
the application and shall advise the Applicant in writing of such
decision. If additional information was requested by the Town
to complete an application, the time required by the Applicant
to provide the information shall not be counted toward the
Town's ninety-day review period.
L. Retention of experts. The Town may hire any consultant(s) and/
or expert(s) necessary to assist the Town in reviewing and
evaluating the application for approval of the Antenna and,
once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential
violations of the terms and conditions of this Ordinance. The
Applicant and/or owner of the Antenna shall reimburse the
 1341.13 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.13
C:586
Town for all costs of the Town's consultant(s) in providing
expert evaluation and consultation in connection with these
activities.
M. Permit fees. The Town may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Town's actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a
Communications Antenna, as well as related inspection,
monitoring and related costs.
(d) Communications antennas outside the public rights-of-way. The
following additional regulations shall apply to Communications
Antennas located outside the public Rights-of-Way that do Substantially
Change the Wireless Support Structure to which they are attached:
(1) Communications Antennas are permitted in the (I) Institutional,
District, C-5 Commercial Residential District, C-7 Office Building
District, R-4 Hi-Rise Apartment District, and R-6 Elderly Housing
District. Communications Antennas in such districts may only be
mounted to a building, an existing utility pole, an existing
Communications Tower, or public utility transmission structure.
(2) Development regulations. Communications Antennas shall be colocated
on existing structures, such as existing buildings or
Communications Towers, if possible, subject to the following
conditions:
A. To the extent permissible by law, such Antenna does not exceed
the lesser of a total maximum height of 12 feet, or the
maximum height permitted in the underlying zoning district.
B. If the Antenna Applicant proposes to locate the Related
Equipment in a separate building, the building shall comply
with the minimum requirements for the applicable zoning
district.
C. A security fence satisfactory to the Town of not less than 10
feet shall surround any separate communications equipment
building. Vehicular access to the communications equipment
building shall not interfere with the parking or vehicular
circulations on the site for the principal use. A lock box shall be
provided for emergency access.
(3) Permit required. If co-location of the Communications Antenna on
an existing Support Structure is not technologically feasible, the
Applicant shall obtain a Permit from the Town Zoning Office.
(4) Land development plan. Town approval of a land development plan
shall be required for all Towers in excess of 50 feet in height. All
stormwater requirements are applicable.
(5) Design regulations.
 1341.13 CHARTER  1341.13
C:587
A. Communications Antennas shall employ Stealth Technology
and be treated to match the supporting structure in order to
minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the Stealth
Technology chosen by the Antenna Applicant shall be subject
to the approval of Town Council.
B. The total height of any support structure and mounted Antenna
shall not exceed the maximum height permitted in the
underlying zoning district. To the extent permissible by law,
the height of an Antenna shall not exceed the lesser of a total
maximum height of 12 feet, or the maximum height permitted
in the underlying zoning district.
C. In accordance with industry standards, all Communications
Antenna Applicants must submit documentation to the Town
justifying the total height of the Antenna structure. Such
documentation shall be analyzed in the context of such
justification on an individual basis.
D. Non-Commercial Usage Exemption. Town citizens utilizing
satellite dishes, Amateur radios, and Antennas for the purpose
of maintaining television, telephone, radio communications
and/or internet connections at their respective residences shall
be exempt from these Design Regulations.
(6) Removal, replacement, modification.
A. The removal and replacement of Communications Antennas
and/or accessory equipment for the purpose of upgrading or
repairing the Antenna is permitted, so long as such repair or
upgrade does not increase the overall size or number of
Antennas.
B. Any material modification to a Wireless Communications
Facility shall require a prior amendment to the original permit
or authorization.
(7) Reservation of rights. In accordance with applicable law, the Town
reserves the right to deny an application for the construction or
placement of any Communications Antenna for numerous factors,
including but are not limited to, visual impact, design, and safety
standards.
(8) Inspection. The Town reserves the right to inspect any Antenna to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and any
other provisions found within the Town Code or state or federal law.
The Town and/or its agents shall have the authority to enter the
property upon which an Antenna is located at any time, upon
reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
 1341.13 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.13
C:588
(e) Communications antennas in the public rights-of-way. The following
additional regulations shall apply to all Communications Antennas
located in the public Rights-of-Way:
(1) Permitted in areas in which utilities are aboveground.
Communications Antennas shall be permitted in areas in which all
utilities are located aboveground, regardless of the underlying
zoning district, so long as such Antennas are located on existing
poles in the ROW. Antennas shall not be located on any sign listed
in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) nor any
traffic signal pole, mast arm device or associated equipment.
(2) Co-location. Communications Antennas in the ROW shall be colocated
on existing poles, such as existing utility poles or street
light poles. If co-location is not technologically feasible, the
Applicant shall locate its Communications Antennas on existing
poles that do not already act as Wireless Support Structures.
(3) Design requirements:
A. Antenna installations located above the surface grade in the
public ROW including, but not limited to, those on streetlights
and joint utility poles, shall consist of equipment components
that are no more than six feet in height and that are compatible
in scale and proportion to the structures upon which they are
mounted. All equipment shall be the smallest and least visibly
intrusive equipment feasible.
B. Antennas and all support equipment shall be treated to match
the supporting structure. Antennas and accompanying
equipment shall be painted, or otherwise coated, to be visually
compatible with the support structure upon which they are
mounted. Antennas must be located using Stealth Technology
as approved by the Town. No more than four antennas may be
placed on a pole.
(4) Reimbursement for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as
described above, every Communications Antenna in the ROW is
subject to the Town's right to fix annually a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such
compensation for ROW use shall be directly related to the Town's
actual ROW management costs including, but not limited to, the
costs of the administration and performance of all reviewing,
inspecting, permitting, supervising and other ROW management
activities by the Town. The owner of each Communications Antenna
shall pay an annual fee to the Town to compensate the Town for its
costs incurred in connection with the activities described above.
The Annual ROW management fee for Communications Antennas
shall be determined by the Town and authorized by resolution of
Town Council and shall be based on the Town's actual ROW
management costs as applied to such Communications Antenna.
 1341.13 CHARTER  1341.13
C:589
(5) Time, place and manner. The Town shall determine the time, place
and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of
all Communications Antennas in the ROW based on public safety,
traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and related
considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner
requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of the
Town and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
(6) Equipment location. Communications Antennas and accessory
equipment shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual
obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to
otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by
the Town. In addition:
A. In no case shall ground-mounted equipment, walls, or
landscaping be located within 36 inches of the exposed back of
the curb or within an easement extending onto a privatelyowned
lot;
B. Ground-mounted equipment that cannot be underground shall
be screened, to the fullest extent possible, through the use of
landscaping or other decorative features to the satisfaction of
the Town.
C. Required electrical meter cabinets shall the screened to blend
in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the Town.
D. Any graffiti on the tower or on any accessory equipment shall
be removed at the sole expense of the owner within 10
business days of notice of the existence of the graffiti.
E. Any plans for a proposed underground vault related to
Communications Antennas shall be reviewed and approved in
advance by the Town.
(7) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written
notice from the Town, or such longer period as the Town
determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the
case of an Emergency, an owner of an Antenna in the ROW shall, at
its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate,
change or alter the position of any Antenna when the Town,
consistent with its police powers and applicable Public Utility
Commission regulations, shall have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the
following circumstances:
A. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Town or other public improvement in the Right-of-Way;
B. The operations of the Town or other governmental entity in the
Right-of-Way;
 1341.13 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.13
C:590
C. Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
D. An Emergency as determined by the Town.
(8) Reservation of rights. In accordance with applicable law, the Town
reserves the right to deny an application for the construction or
placement of any Communications Antenna for numerous factors,
including but are not limited to, visual impact, design, and safety
standards.
(f) General requirements for all communications towers. The following
regulations shall apply to all Communications Towers:
(1) Standard of care. Any Communications Tower shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable technical,
safety and safety-related codes, including but not limited to, the
most recent editions of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety Code, National Electrical
Code, as well as the accepted and responsible workmanlike
industry practices of the National Association of Tower Erectors.
Any Communications Tower shall at all times be kept and
maintained in good condition, order and repair by qualified
maintenance and construction personnel, so that the same shall not
endanger the life of any person or any property in the Town.
(2) Authorization required. The construction of a new Communications
Tower may be permitted as a special exception subject to the
applicable standards in this Ordinance. Modifications to an existing
Communications Tower shall be prohibited without a zoning
permit. Any Applicant for a special exception shall demonstrate
that the proposed facility conforms to all applicable requirements
and standards set forth in Section 1341.13.
(3) Wind. Any Communications Tower structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind according to the standard designed by
the American National Standards Institute as prepared by the
engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association,
and Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/TIA-222-E, as
amended).
(4) Design. Any Communications Tower shall be designed to have the
least practical adverse visual effect on the areas which can view it.
(5) Height. Any Communications Tower shall be designed at the
minimum functional height. All Communications Tower Applicants
must submit documentation to the Town justifying the total height
of the structure. The maximum total height of any Communications
Tower, which is not located in the public ROW, shall not exceed 200
feet, as measured vertically from the ground level to the highest
point on the structure, including Antennas and subsequent
 1341.13 CHARTER  1341.13
C:591
alterations. Equipment buildings, cabinets, and ground-mounted
accessory structures shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
(6) Related equipment. A telecommunication equipment building,
equipment cabinet, or any other structure associated with a
Communications Tower, shall meet the height and setback
requirements for principal buildings in the zoning district in which
the building is located, except as otherwise noted in the Town of
McCandless Zoning Ordinance.
(7) Public safety communications. No Communications Tower shall
interfere with public safety communications or the reception of
broadband, television, radio or other communication services
enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
(8) Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall apply:
A. Any Communications Tower shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for
maintenance or emergency repair.
B. Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of
the facility in order to promote the safety and security of Town
residents.
C. All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than the
best available technology for preventing failures and
accidents.
(9) Radio frequency emissions. No Communications Tower may, by
itself or in conjunction with other Wireless Communications
Facilities, generate radio frequency emissions in excess of the
standards and regulations of the FCC, including but not limited to,
the FCC Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled
"Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure
to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(10) Historic buildings or districts. No Communications Tower may be
located on a building or structure that is listed on either the
National or Pennsylvania Registers of Historic Places, or eligible to
be so listed, or is included in the official historic structures and/or
historic districts list maintained by the Town.
(11) Signs. All Communications Towers shall post a sign in a readily
visible location identifying the name and phone number of a party
to contact in the event of an emergency.
(12) Lighting. No Communications Tower shall be artificially lighted,
except as required by law. Towers shall be galvanized and/or
painted with a rust-preventive paint of an appropriate color to
harmonize with the surroundings. If lighting is required, the
Applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting,
 1341.13 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.13
C:592
demonstrating as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is
permissible under state and federal regulations. Strobe lights are
not to operate between sunset and sunrise.
(13) Noise. Communications Towers shall be operated and maintained
so as not to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards
under state law and applicable Town ordinance guidelines, except
in emergency situations requiring the use of a backup generator,
where such noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis
only.
(14) Aviation safety. Communications Towers shall comply with all
federal and state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(15) Retention of experts. The Town may hire any consultant(s) and/or
expert(s) necessary to assist the Town in reviewing and evaluating
the application for approval of the Communications Tower and,
once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential violations
of the terms and conditions of this Ordinance. The Applicant and/or
owner of the Tower shall reimburse the Town for all costs of the
Town's consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and
consultation in connection with these activities.
(16) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a Communications Tower is filed with the Town, the
Town shall notify the Applicant in writing of any information that
may be required to complete such application. All applications for
Communications Towers shall be acted upon within 150 days of the
receipt of a fully completed application for the approval of such
Communications Tower and the Town shall advise the Applicant in
writing of its decision. If additional information was requested by
the Town to complete an application, the time required by the
Applicant to provide the information shall not be counted toward
the 150-day review period.
(17) Non-conforming uses. Non-conforming Communications Towers
which are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or
cause may be repaired and restored at their former location, but
must otherwise comply with the terms and conditions of this
Ordinance. Co-location of antennas on existing non-conforming
Towers is permitted.
(18) Removal. In the event that use of a Communications Tower is
planned to be discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice
to the Town of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the
use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned Towers or portions
of Towers shall be removed as follows:
A. All unused or abandoned Communications Towers and
accessory facilities shall be removed within six months of the
cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is
approved by the Town.
 1341.13 CHARTER  1341.13
C:593
B. If the Tower and/or accessory facility is not removed within six
months of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any
longer period approved by the Town, the Tower and accessory
facilities and equipment may be removed by the Town and the
cost of removal assessed against the owner of the Tower.
C. Any unused portions of Communications Towers, including
Antennas, shall be removed within six months of the time of
cessation of operations. The Town must approve all
replacements of portions of a Communications Tower
previously removed.
(19) Permit fees. The Town may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Town's actual costs in reviewing
and processing the application for approval of a Communications
Tower, as well as related inspection, monitoring and related costs.
(20)FCC license. Each Person that owns or operates a Communications
Tower shall submit a copy of its current FCC license, including the
name, address, and emergency telephone number for the operator
of the facility.
(21) Insurance. Each Person that owns or operates a Communications
Tower greater than 50 feet in height shall provide the Town with a
certificate of insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the
minimum amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence and property
damage coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per
occurrence covering the Communications Tower. Each Person that
owns or operates a Communications Tower 50 feet or less in height
shall provide the Town with a certificate of insurance evidencing
general liability coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000
per occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering each
Communications Tower.
(22) Indemnification. Each Person that owns or operates a
Communications Tower shall, at its sole cost and expense,
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Town, its elected and
appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against any
and all claims for personal injury, including death, and property
damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or connected
with any act or omission of the Person, its officers, agents,
employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the
construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the
Communications Tower. Each Person that owns or operates a
Communications Tower shall defend any actions or proceedings
against the Town in which it is claimed that personal injury,
including death, or property damage was caused by the
construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of
Communications Tower. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless
and defend shall include, but not be limited to, the obligation to pay
 1341.13 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.13
C:594
judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys'
fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs of
indemnification.
(23) Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for a tower and
Antenna shall contain a seal and signature of a professional
structural engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(24) Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit for the
construction or placement of a Communications Tower, the
Applicant shall provide to the Town financial security sufficient to
guarantee the removal of the Communications Tower in a form to
be approved by the Town Attorney. Said financial security shall
remain in place until the Communications Tower is removed.
(g) Tower-based facilities outside the rights-of-way. The following
regulations shall apply to Tower-Based Wireless Communications
Facilities located outside the Rights-of-Way:
(1) Development regulations:
A. Location. No Communications Tower shall be located in an
area in which all utilities are underground, except as permitted
by this Ordinance. The following additional requirements shall
apply:
1. Communications Towers may be permitted in an (I)
Institutional Zoning District.
2. Communications Towers shall not be located in, or within
75 feet of, any area in which all utilities are underground.
B. Gap in coverage. An Applicant for a Communications Tower
must demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage
exists with respect to all wireless operators in the applicable
area and that the type of Wireless Communications Facility
being proposed is the least intrusive means by which to fill that
gap in wireless coverage. The existence or non-existence of a
gap in wireless coverage shall be a factor in the Town's
decision on an application for approval of Communications
Towers.
C. Sole use on a lot. A Communications Tower shall be permitted
as a sole use on a lot, provided that the lot shall meet the
minimum lot area of the district in which it is located.
D. Combined with another use. A Communications Tower may be
permitted on a property with an existing use, or on a vacant
parcel in combination with another use, except residential,
subject to the following conditions:
 1341.13 CHARTER  1341.13
C:595
1. The existing use on the property may be any permitted use
in the applicable district, and need not be affiliated with
the Wireless Communications Facility.
2. Minimum lot area. The minimum lot shall comply with the
requirements for the applicable zoning district and shall
be the area needed to accommodate the Communications
Tower and guy wires, the equipment building, security
fence, and buffer planting if the proposed Communications
Tower is greater than 50 feet in height. If a security fence
is put in place, a lock box shall be provided for emergency
access.
3. Minimum setbacks. The foundation and base of any
Communications Tower shall be set back from property
lines in accordance with the minimum setbacks applicable
to the zoning district where the property is located.
(2) All parts of the Communications Tower shall be set back a minimum
of 100 feet from the property line on the larger parcel on which the
leased parcel is located, plus one foot for each foot of height of
Tower and Antenna beyond 100 feet. Notice. Upon submission of an
application for a Communications Tower, the Applicant shall mail
notice to all owners of every property within 500 feet of the
proposed facility. The Applicant shall provide proof of the
notification to the Town.
(3) Leased parcels. Copies of lease agreements and easements
necessary to provide access to the buildings or structure for
installation and placement of the equipment cabinet or equipment
building shall be provided to the Town. Recording of a plat of
subdivision shall not be required for the leased parcel on which the
Communications Tower is constructed, provided the equipment
building is proposed to be unmanned, the required easement
agreement for access is submitted for approval by the Town, and
the equipment building is less than 1,000 square feet.
(4) Co-location and siting. The Applicant must demonstrate that the
wireless communications equipment planned for the proposed
Communications Tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved structure or building, or on Town property. The Applicant
shall demonstrate that it contacted the owners of tall structures,
buildings, and towers in excess of 50 feet, within a 1/2 of a mile
radius of the site proposed, sought permission to install an Antenna
on those structures, buildings, and towers and was denied for one
of the following reasons:
A. The proposed Antenna and Related Equipment would exceed
the structural capacity of the existing building, structure or
tower, and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a
reasonable cost.
 1341.13 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.13
C:596
B. The proposed Antenna and Related Equipment would cause
radio frequency interference with other existing equipment for
that existing building, structure, or tower and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
C. Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have
adequate location, space, access, or height to accommodate
the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended
function.
D. A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached
with the owner of such building, structure, or tower.
(5) Any application for approval of a Communications Tower shall
include a comprehensive inventory of all existing towers and other
suitable structures within a two-mile radius from the point of the
proposed tower, unless the Applicant can show to the satisfaction of
the Town that a different distance is more reasonable, and shall
demonstrate conclusively why an existing tower or other suitable
structure cannot be utilized.
(6) Design regulations:
A. The Communications Tower shall employ the most current
Stealth Technology available in an effort to appropriately blend
into the surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic
impact. The application of the Stealth Technology chosen by
the Communications Tower Applicant shall be subject to the
approval of the Town.
B. Any height extensions to an existing Communications Tower
shall require prior approval of the Town. The Town reserves
the right to deny such requests based upon lawful
considerations related to the character of the Town.
C. Any proposed Communications Tower shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects to accommodate
both the Communications Tower Applicant's Antennas and
comparable Antennas for future users.
D. Any Communications Tower over 50 feet in height shall be
equipped with an anti-climbing device, as approved by the
manufacturer.
(7) Surrounding environs:
A. The Applicant shall ensure that the existing vegetation, trees
and shrubs located within proximity to the Communications
Tower structure shall be preserved to the maximum extent
possible.
B. The Applicant shall submit a soil report to the Town complying
with the standards of Appendix I: Geotechnical Investigations,
 1341.13 CHARTER  1341.13
C:597
ANSI/TIA-222, as amended, to document and verify the design
specifications of the foundation of the Communications Tower,
and anchors for guy wires, if used.
(8) Fence/screen:
A. A security fence satisfactory to the Town having a minimum
height of 10 feet shall completely surround any
Communications Tower greater than 50 feet in height, as well
as guy wires, or any building housing Communications Tower
equipment. If a security fence is used, a lock box shall be
provided for emergency access.
B. Landscaping shall be installed to screen and buffer the tower
and any ground level features, such as an equipment building,
from adjacent properties.
C. A ten-foot wide bufferyard consisting of dense evergreen
hedge planted so that the leaves or needles will touch an
adjacent plant at maturity around the perimeter of the security
fence on the leased parcel. The bufferyard required in the
Institutional ("I") Zone District must be planted around the
perimeter of the parcel from which the leased parcel is
separated.
(9) Accessory equipment:
A. Ground-mounted equipment associated to, or connected with,
a Communications Tower shall be underground or screened
from public view using Stealth Technologies, as described
above.
B. All utility buildings and accessory structures shall be
architecturally designed to blend into the environment in
which they are situated and shall meet the minimum setback
requirements of the underlying zoning district.
(10) Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all
Communications Towers, the Applicant shall provide the Town with
a written commitment that it will allow other service providers to
co-locate Antennas on Communications Towers where technically
and economically feasible. The owner of a Communications Tower
shall not install any additional Antennas without obtaining the prior
written approval of the Town.
(11) Access road. An access road, turnaround space and parking shall
be provided to ensure adequate emergency and service access to
Communications Tower. Maximum use of existing roads, whether
public or private, shall be made to the extent practicable. Road
construction shall at all times minimize ground disturbance and the
cutting of vegetation. Road grades shall closely follow natural
contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and minimize soil
 1341.13 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.13
C:598
erosion. Where applicable, the Communications Tower owner shall
present documentation to the Town that the property owner has
granted an easement for the proposed facility. The access road
shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width and shall be improved with a
bituminous or concrete surface approved by the Town, for its entire
length at a minimum of 12 feet in width.
(12) Parking. For each Communications Tower greater than 50 feet in
height, there shall be two off-street parking spaces. Each parking
space shall be improved with a dust-free, all-weather surface.
(13) Reservation of rights. In accordance with applicable law, the Town
reserves the right to deny an application for the construction or
placement of any Communications Tower for numerous factors,
including but are not limited to, visual impact, design, and safety
standards.
(14) Inspection. The Town reserves the right to inspect any
Communications Tower to ensure compliance with the provisions of
this Ordinance and any other provisions found within the Town
Code or state or federal law. The Town and/or its agents shall have
the authority to enter the property upon which a Communications
Tower is located at any time, upon reasonable notice to the
operator, to ensure such compliance.
(15) Engineer inspection report. The owner of any Communications
Tower greater than 50 feet in height shall submit to the Town proof
of an annual inspection conducted by a structural engineer at the
owner's expense and an updated tower maintenance program
based on the results of the inspection. Any structural faults shall be
corrected immediately and re-inspected and certified to the Town
by a structural engineer at the Tower owner's expense.
(h) Communications towers in the public rights-of-way. The following
regulations shall apply to Tower-Based Wireless Communications
Facilities located in the Rights-of-Way:
(1) Location. The location of Towers is limited to the following rightsof-
way:
A. An Applicant must first attempt to site a proposed tower along
the following corridors, provided the proposed Tower is not
situated within 50 feet of an area in which all utilities are
underground:
1. Route 19 (Perry Highway)
2. Ingomar Road and Wildwood Road.
B. If it is not technologically or economically feasible to locate the
proposed Tower along the corridors mentioned above, the
proposed Tower may be located along collector roads listed
 1341.13 CHARTER  1341.13
C:599
below where utilities are aboveground, provided that the
proposed Tower is not sited within 75 feet of an area in which
utilities are underground. Collector Roads -Rinaman Road,
Richard Road, Grubbs Road, Reichold Road, Kummer Road,
Cumberland Road, Perrymont Road, and Sloop Road.
C. No Communications Tower sited in the public ROW shall be
located in the front facade zone of any structure.
(2) Gap in coverage. An Applicant for a Communications Tower must
demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage exists with
respect to all wireless operators in the applicable area and that the
type of Communications Tower being proposed is the least
intrusive means by which to fill that gap in wireless coverage. The
existence or non-existence of a gap in wireless coverage shall be a
factor in the Town's decision on an application for approval of
Communications Towers in the ROW.
(3) Notice. Upon submission of an application for a Communications
Tower, the Applicant shall mail notice to all owners of every
property within 500 feet of the proposed facility. The Applicant
shall provide proof of the notification to the Town.
(4) Co-location and siting. The Applicant must demonstrate that the
wireless communications equipment planned for the proposed
Communications Tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved structure or building, or on Town property. The Applicant
shall demonstrate that it contacted the owners of tall structures,
buildings, and towers within a 1/2 of a mile radius of the site
proposed, sought permission to install an Antenna on those
structures, buildings, and towers and was denied for one of the
following reasons:
A. The proposed Antenna and Related Equipment would exceed
the structural capacity of the existing building, structure or
tower, and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a
reasonable cost.
B. The proposed Antenna and Related Equipment would cause
radio frequency interference with other existing equipment for
that existing building, structure, or tower and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
C. Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have
adequate location, space, access, or height to accommodate
the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended
function.
D. A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached
with the owner of such building, structure, or tower.
 1341.13 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.13
C:600
(5) Time, place and manner. The Town shall determine the time, place
and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of
all Communications Towers in the ROW based on public safety,
traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and related
considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner
requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of the
Town and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
(6) Equipment location. Communications Towers and accessory
equipment shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual
obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to
otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by
the Town. In addition:
A. In no case shall ground-mounted equipment, walls, or
landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of the curb.
B. Ground-mounted equipment that cannot be undergrounded
shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible, through the
use of landscaping or other decorative features to the
satisfaction of the Town.
C. Required electrical meter cabinets shall the screened to blend
in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the Town.
D. Any graffiti on the tower or on any accessory equipment shall
be removed at the sole expense of the owner within 10
business days of notice of the existence of the graffiti.
E. Any plans for underground vaults related to Communications
Towers shall be reviewed and approved in advance by the
Town.
(7) Design regulations.
A. The Communications Tower shall employ the most current
Stealth Technology available in an effort to appropriately blend
into the surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic
impact. The application of the Stealth Technology chosen by
the Communications Tower Applicant shall be subject to the
approval of the Town.
B. Communications Towers in the public ROW shall not exceed 32
feet in height.
C. Any height extensions to an existing Communications Tower
shall require prior approval of the Town, and shall not increase
the overall height of the Communications Tower to more than
32 feet. The Town reserves the right to deny such requests
based upon aesthetic and land use impact, or any other lawful
considerations related to the character of the Town.
 1341.13 CHARTER  1341.13
C:601
D. Any proposed Communications Tower shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects to accommodate
both the Applicant's Antennas and comparable Antennas for
future users.
(8) Reservation of rights. In accordance with applicable law, the Town
reserves the right to deny an application for the construction or
placement of any Communications Tower in the ROW for numerous
factors, including but are not limited to, visual impact, design, and
safety standards.
(9) Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all
Communications Towers in the ROW, the Applicant shall provide
the Town with a written commitment that it will allow other service
providers to co-locate Antennas on Communications Towers where
technically and economically feasible. The owner of a
Communications Tower shall not install any additional Antennas
without obtaining the prior written approval of the Town.
(10) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written
notice from the Town, or such longer period as the Town
determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the
case of an Emergency, an owner of Communications Tower in the
ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any Communications Tower
when the Town, consistent with its police powers and applicable
Public Utility Commission regulations, shall determine that such
removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary
under the following circumstances:
A. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Town or other public improvement in the Right-of-Way;
B. The operations of the Town or other governmental entity in the
Right-of-Way;
C. Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
D. An Emergency as determined by the Town.
(11) Reimbursement for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as
described in Section VIII(19) above, every Communications Tower
in the ROW is subject to the Town's right to fix annually a fair and
reasonable compensation to be paid for use and occupancy of the
ROW. Such compensation for ROW use shall be directly related to
the Town's actual ROW management costs including, but not
limited to, the costs of the administration and performance of all
reviewing, inspecting, permitting, supervising and other ROW
management activities by the Town. The owner of each
Communications Tower shall pay an annual fee to the Town to
compensate the Town for the Town's costs incurred in connection
 1341.13 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.13
C:602
 1341.14. Mobile home parks. [Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994]
Mobile Home Parks are permitted as a conditional use in the R-5 Zoning
District and shall meet the following conditions:
 1341.15. Office. [Ord. 1177, passed 12-16-1996]
An office is permitted as a Conditional Use in the C-1 Commercial
Recreation District. The following conditions shall apply, in addition to the
requirements set forth in the C-1 Zoning District. In the event of conflict,
the following conditions take precedence.
 1341.16. Sexually oriented businesses. [Ord. 1215, passed
5-24-1999]
with the activities described above. The annual ROW management
fee for Communications Towers shall be determined by the Town
and authorized by resolution of Town Council and shall be based
on the Town's actual ROW management costs as applied to such
Communications Tower.
(a) All utilities, including electric, water and sewerage shall be available to
each home.
(b) Homes shall be set on a concrete foundation.
(c) Open space under home shall be enclosed with concrete block and/or
brick.
(d) Minimum lot width shall be 75 feet.
(e) Minimum lot size shall be 10,900 square feet.
(f) Spacing between homes shall be a minimum of 50 feet. Bufferyards as
described in Section 1323.04(h).
(a) Maximum coverage based on gross lot area: 20% max.
(b) Maximum gross area of floor space: 35,000 square feet max.
(c) Maximum number of parking spaces permitted for office use: 85 spaces
max.
(d) Parking requirements set forth in Section 1313.06, Parking
Requirements, shall apply.
(a) Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of this section to
regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the Town of McCandless, and to
establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the continued
deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses
within the Town. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose
nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
 1341.13 CHARTER  1341.16
C:603
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the
First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors
of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither
is it the intent nor effect of this section to condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene material.
(b) Definitions.
ADULT ARCADE  Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically,
or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors,
or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to
five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting
or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas."
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE 
ADULT CABARET  A nightclub, or bar, or establishment which
regularly features:
A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any
one or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which
depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas"; or
A.
Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for
use in connection with "specified sexual activities."
B.
(1)
A commercial establishment may have other purposes that do not
involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or
describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas" and still be categorized as adult bookstore or adult video
store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such
commercial establishment from being categorized as an adult
bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its principal
business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration
the specified materials which depict or describe "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(2)
(1) Person(s) who appear in the state of nudity: or
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
"specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or
(2)
 1341.16 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.16
C:604
ADULT MOTEL  A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER  A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly
shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
ADULT THEATER  A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who
appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas."
CHILD-ORIENTED BUSINESS  A commercial establishment which,
as one of its principal business purposes, serves, sells and/or caters
food, apparels, goods, services, play and/or entertainment to children
and their families.
ESCORT  A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act
as a companion, guide, or date for another person for the purpose of
a specified sexual activity, or who agrees or offers to privately model
lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
ESCORT AGENCY  A person or business association who furnishes,
offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary
business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO  Any place where a person who appears in
a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided
to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed,
or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration.
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas."
(3)
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which
advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic
reproductions; or
(1)
Offers sleeping rooms for rent four or more times one calendar
day during five or more calendar days in any continuous thirty-day
period.
(2)
 1341.16 CHARTER  1341.16
C:605
NUDITY or a STATE OF NUDITY  The appearance of a human bare
buttocks, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast.
PERMITTEE and/or LICENSEE  A person in whose name a permit
and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued,
as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a
permit and/or license.
PERSON  An individual proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
SEMI-NUDE  A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than
the genitals, public region, and areola of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER  A business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any
form of consideration:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS  An adult arcade, adult bookstore
or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual
encounter center.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS  The male genitals in a state of
sexual arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female
genitals.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES  And includes any of the following:
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT  Of a sexually oriented business
means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more
than 25%, as the floor areas exist on date of enactment of this section.
TOWN  The Town of McCandless.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL  Of a sexually oriented
business means and includes any of the following:
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
(1)
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
semi-nude.
(2)
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
(1)
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated.
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in Subsections 1 through 3 above.
(4)
(1) The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
 1341.16 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.16
C:606
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
(2)
The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.
(3)
(c) Classification. Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
(1) Adult arcades;
(2) Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
(3) Adult cabarets;
(4) Adult motels;
(5) Adult motion picture theaters;
(6) Adult theaters;
(7) Escort agencies;
(8) Nude model studios; and
(9) Sexual encounter centers.
(d) Permit required.
(1) Any person who operates a sexually oriented business without a
valid permit issued by the Town is guilty of a violation of the Zoning
Ordinance of the Town.
(2) After receipt of a special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board
of the Town of McCandless for a sexually oriented business, an
application for a permit to operate a sexually oriented business
must be made on a form provided by the Zoning Officer of the
Town. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram
showing the floor plan and plot plan configuration of the premises,
including a statement of the total floor space occupied by the
business. The sketch or diagram must be professionally prepared
and must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches. A traffic and parking study performed by a
professional engineer shall be required if requested by the Town to
assist in the determination of the parking requirements for a
sexually oriented business at the expense of the applicant. Parking
facilities must be specifically identified and shall meet all zoning
ordinance requirements. Nonconforming structures and those
structures not having the required parking sites shall not be issued
permits unless the sexually oriented business was in existence as a
lawful use prior to the date of this section.
 1341.16 CHARTER  1341.16
C:607
(3) The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
section and the premises must be inspected and found to be in
compliance with the law by the Zoning Officer, the Fire Marshal
and the Building Inspector.
(4) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, he must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If
a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
other than an individual, each individual who has a 10% or greater
interest in the business must sign the application for a permit as
applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented
business or as the entity which wishes to operate such a business,
each individual having a direct or indirect interest of 10% or
greater in the corporation must sign the application for a permit as
applicant.
(5) The fact that a person possesses other types of Town permits does
not exempt the person from the requirement of obtaining a sexually
oriented business permit.
(e) Issuance of permit.
(1) The Zoning Officer of the Town of McCandless shall approve the
issuance of a permit to operate a sexually oriented business to an
applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless he
finds one of more of the following to be true:
A. The Zoning Hearing Board has not granted a special exception
for the operation of a sexually oriented business.
B. A land development has not been approved as required.
C. All appeals have not been exhausted.
D. An applicant is under 18 years of age.
E. An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his payment
to the Town of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against
him or imposed upon him in relation to a sexually oriented
business.
F. An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form.
G. An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a
permit by the Town to operate a sexually oriented business
within the preceding 12 months, or residing with a person
whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been
revoked within the preceding 12 months.
H. The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business
have been reviewed and have been disapproved by either the
 1341.16 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.16
C:608
Zoning Officer, the Fire Marshall, or the Building Inspector as
not being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
I. The permit fee required by this section has not been paid.
J. An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of, or
is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this section.
K. An individual applicant, or any individual holding a direct or
indirect interest of more than 10% of a corporate applicant, or
any of the officers and directors of a corporate applicant, if the
applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including
limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, or the
manager or other person in charge of the operation of the
applicant's business, has, or have been convicted of an offense
involving sexual misconduct within the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, including, but not limited to, prostitution,
obscenity and possession of child pornography, or convicted of
any offense in any jurisdiction other than the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania that would have constituted an offense involving
sexual misconduct if committed within the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. In order for approval to be denied pursuant to
this subsection, the person or persons' conviction or release in
connection with the sexual misconduct offense must have,
occurred within two years of the date of application in the
event of a misdemeanor and within five years of the date of
application in the event of a felony.
(2) The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person
or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the
address of the sexually oriented business. The permit shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the
sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.
(3) The Zoning Officer, the Fire Marshall and the Building Inspector
shall complete their certification that the premises are in
compliance or not in compliance within 20 days of receipt of the
application by the Zoning Officer. The certification shall be
promptly presented to the Zoning Officer.
(f) Fees. The annual fee for a sexually oriented occupancy permit if $500.
(g) Inspection.
(1) An applicant, or permittee, shall permit representatives of the
Police Department, Fire Marshall, Zoning Officer, Building
Inspector or other Town departments or agencies to inspect the
premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring
compliance with the law, at any time that the sexually oriented
business is occupied or open for business.
 1341.16 CHARTER  1341.16
C:609
(2) A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or
employee violates the Zoning Ordinance of the Town if he refuses to
permit such lawful inspection of premises at any time it is occupied
or open for business.
(h) Expiration of permit.
(1) Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and
may be renewed only by making application as provided in
subsection (e) hereof. Application for renewal should be made at
least 30 days before the expiration date, the pendency of the
application will not prevent the expiration of the permit.
(2) If the Zoning Officer denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall
not be issued a permit for one year from the date of denial, except
that after 90 days have elapsed since the date of denial, the
applicant may be granted a permit if the Zoning Officer finds that
the basis for the denial of the renewal permit has been corrected or
abated.
(i) Suspension of permit. The Zoning Officer shall suspend a permit for a
period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a permittee or an
employee of a permittee has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any subsection of this section;
(2) Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the
sexually oriented business premises;
(3) Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this section;
(4) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually
oriented business premises;
(5) Failed to man managers' stations and/or maintain viewing rooms as
set forth in Section 1341.16(m).
(j) Revocation of permit.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall revoke a permit if a cause of suspension
set forth in subsection (i) hereof occurs and the permit has been
suspended within the preceding 12 months.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall revoke a permit if he determines that:
A. A permittee, or any of the persons specified in subsection
(e)(1)K. hereof, is or has been convicted of the offenses
specified in subsection (e)(1)K. hereof;
B. A permittee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted to the Town during the application process;
 1341.16 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.16
C:610
C. A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly
allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the
premises;
D. A permittee or employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises;
E. A permittee or an employee of a permittee knowingly operated
the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the
permittee's permit was suspended;
F. A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly
allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation, or other explicit sexual conduct to occur in or on
the permitted premises;
G. A permittee is delinquent in payment to the Town or State of
any taxes or fees relating to sexually oriented businesses.
(3) When the Zoning Officer revokes a permit, the revocation shall
continue for one year, and the permittee shall not be issued a
sexually oriented business permit for one year from the date
revocation became effective, except that if the revocation is
pursuant to subsection (j)(2)A., above, the revocation shall be
effective for two years in the event of a misdemeanor or five years
in the case of a felony.
(4) After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an
application, or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant
or licensee or permittee shall have the right to appeal said action
and to seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in
any court of competent jurisdiction.
(k) Transfer of permit. A permittee shall not transfer his permit to another
person. A permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business
under the authority of a permit at any place other than the address
designated in the application.
(l) Location of sexually oriented businesses.
(1) A person is guilty of a violation of the Zoning Ordinance if he
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
outside of the district in which a sexually oriented business is a
permitted use in addition to the requirements of a D-Development
District. No sexually oriented businesses shall be located outside a
district in which a sexually oriented business is a permitted use.
Sexually oriented businesses as defined herein shall be permitted
in that portion of the D-Development District for properties along
McKnight Road from Perrymont Road north to Ingomar Road as a
special exception. No sexually oriented businesses shall be located
north of Ingomar Road.
 1341.16 CHARTER  1341.16
C:611
(2) A person is guilty of a violation of the Zoning Ordinance if he
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
within the below listed distances of the following institutions or
residences, and no permit will be issued for any such sexually
oriented business which intends to be located within the below
listed distances of such institutional or residential property lines:
A. A church: 800 feet;
B. A public or private pre-elementary, elementary or secondary
school property: 750 feet;
C. A public library: 500 feet;
D. A child care facility or nursery school: 800 feet;
E. A public playground or park: 800 feet;
F. A child-oriented business: 800 feet;
G. Residential zones: 600 feet.
(3) A person is guilty of a violation of the Zoning Ordinance if he
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
without conforming to the following standards:
A. Gross lot area: 20,000 square feet min.
B. Lot width at building line: 100 feet min.
C. Front yard depth: 100 feet min.
D. Side and rear yard depth: 30 feet min.
E. Maximum height of building: 35 feet.
F. Bufferyards planted as follows:
1. All yards fronting a street - bufferyard G. Section 1314.04
of the McCandless Codified Ordinances.
2. All other yards - bufferyard F. Section 1314.04 of the
McCandless Codified Ordinances.
G. Coverage: 20% max.
H. Signs;
1. Signs shall conform to Section 1313.11 of the Zoning
Ordinance except as provided herein.
2. A free standing sign shall be limited to 32 square feet.
3. One free standing sign shall be allowed for each 250 feet
of lot width. For corner lots, a sign is permitted on the
 1341.16 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.16
C:612
second street, not exceeding 20 square feet for each 300
feet of building depth.
4. Wall signs shall be limited in size to 1/2 square foot of sign
for each foot of building length at the front building line.
This approved size may be divided between the front of the
building and one side.
5. A sexually oriented business operating inside a building
with other businesses shall be required to coordinate
signage to conform to sign requirements for this building.
6. Signs shall not display any nudity.
7. Signs shall not be lighted by blinking or glittering lights.
(4) No sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, shall
open to do business before 10:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday,
prevailing time; and no sexually oriented business, other than an
adult motel, shall remain open after 10:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, prevailing time. No sexually oriented business, other
than an adult motel, shall be open for business on any Sunday or on
a legal holiday as set forth in the Act of May 31, 1893, P.L. 188,  1,
as amended, 44 P.S.  11.
(5) A person is guilty of a violation of the Zoning Ordinance if he causes
or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement,
or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business,
and no permit shall be issued for any such sexually oriented
business intended to be located within 3,000 feet of another
sexually oriented business.
(6) A person is guilty of a violation of the Zoning Ordinance if he causes
or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more
than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure,
or portion thereof; or the increase of floor areas of any sexually
oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof
containing another sexually oriented business.
(7) For the purpose of this section, measurement shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structure(s), from the
nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the
premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the
nearest property line of the premises of a church, public or private
pre-elementary, elementary, or secondary school, public library,
child care facility, or nursery school; or to the nearest boundary of
an affected public playground, public park, or residence.
(8) For purposes of subsection (1)(2) and (5) of this section, the
distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
 1341.16 CHARTER  1341.16
C:613
structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure
in which each business is located.
(9) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on date of
enactment of this section that is in violation of subsection (1)(1)
through (7) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use.
Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged,
extended or altered, except that the use may be changed to a
conforming use. In the event that two or more sexually oriented
businesses are within 3,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a
permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first
established and continually operating at a particular location is the
conforming use and the later-established business is
nonconforming.
(10) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use
is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to
the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business permit, of a
church, public or private pre-elementary, elementary, or secondary
school, public library, child care facility, nursery school, public
playground, public park or residence within those distances set
forth in subsection (1)(2) of the sexually oriented business. This
provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit, and does not
apply when an application for a permit is submitted after a permit
has expired or has been revoked.
(m) Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or Videos.
(1) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises
in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film
or video cassette, or other video or other image production or
reproduction which depicts "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas", shall comply with the following
requirements:
A. The application for a permit to operate a sexually oriented
business shall be accompanied by a floor plan and plot plan
diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the
location of one or more manager's stations, the location of all
viewing rooms, partitions and doors and the location of all
overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's
station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The
diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will
be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint
shall be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to
the north or to some designated street or object and should be
drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions
sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas
 1341.16 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.16
C:614
of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus
six inches. The Zoning Officer may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a
diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the
configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was
prepared.
B. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
C. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station may be made without the prior approval of the Zoning
Officer or his designee.
D. It is the duty of the owners and operators of the premises to
ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in
each manager's station at all times that any patron is present
inside the premises.
E. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's
station of every area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms.
Restrooms may not contain video reproduction or viewing
equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations
designated, then the interior of the premises shall be
configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view
of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose from at least one of the managers'
stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct
line of sight from the manager's station.
F. It shall be the duty of the owners and operators, and it shall
also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the
premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection
E. remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise,
display racks or other materials at all times and to ensure that
no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises
which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not
be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection A.
of this section.
G. No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at
any time. No connections or openings to an adjoining viewing
room shall be permitted.
H. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures
of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which
patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than
one foot candle as measured at the floor level.
 1341.16 CHARTER  1341.16
C:615
I. It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present in the
premises to ensure that the illumination described above is
maintained at all times that any patron is present in the
premises.
(2) A person having a duty under subsection (m)(1)A. through I. is
guilty of a violation of the Zoning Ordinance if he knowingly fails to
fulfill that duty.
(n) Exemptions.
(1) It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (e) and (1) hereof
that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling
class operated:
A. By a proprietary school, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation;
B. By private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a
college, junior college, or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation; or
C. In a structure.
1. Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure
and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is
available for viewing; and
2. Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must
enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and
3. Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at
any one time.
(2) A facility offering massage therapy provided by a massage
therapist holding a current certificate from a nationally accredited
massage therapy school.
(o) Injunction. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business without a valid permit or in violation of this section is
subject to an action in equity or a suit for injunction as well as citations
for violations of the Zoning Ordinance.
(p) Severability. The provisions of this section are severable and, if any
section, sentence, or clause be held part or provision hereof shall be
held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision of the court shall not affect the remaining
sections, sentences, clauses, parts or provisions of this section. It is
hereby declared to be the intent of the Town Council that this section
would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional
 1341.16 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.16
C:616
 1341.17. Express criteria for personal care homes in the R-6
Zoned District. [Ord. 1258, passed 12-17-2001]
Council may approve Personal Care Homes as a conditional use in an
R-6 zoned district in accordance with the following expressed criteria and
the imposition of any other reasonable conditions and safeguards Council
deems necessary to implement the purposes of this ordinance.
section, sentence, clause, part or provision had not been included
herein.
(q) Optional procedures for sexually oriented businesses.
(1) For a sexually oriented business, the developer shall have the
option of submitting a unified special exception and preliminary
and final land development application. If this option is chosen by
the developer, in addition to all zoning regulations, all rules,
regulations and procedures provided in Title V, Land Development
and Subdivision Regulations shall govern the application except
that the Town Council assigns jurisdiction for preliminary and final
approval of the land development to the Zoning Hearing Board.
(2) If the developer chooses this option in Title V, the word "Council"
shall be replaced with the words "Zoning Hearing Board" except
that the Zoning Hearing Board is not granted any legislative rights
granted to the Town Council under Article V or under the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act of 1968, P.L. 805,
No. 247 as re-enacted and amended) hereinafter "MPC".
(3) Section 1349.14 Special Exceptions: Conditions Governing
Application Procedures and Article 1365 Procedures for
Submission of Plats shall apply.
(4) Section 1365.04 (d) shall be deleted for this purpose only.
(5) Preliminary and Final Land Development and the special exception
shall be applied for and reviewed concurrently.
(6) The applicant shall agree to an extension of time required by the
MPC and by the Town Code for Zoning Hearing Board hearings and
plat approvals and to be replaced with the following:
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall commence its meeting within
30 days of receipt by the Zoning Office of a complete
application.
B. The Zoning Hearing Board shall render its decision within 45
days after the close of its last hearing.
(7) If any conflicts arise between this section and Title V (Town Land
Development Code), this section shall take precedence.
(a) Minimum acreage required:
 1341.16 CHARTER  1341.17
C:617
One building and 12 occupants or less: three acres.
Personal care homes - more than 12 occupants: four acres.
(b) The applicant, owner, or agent shall observe all applicable Federal and
State statutes and regulations and shall be licensed by the State of
Pennsylvania.
(c) The applicant shall satisfy all applicable laws relevant to the proposed
development.
(d) Parking shall be one space for each two beds.
(e) A dumpster shall be provided and shall be screened mechanically or
with landscaping.
(f) In addition to bufferyards generally required by Section 1324.02,
bufferyard "D" shall be provided between personal care homes and
single-family dwelling units or duplexes, except where the plan
indicates elements are common to all uses; for example, parking or
recreation.
(g) The approved plan must contain a statement to the effect that this
Personal Care Home will be owned by an individual(s), partnership,
organization, corporation, or other single entity, who shall be fully
responsible for the construction, operation, management, care of the
residents, and permanent maintenance of the building(s), and grounds.
(h) A Personal Care Home shall include a common dining and kitchen
facility. A retail and service business is permitted for the exclusive use
of the residents living in the development.
(i) A minimum of 150 square feet for each bed shall be provided for active
and passive recreation. The area shall be readily accessible and well
maintained.
(j) Minimum front, rear and side yard requirements:
Abutting R-1 and R-2 zoning districts and streets
abutting such districts
100 feet
Abutting all other zoning districts and/or streets
abutting such districts
60 feet
(k) When the personal care home is part of an R-6 zoned lot or parcel
owned or operated by another group, association or entity, provisions
shall be made for the sharing of maintenance of the grounds, roads,
parking areas, recreation areas, sewer lines and other common areas
and amenities. This maintenance shall be in a form approved by the
Town Attorney and Town Council, prior to approval of the conditional
use.
 1341.17 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.18
C:618
 1341.18. Express criteria for an older adult daycare in the R-6
Zoned District. [Ord. 1258, passed 12-17-2001]
Council may approve Older Adult Daycare as a conditional use in an R-6
zoned district in accordance with the following expressed criteria and the
imposition of any other reasonable conditions and safeguards Council
deems necessary to implement the purposes of this ordinance.
 1341.19. Oil and gas development. [Ord. 1390, passed 9-27-2010]
(a) Older Adult Daycare shall be an accessory use to a housing plan
meeting the requirements of the R-6 housing or a Personal Care Home.
(b) Parking shall include temporary spaces near the building but shall not
interfere with fire lanes.
(c) Drop-off areas shall be included in the plan.
(d) Parking shall be adequate for all employees.
(e) When the Older Adult Daycare is part of an R-6 zoned lot or parcel
owned or operated by another group, association or entity, provisions
shall be made for the sharing of maintenance of the grounds, roads,
parking areas, recreation areas, sewer lines and other common areas
and amenities. This maintenance shall be in a form approved by the
Town Attorney and Town Council, prior to approval of the conditional
use.
(a) Purpose. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to
declare Oil and Gas Development a use that may be authorized as a
Conditional Use in the following Zoning Districts of the Town: C-2
("Neighborhood Shopping District") and I ("Institutional District"). The
Town of McCandless recognizes that the regulation of Oil and Gas
Development is the primary responsibility of the regulatory agencies of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, but that the Town maintains its
zoning powers as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code ("MPC") and through the Town of McCandless Zoning Ordinance.
It is in the Town's best interest to have information concerning oil and
gas exploration, development, and production taking place within the
Town and to ensure certain security and safety measures related to oil
and gas well drilling are in place.
(b) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall be
interpreted or defined as follows:
NATURAL GAS COMPRESSOR STATION  A facility designed and
constructed to compress natural gas that originates from an Oil and
Gas well or collection of such wells operating as a midstream facility
for delivery of Oil and Gas to a transmission pipeline, distribution
pipeline, Natural Gas Processing Plant or underground storage field,
including one or more natural gas compressors, associated buildings,
pipes, valves, tanks and other equipment.
 1341.18 CHARTER  1341.19
C:619
NATURAL GAS PROCESSING PLANT  A facility designed and
constructed to remove materials such as ethane, propane, butane, and
other constituents or similar substances from natural gas to allow such
natural gas to be of such quality as is required or appropriate for
transmission or distribution to commercial markets but not including
facilities or equipment that are/is designed and constructed primarily
to remove water, water vapor, oil or naturally occurring liquids from
natural gas.
OIL AND GAS  Crude oil, natural gas, methane gas, coal bed methane
gas, propane, butane and/or any other constituents or similar
substances that are produced by drilling a well of any depth into,
through and below the surface of the earth.
OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT or DEVELOPMENT  The well site
preparation, well site construction, drilling, hydraulic fracturing, and/
or site restoration associated with an Oil and Gas well of any depth;
water and other fluid storage, impoundment and transportation used
for such activities; and the installation and use of all associated
equipment, including tanks, meters and other equipment and
structures whether permanent or temporary; and the site preparation,
construction, installation, maintenance and repair of Oil and Gas
pipelines and associated equipment and other equipment and activities
associated with the exploration for, production and transportation of Oil
and Gas other than Natural Gas Compressor Stations and Natural Gas
Processing Plants or facilities performing the equivalent functions that
operate as midstream facilities.
OPERATOR  Any person, partnership, company, corporation and its
subcontractors and agents who have an interest in real estate for the
purpose of exploring or drilling for, producing, or transporting Oil or
Gas.
PROTECTED STRUCTURE  Any structure capable of occupancy
including but not limited to a residence, business, school, religious
institution, swimming pool, or other public building located within
1,000 feet of the surface location of a well that may be impacted by
noise generated from drilling or hydraulic fracturing activity at a Well
Site. The term shall not include any structure owned by an oil and
gas lessor who has signed a lease with the Operator granting surface
rights to drill the subject well or whose owner or occupants have signed
a waiver relieving the Operator from implementation of the measures
established in subsection (c)(15) hereof for the owners' or occupants'
benefit.
TOWN  Town of McCandless, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
WELL SITE  A graded pad designed and constructed for the drilling
of one or more Oil and Gas wells.
(c) Express criteria. The Town of McCandless hereby declares that Oil and
Gas Development may be authorized as a Conditional Use in the C-2
("Neighborhood Shopping District") and I ("Institutional District") in
 1341.19 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.19
C:620
the Town, in accordance with the following express criteria and the
imposition of any other reasonable conditions and safeguards that
Council deems necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the Town:
(1) Operator shall comply with any generally applicable bonding and
permitting requirements for Town roads. Any existing Town roads,
damaged or worsened in condition by the Operator as determined
by the Town shall be repaired by the Operator as required by the
Town. Funds for such repairs shall be held either in escrow, bond or
letter of credit on an estimate determined by the Town after
inspection by the Town of existing conditions of roads, which may
be affected by the Operator. If no repairs are necessary, all funds
earmarked for existing road/drainage repairs shall be returned to
the Operator.
(2) Operator shall take the necessary safeguards to ensure that the
Town roads utilized remain free of dirt, mud and debris resulting
from Development activities and/or shall ensure such roads are
immediately swept or cleaned if dirt, mud and debris occur.
(3) Operator shall take all necessary precautions to ensure the safety
of persons in areas established for road crossing and/or adjacent to
roadways (for example, persons waiting for public or school
transportation). Where necessary and permitted, during periods of
anticipated heavy or frequent truck traffic associated with
Development, Operator will provide flagmen to ensure the safety of
children at or near schools or school bus stops and include
adequate signs and/or other warning measures for truck traffic and
vehicular traffic.
(4) Operator shall not clear brush or trees by way of burning, and shall
chip, grind or remove all tree stumps from properties it clears for
Development purposes.
(5) Prior to Development, Operator shall provide to the Town's Police
Department and Fire Company ("First Responders") and to the
Town Zoning Officer, a copy of its Preparedness, Prevention and
Contingency ("PPC") Plan. If the PPC requires the availability and/
or utilization of special equipment or supplies particular to the
hazards or conditions addressed in the PPC, the Town may require
that Operator reimburse the Town for the cost of procurement of
such special equipment or supplies.
(6) Before drilling, the Operator shall ascertain whether the Town's
First Responders have secured adequate information to deal with
any potential dangerous conditions that may result due to
Development activities. First Responders shall have on-site
orientation and be provided adequate awareness information.
Upon request from the Town, Operator will, prior to drilling of an
Oil and Gas well, make available with at least 30 days' notice, at its
 1341.19 CHARTER  1341.19
C:621
sole cost and expense, an appropriate site orientation for First
Responders. Such site orientation shall be made available at least
annually during the period when the Operator anticipates drilling
activities in the Town.
(7) Operator shall take the necessary safeguards to ensure appropriate
dust control measures are in place.
(8) Operator shall locate its temporary and permanent operations,
when possible, so as to minimize interference with Town residents'
enjoyment of their property and future Town development
activities.
(9) Recognizing that adequate and appropriate lighting is essential to
the safety of those involved in the Development of Oil and Gas, the
Operator shall direct site lighting downward and inward toward the
drillsite, wellhead, or other area being developed so as to minimize
glare on public roads and adjacent buildings within 300 feet of the
drillsite, wellhead or other area being developed.
(10) At least two weeks prior to drilling an Oil and Gas well or multiple
Oil and Gas wells at a location, the Operator shall provide the
following information to each resident within 1,000 feet of the
planned surface location of the well(s):
A. A copy of the well survey plat showing the location(s) of the
planned well(s),
B. A general description of the planned operations at the planned
well(s) and associated equipment used in the Development of
the well(s),
C. The contact information for the Operator, and
D. The availability of the Operator to hold a meeting with such
residents to present Operator's plans for the well(s) and to
allow for questions and answers. The meeting(s) shall be held
prior to Well Site construction.
(11) Upon the filing of an Application for Conditional Use under this
section, Operator shall provide the following:
A. A map showing the planned access route to the Well Sites on
public roads,
B. Information on the status of road bonding,
C. The Operator's Erosion & Sedimentation Plan,
D. The well survey plat showing the planned surface location(s) of
the well(s), and
E. The contact information for the Operator.
 1341.19 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.19
C:622
(12) At least 10 days prior to commencement of drilling, the Operator
shall provide to the Town Zoning Officer a copy of the drilling
permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection ("DEP"). Operator shall also provide a copy of the
recorded subdivision plan or land development plan, as
appropriate, indicating the size and location of the proposed
drilling area.
(13) In addition to the requirements in subsections (c)(1) - (12) above,
for any Oil and Gas well where the planned surface location of the
well will be within 1,000 feet of a Protected Structure, the Operator
shall:
A. Install temporary safety fencing, at least six feet in height,
around drilling and hydraulic fracturing equipment and install
permanent fall protection fencing meeting OSHA requirements
around any pits that contain or could contain water or other
liquids at depths greater than two feet.
B. Install warning signs providing notice of the potential dangers
at the Well Site.
C. Provide at least one security guard at all times (24 hours/day,
seven days/week) when a drilling rig or hydraulic fracturing
equipment is on the Well Site.
(14) Prior to the commencement of drilling activities, no construction
activities involving excavation of, alteration to, or repair work on
any access road or Well Site shall be performed during the hours of
10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
(15) The Town recognizes and acknowledges that Oil and Gas
Development is accompanied by inherent noise. However, the
Operator shall take the following steps to minimize, to the extent
practicable, the noise resulting from the Development:
A. Prior to drilling of an Oil and Gas well, the Operator shall
establish a continuous seventy-two-hour ambient noise level at
the nearest Protected Structure property line or 100 feet from
the nearest Protected Structure (as measured to the closest
exterior point of the building), whichever is closer to the
Protected Structure or, alternatively, and in lieu of establishing
the above seventy-two-hour ambient noise level, the Operator
may assume and use, for the purposes of compliance with this
section, a default ambient noise level of 55 dBA. The sound
level meter used in conducting any evaluation shall meet the
American National Standard Institute's standard for sound
meters or an instrument and the associated recording and
analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data.
B. The Operator shall provide documentation of any established,
seventy-two-hour evaluation relied upon to establish an
 1341.19 CHARTER  1341.19
C:623
ambient noise level greater than 55 dBA to the Town's Zoning
Officer within three business days of such a request from the
Zoning Officer.
C. The noise generated during construction, drilling and
hydraulic fracturing activities when measured at the nearest
Protected Structure property line or 100 feet from the nearest
Protected Structure (as measured to the closest exterior point
of the building), whichever is closer to the Protected Structure,
shall not exceed the average ambient noise level (as
determined by the seventy-two-hour evaluation) or default
level, whichever is higher:
1. During drilling activities by more than seven decibels
during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.;
2. During drilling activities by more than five decibels during
the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.; or
3. By more than 10 decibels during construction, hydraulic
fracturing operations.
The Operator shall inform the Town of which level
(average ambient noise level or default level) is being
used.
D. Adjustments to the foregoing noise limits may be permitted in
accordance with the following:
Permitted Increase
(dBA)
Duration of Increase
(minutes)*
5 15
10 5
15 1
20 1
Notes:
* Cumulative minutes during any one hour.
E. If a complaint is received by the Town from any person,
whether a resident or otherwise using the Protected Structure
as defined herein for any lawful purpose, regarding noise
generated during construction, drilling or hydraulic fracturing
activities, the Operator shall, within 24 hours of receipt of the
complaint from the Town, continuously monitor for a fortyeight-
hour period at a point which is the closer to the
complainant's building of:
 1341.19 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.19
C:624
 1341.20. Junkyards. [Ord. 1408, passed 12-14-2011]
1. The complainant's Protected Structure property line
nearest to the wellsite or equipment generating the noise,
or
2. One hundred feet from the Protected Structure.
F. If the Operator engages in any noise testing as required by this
section, it will provide preliminary data to the Town no later
than 10 business days following completion of the noise
testing. Once the monitoring is complete, Operator will meet
with Town representatives and affected residents to discuss
whether possible noise abatement measures are warranted, if
the permitted levels set forth herein were exceeded.
G. Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or compressor
used in connection with the drilling of any well or for use on
any production equipment or used in Development shall not be
discharged into the open air unless it is equipped with an
exhaust muffler or an exhaust box. The exhaust muffler or
exhaust box shall be constructed of non-combustible materials
designed and installed to suppress noise and disruptive
vibrations. Moreover, all such equipment with an exhaust
muffler or exhaust box shall be maintained in good operating
condition according to manufacturer's specifications.
H. All workover operations shall be restricted to the hours of 6:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m., except in the extent of an emergency, as
reasonably determined by the Operator. "Workover operations"
shall mean work performed in a well after its completion in an
effort to secure production where there has been none, restore
production that has ceased, or increase production.
I. The noise restrictions contained in this subsection (c)(15) shall
also apply to Natural Gas Compressor Stations and Natural
Gas Processing Plants.
(a) The Town Council may approve the operation of Junkyards as a
Conditional Use in C-3 zoned districts, subject to the following
conditions:
(1) If a Junkyard is to be located adjacent to a federal aid primary
highway, it shall comply with all regulations of the Federal Highway
Administration and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
and provide evidence of the same to the Town.
(2) Junkyards must have an office building meeting the setbacks within
the C-3 district requirements.
(3) Junk and Junked Vehicles within a junkyard must be stored in the
rear yard.
 1341.19 CHARTER  1341.20
C:625
(4) Junk and Junked Vehicles must be screened from the front by a
bufferyard G and an eight-foot fence. The fence shall be behind the
building and shall contain a gate or gates.
(5) Business hours may not exceed 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday
through Saturday.
(6) Junkyards shall be located no closer than 50 feet to an existing
public right-of-way and 100 feet to any side or rear property line.
(7) Junkyards must be enclosed by and maintain an eight-foot solid
wood or vinyl fence.
(8) A fifty-foot bufferyard H must be in the rear and side yards between
the outside of the fence and the property line.
(9) No junkyard shall be located on a slope exceeding 12% grade or so
situated on a bluff as not to be able to be screened.
(10)No Junkyard shall be used as a dumping area for refuse or as a
place for the burning or disposal of trash.
(11) All materials stored in Junkyards shall be maintained on an
impervious surface to minimize the risk of grass fire hazards.
(12) A cleared fire lane of no less than 25 feet shall be maintained
through or around the perimeter of any Junkyard to facilitate
access by firefighting equipment.
(13) All hazardous materials shall be stored in approved containers and
such storage and disposal shall comply with all federal and state
regulations.
(14) Junkyards shall not be located within 200 feet of any well, stream,
lake or pond.
(15) Junk shall not be stacked more than six feet high.
(16) All fuel and other liquids shall be drained from any vehicle prior to
storage or disposal and any fuel or waste oil shall be stored in
approved containers.
(17) Stormwater inlets must contain inlet protection to prevent oil and
gas from entering the stormwater system.
(18) Junkyards shall comply with all regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and the Environmental
Protection Agency.
(b) Junkyards as an Accessory Use to Gas Stations in C-2 and C-3 zoned
districts and as an Accessory Use to Motor Vehicle Sales and Service in
C-3 zoned districts, are permitted as Conditional Uses subject to the
conditions set forth in Section 1340.20(a).
 1341.20 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.21
C:626
 1341.21. Personal storage establishment/facility. [Added
2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 148554]
The Council may approve a personal storage establishment/facility as a
conditional use in a C-6 Zoning District if it conforms to the following
express criteria:
(a) Access. Ingress or egress shall be from an arterial or collector street. A
marginal access street shall be provided if its use will reduce the
number of curb cuts on the arterial or collector street as determined by
Town Council.
(b) Distance from face of building to face of building: 28 feet minimum for
units less than 15 feet in depth and 42 feet minimum for units 15 feet or
more in depth.
(c) Minimum distance from end of building to end of building: 20 feet.
(d) Maximum length of building: 200 feet.
(e) Maximum facility unit size: 14 feet wide, 40 feet deep, and one story (15
feet) in height. If units are placed back-to-back, the maximum width of
the building shall not exceed 40 feet.
(f) Minimum driveway width: 24 feet.
(g) All driveways shall be paved with an impervious surface.
(h) A landscaping plan shall be submitted with the site plan showing the
site's buffer area in accordance with  1337.02(e). The buffer shall exist
around the entire perimeter of the site.
(i) Six-foot-high fences shall be shall be placed around the perimeter of the
site inside of the buffer zone.
(j) All outside signs and lighting will be constructed and operated in a
manner that will not cause disruptive color alteration or illumination of
or otherwise interfere with neighboring properties. Lighting shall not
interfere with the surrounding area or distract traffic. The property
owner must address any lighting complaints.
(k) A fire hydrant shall be provided on site, with its location to be
determined by the Town.
(l) No storage may take place outside of the building.
(m) Personal storage units shall not have water or sanitary sewer service.
(n) No signs may be placed on the buildings themselves or their rooftops.
Freestanding signs denoting the site shall be the only type of sign
permitted.
54.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former  1341.21 as
 1341.99.
 1341.21 CHARTER  1341.21
C:627
 1341.22. Medical marijuana academic clinical research center.
[Added 2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 1485]
The Council may approve a medical marijuana academic clinical research
center as a conditional use in an I Zoning District if it conforms to the
following express criteria:
(o) The design of personal storage facilities shall be by a Pennsylvania
registered architect.
(p) Office space may be provided which does not exceed 5% of the net site
area.
(q) A caretaker may reside on a portion of the personal storage site.
(r) No hazardous materials or substances are permitted in personal
storage facilities beyond the allowances of the Building Code or Fire
Code. Both the landlord and the tenant of such personal storage facility
shall be responsible for the prevention of the storage of hazardous
materials or substances in personal storage facilities that would be
beyond the allowance of the Building Code or the Fire Code.
(a) A medical marijuana academic clinical research center shall provide
proof of registration with the Department of Health or proof that
registration has been sought and is pending approval and at all times
shall maintain a valid, accurate, and up-to-date registration with the
Department of Health. Should registration be revoked or denied at any
time, any Town approval shall immediately become void.
(b) A medical marijuana academic clinical research center shall at all times
operate in compliance with Act 16 of 2016, 35 P.S.  10231.101 et seq.,
as amended, and all Department of Health regulations pertaining to
such facilities.
(c) A medical marijuana academic clinical research center may only grow
medical marijuana in an indoor, enclosed, and secure building which
includes electronic locking systems, electronic surveillance and other
features required by the Department of Health.
(d) A medical marijuana academic clinical research center must be located
in a facility owned and used by an accredited medical school within this
commonwealth that operates or partners with an acute care hospital
licensed within this commonwealth.
(e) Parking requirements shall be determined pursuant to  1313.06(b) of
the Zoning Code as applied to unlisted uses.
 1341.21 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.23
C:628
 1341.23. Medical marijuana dispensary. [Added 2-25-2019 by Ord.
No. 1485]
The Council may approve a medical marijuana dispensary as a conditional
use in an R-C, C-3 or C-4 Zoning District if it conforms to the following
express criteria:
 1341.24. Medical marijuana grower/processor. [Added 2-25-2019
by Ord. No. 1485]
The Council may approve a medical marijuana grower/processor as a
conditional use in a C-6 Zoning District if it conforms to the following
express criteria:
(a) A medical marijuana dispensary shall provide proof of registration with
the Department of Health or proof that registration has been sought
and is pending approval and at all times shall maintain a valid,
accurate, and up-to-date registration with the Department of Health.
Should registration be revoked or denied at any time, any Town
approval shall immediately become void.
(b) A medical marijuana dispensary shall at all times operate in compliance
with Act 16 of 2016, 35 P.S.  10231.101 et seq., as amended, and all
Department of Health regulations pertaining to such facilities.
(c) A medical marijuana dispensary may only dispense medical marijuana
in an indoor, enclosed, secure facility within this commonwealth, as
approved by the Department of Health and with other features required
by the Department of Health. No exterior sales, no outdoor seating, and
no drive-through services shall be permitted.
(d) A medical marijuana dispensary may not operate on the same site as a
medical marijuana grower/processor except as permitted by the
Medical Marijuana Act of 2016 and its amendments.
(e) A medical marijuana dispensary may not be located within 1,000 feet of
the property line of a public, private or parochial school or day-care
center unless this requirement is waived by the Department of Health.
(f) A medical marijuana dispensary shall submit to the Town and
Department of Health its system to track the waste, including the name
and address of any disposal service.
(g) Parking requirements shall be determined pursuant to  1313.06(b) of
the Zoning Code as applied to unlisted uses.
(a) The medical marijuana grower/processor must comply with the
following criteria imposed on other commercial uses:
(1)  1341.21(a) (street access).
(2)  1341.21(f) (driveway width).
 1341.23 CHARTER  1341.24
C:629
 1341.99. Undefined or other land uses. [Ord. 1408, passed
12-14-2011]
(3)  1341.21(h) (landscape plan/buffer).
(4)  1341.21(i) (fencing).
(5)  1341.21(j) (lighting).
(6)  1341.21(l) (no outside storage).
(b) A medical marijuana grower/processor shall provide proof of
registration with the Department of Health or proof that registration
has been sought and is pending approval and at all times shall maintain
a valid, accurate, and up-to-date registration with the Department of
Health. Should registration be revoked or denied at any time, any Town
approval shall immediately become void.
(c) A medical marijuana grower/processor shall at all times operate in
compliance with Act 16 of 2016, 35 P.S.  10231.101 et seq., as
amended, and all Department of Health regulations pertaining to such
facilities.
(d) A medical marijuana grower/processor shall only grow, store, harvest or
process medical marijuana in an indoor, enclosed, secure facility, which
includes electronic locking systems, electronic surveillance and any
other features required by the Department of Health.
(e) A medical marijuana grower/processor shall only provide wholesale
products to medical marijuana dispensaries. Retail sales and dispensing
of medical marijuana and related products is prohibited at a medical
marijuana grower/processor.
(f) A medical marijuana grower/processor shall submit to the Town and the
Department of Health its system to track the plant waste resulting from
the growth of medical marijuana or other disposal, including the name
and address of any disposal service.
(g) Parking requirements shall be determined pursuant to  1313.06(b) of
the Zoning Code as applied to unlisted uses.
(a) Other types of land uses, not specifically identified, regulated or
recognized within the Planning and Zoning Code, may evolve or become
commonly acceptable as a reasoanble use within the Township. It is the
purpose of this section to provide for all reasonable and appropriate
land uses and to establish a mechanism for the inclusion of such land
uses within the Township.
(b) All undefined or other reasonable land uses that are not otherwise
regulated by the Planning and Zoning Code shall be considered a
Special Exception use in its zoning district as determined by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
 1341.24 MCCANDLESS CODE  1341.99
C:630
Article 1342
(RESERVED)
[Editor's Note: See Article 912 for current floodplain management
regulations.]
Article 1343
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES
 1343.01. Nonconforming structures. [Ord. 1052, passed
4-22-1991]
A nonconforming structure is one that met all zoning requirements when
it was built or when its building permit was issued and now fails to meet
the current zoning requirements. Any addition made to the structure after it
became a nonconforming structure must conform to the current Code. If the
aboveground portion of the structure is more than 50% destroyed or razed
as measured by assessed valuation of the property based on the current
deed and assessment registry of the County of Allegheny, it may be rebuilt
only if made to conform to this Code.
 1343.02. Nonconforming use. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord.
1052, passed 4-22-1991; Ord. 1339, passed 12-18-2006]
(a) A nonconforming use is one that met all zoning requirements when the
use was started but now fails to meet the current zoning requirements.
A nonconforming use shall not be resume after being abandoned.
Discontinuance for one year shall be considered abandonment. The
scope of the nonconforming use shall not be enlarged more than 25% of
its size at the time the use became nonconforming.
(b) A change from one conforming use to another conforming use, shall
require the submission of a site plan for approval. The Zoning
Administrator shall have authority to either approve the site plan or
refer it to the Planning Commission for approval, pursuant to Article
1345.
(c) Legal nonconforming uses shall not lose their nonconforming status
due to acquisition in part for a State or local highway project, whether
by amicable deed or condemnation, that affects the dimensional
nonconformity of the property. If a variance request is deemed required
for such a property, the impact of the acquisition for public purposes
shall be considered an unnecessary hardship to the property.
 1341.99 CHARTER  1343.03
C:631
 1343.03. Change to another nonconforming use. [Ord. 741,
passed 7-3-1978]
A change from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use may
be authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board when the Board considers the
change to meet the criteria stated in Section 1349.06.
 1343.04. Limited life of certain nonconforming uses. [Ord. 741,
passed 7-3-1978]
If a use becomes nonconforming as a result of a change in zoning
classification requested by the owner, such use shall end within two years
after the issuance of the first building permit issued for construction on the
rezoned property.
 1343.05. Listing of nonconforming structures and uses. [Ord.
1052, passed 4-22-1991]
The Zoning Officer shall register nonconforming structures, and uses,
together with the reason why the structure or use is nonconforming. A
zoning occupancy permit shall then be issued to the owner of such structure
or use.
Article 1344
TRANSPORTATION OVERLAY DISTRICT
 1344.01. Purpose. [Ord. 1073, passed 5-26-1992]
The purpose of the Transportation Overlay District (TD-1) is to coordinate
land use controls and transportation use controls to assure that
improvements constructed in special assessment districts are not
overburdened by development occurring within the special assessment
district and to provide security for any public financing used for such
improvements. The Transportation Overlay District does not permit or imply
permission for any use not permitted in the underlying district(s) or any
greater intensity of use not permitted in the underlying district(s).
 1344.02. Land use permits. [Ord. 1073, passed 5-26-1992]
Within the TD-1 District:
(a) No permit required by this Part 13, Planning and Zoning Code, by way
of example and not limitation, for use, development or occupancy;
(b) No PRD approval; or
(c) No subdivision or land development approval shall be issued without
strict conformance to the provisions of the TD-1 District Regulations.
 1343.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  1344.02
C:632
 1344.03. Traffic report requirements. [Ord. 1073, passed
5-26-1992]
Any application for a permit, PRD approval, Land Development approval or
Subdivision approval, shall be accompanied by a certified copy of a traffic
report ("report") prepared by a licensed, qualified traffic engineer which
addresses the traffic impact of the development or change in use and which
report contains no less than the following:
Should any provisions of the TD-1 District conflict with a provision
of the underlying district, that provision which restricts or limits
development or use the most shall apply unless expressly indicated to
the contrary herein.
(a) A trip generation analysis showing the average weekday vehicle trip
ends ("A WVTE") which shall be generated by the development,
expansion or change in use.
(b) Trip generation during the Saturday, evening weekday and morning
weekday peak hours.
(c) The traffic impact of the development, expansion or change in use upon
the streets within the TD-1 District in which the lot or property is
located, including, without limitation, an analysis of the affect on road
capacity and safety within the TD-1 District.
(d) An analysis showing that the development or change in use is
consistent with the facilities proposed in the Transportation
Development District multi-year program or the Business
Infrastructure Improvement District plan, or both, as appropriate
(hereinafter jointly and severally "TPAD Program") whether built or
planned, and the location of all rights of way required by the TPAD
Program on the lot or property which are to be dedicated as part of the
approval process.
(e) The assessment formula in the Transportation Partnership Act District
or Business Infrastructure Improvement District (hereinafter jointly or
severally "TPAD") and the traffic capacity assigned to the lot or
property.
(f) An analysis of the remedial traffic work, if any, required in addition to
that established under the TPAD Program to eliminate the adverse
impact of the development, expansion or change in use.
(g) An analysis showing that either:
(1) Sufficient traffic capacity is assigned to the lot by the Town
assessment formula to meet the demand created by the
development, expansion or change in use; or
(2) Sufficient traffic capacity is available either from treasury trips
available from the Town or trips from other lots or property within
 1344.02 CHARTER  1344.03
C:633
 1344.04. Town traffic engineer report review. [Ord. 1073, passed
5-26-1992]
Upon receipt of a completed report, the Zoning Officer shall refer the
report to the Town Manager for a determination of whether the report
requires review by the Town Traffic Engineer. Should the report require
such review, it shall be transmitted to the Town Traffic Engineer for review,
comment and written recommendations. The Zoning Officer shall take no
action on any permit application until the written recommendations of the
Town Traffic Engineer or the Town Manager's recommendation, if no Town
Traffic Engineer review is required. Failure of the Town Traffic Engineer or
Manager to respond within 30 days of referral shall be deemed acceptance
of the report; provided, however, such deemed acceptance shall not indicate
any acceptance of a proposal therein to modify the TPAD Program. Nothing
in this section shall restrict any other advisory board or commission from
reviewing any application for development and making recommendations
thereon to Council during the review period set forth in this section.
 1344.05. Waiver of report requirement. [Ord. 1073, passed
5-26-1992]
The Zoning Officer may waive in writing the report requirements only for
the following:
the TPAD which, after transfer by the owner of that other lot or
property, the Town determines shall not be required by any present
or future development or change in use on the transferring lot or
property and which as surplus can be transferred pursuant to the
terms of the Town Manager's regulations.
(h) All lot or property traffic impacts and the mitigation measures to abate
such impacts.
(i) A recommended program of Transportation System Management
("TSM") and/or Transportation Demand Management ("TDM") which
shall mitigate off-site impacts.
(j) Any other reasonable components required by the Town Manager's
regulations.
(k) Any other components required by any bond indenture or other
financial instrument used by the Town for financing TPAD
improvements.
The report shall use current ITE trip generation methodology in
analyzing traffic impact. The form, methodology and conclusions shall
be approved in writing by the Town.
(a) The construction of a single family home on a pre-existing lot.
(b) A two lot subdivision involving residential property or adjusting lot lines
where such adjustment is not for the purpose of development, provided
 1344.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  1344.05
C:634
 1344.06. On-site transportation improvement program. [Ord.
1073, passed 5-26-1992]
 1344.07. Limitation on development. [Ord. 1073, passed
5-26-1992]
Notwithstanding the fact that the development, expansion or change in
use would be permitted in the underlying zoning district, no development,
expansion, change in use within a TD-1 District shall be permitted which
would increase the trips generated by development, expansion or use on
however, nothing herein shall permit the construction of multifamily
housing without a report.
(c) An expansion of an existing use on the same lot by the lesser of:
(1) 5% provided that all previous expansions from the date of this
article to wit: May 26, 1992, shall be aggregated with the proposed
expansion; or
(2) Ten thousand square feet and provided further in either case that
the applicant demonstrates to the Zoning Officer that all rights of
way required by the TPAD Program on the lot have been dedicated
for public use.
(d) The applicant demonstrates through an analysis by a qualified traffic
engineer that the change in use to another use is substantially similar to
the existing use in both traffic trip generation characteristics and safety
characteristics; or is both less intense and safer, provided further that
the applicant demonstrates to the Zoning Officer that all rights of way
required by the TPAD Program on the lot have been dedicated for public
use.
(a) If not provided for in the TPAD Program, the applicant shall provide a
schedule for constructing all TPAD Program facilities located on the
property or lot as part of the development or change in use to the extent
the demand for the same is the result of such proposed development or
change in use. If the cost of such construction exceeds the cost
associated with normal development on the lot or property the Town
may defer the construction of a portion of the improvements to reduce
such cost, provided, however, all structures or improvements on the lot
or property shall be located in such a fashion as to not foreclose future
completion of the TPAD Program facilities.
(b) If the Town Traffic Engineer determines that the facilities required by
the TPAD Program cannot be immediately constructed, the Town may
accept, in lieu of dedication, a legally binding offer to dedicate the same
in the future in a form approved by the Town Solicitor. Such agreement
shall be in recordable form.
(c) Facilities required under this section shall be bonded in accordance
with the provisions of Article 1369.
 1344.05 CHARTER  1344.07
C:635
the lot or property by more than the trips presently assigned. The trips
assigned to a lot or property may be increased by an approved transfer,
see Section 1344.03(g), if done in strict conformance with the Manager's
regulations, see Section 1344.09. The trips assigned to the lot or property
shall be that capacity used by the Town in the TPAD District and shall be the
trips assigned to the lot or property under the TPAD assessment formula.
Where treasury trips are released from the Town's reserve or other trips are
transferred from one lot or property to another pursuant to the Manager's
Regulations, no permit required pursuant to this article shall be issued until
the Town Fiscal Officer notifies the Zoning Officer that all fees or charges
for such transfers or release are paid, provided, however, in the case of land
development or subdivision approval, such fees may be paid at the time
building permits are issued but payment of such fees shall be secured in
the same manner and at the same time financial security is posted pursuant
to Title Five Land Development and Subdivision Regulations as now or
hereafter amended or reenacted.
 1344.08. Required off-site improvements, TSM or TDM. [Ord.
1073, passed 5-26-1992]
(a) Where the TPAD Program indicates or the Town Traffic Engineer
determines that an off-site adverse impact shall be caused by the
development, expansion or change in use which is not to be remedied
by the TP AD Program facilities, the following shall occur:
(1) Where both the Town Traffic Engineer determines that the
appropriate TPAD Program should be amended to remedy all
adverse impacts, and the TP AD Program is legally and finally
amended by the Town, the applicant shall be deemed to have
complied with the terms of this section; or
(2) Where all adverse impacts are not remedied, the Town shall require
at the Town's sole discretion all, some or one of the following:
A. Contribute funds towards such off site traffic improvements as
are necessary to eliminate the adverse impact if such
procedures are now or hereafter established or if the applicant
proposes the same in lieu of or in partial substitution for
subsections (a)(2)B. and C. hereof; or
B. Reduce the intensity of development to eliminate the adverse
impact; or
C. Institute a program of Transportation System Management or
Transportation Demand Management in a form approved by
the Town after recommendations from the Town Traffic
Engineer and any regional Transportation Management
Agency as now or hereafter established. Such a program may
include without limitation ride sharing, mass transit subsidies,
signal interconnection and coordination and employee work
hour changes. Such a program shall be a covenant running
 1344.07 MCCANDLESS CODE  1344.08
C:636
 1344.09. Town Manager's regulations. [Ord. 1073, passed
5-26-1992]
The Town Manager is hereby authorized and directed to issue rules,
regulations and forms governing applications, trip transfers among
property or lot owners, treasury trip releases, fees, reports and
administration of TD-1 Districts. Any such rules, regulations and forms shall
not be effective until approved by resolution of Council. The initial Town
Manager's regulations are attached to original Ordinance 1073 and made a
part hereof as Exhibit A and are hereby approved.
 1344.10. Effect on Official Map. [Ord. 1073, passed 5-26-1992]
Where the TPAD Program requires an expansion of rights of way, new rights
of way or relocation of rights of way, the TPAD Program in that TD-1 District
shall be deemed an amendment to the Official Map or where no Official Map
has been adopted, the TPAD Program shall be deemed a partial Official Map.
A partial Official Map for the Town in the McKnight Road TD-1 District is
hereby adopted and is attached to original Ordinance 1073 and made a part
hereof as Exhibit B. No development or improvement of any type shall be
permitted in any rights of way shown in the TPAD Program.
 1344.11. Effect on Comprehensive Plan. [Ord. 1073, passed
5-26-1992]
The TPAD Program and land use assumptions used in the TPAD assessment
formula, if any, shall be deemed an amendment to the Town Comprehensive
Plan.
 1344.12. Dedication of rights-of-way. [Ord. 1073, passed
5-26-1992]
Except as provided in Section 1344.06(b), no permit, PRD approval, land
development approval or subdivision approval shall be given until any such
rights of way, the demand for which is created by the development on
the lot or property, are dedicated to the appropriate Town, County or
Commonwealth agency as determined by the Town.
 1344.13. Increased setback requirements. [Ord. 1073, passed
5-26-1992]
Where any TPAD Program facility is located on a lot or property, the right
of way or proposed right-of-way lines shall be treated as lot lines and
the setback requirements of the article shall be met; provided however,
the Town may reduce set back requirements upon the applicant's written
with the land and shall be recorded in the Allegheny County
Recorder's office in a form approved by the Town Solicitor.
(b) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to permit any development
which does not meet the requirements of Section 1344.07.
 1344.08 CHARTER  1344.13
C:637
waiver request, upon cause shown, as part of the applicant's land
development or subdivision approval.
 1344.14. Development credits. [Ord. 1073, passed 5-26-1992]
Where both (1) any rights of way within or abutting a lot seeking
development or use change approval have been dedicated at no cost by an
applicant or his predecessor in title pursuant to Section 1344.11 in excess
of that required by this Part 13 Planning and Zoning Code and (2) the TPAD
Program as part of the TPAD financing does not provide for the payment
or reimbursement to the land owner of right of way costs for that right of
way to be dedicated, the following development credits shall apply to the
property or lot:
 1344.15. Suspension and satisfaction of D Development District
transportation fees. [Ord. 1073, passed 5-26-1992]
The transportation fees levied in the D Development District Section
1314.06, shall be suspended in any TD-1 District and upon satisfying all of
the following:
Article 1346
(a) The set back requirements from the lot line abutting the dedicated right
of way shall be reduced one foot for every two feet of dedicated right of
way as measured from the center line of the right of way, provided that
such dedicated right of way exceeds 10 feet, provided however the
minimum set back shall not be less than 25% of the setback required in
the underlying district.
(b) In the case of existing development not involving the expansion of new
gross square footage by more than 5%, where the dedication of right of
way or the construction of TPAD Program facilities would remove
required landscaping, buffer areas, parking or the like such removal
shall be deemed an automatic reduction in the underlying district
requirements and the lot or property shall not be deemed
nonconforming on account thereof provided, however, the full parking
requirements for any additional gross square footage must be met.
None of these credits shall apply to any lot or property or portion
thereof where eminent domain proceedings were or are required or
instituted by the Town to acquire rights of way for any project in the
TP AD Program.
(a) The assignment of the full allotment of trips to the applicant's property;
(b) The payment of all special assessments; and
(c) Final discharge of any lien securing such assessments;
The applicant shall be deemed to have complied with, paid and
satisfied all D Development District Transportation levies.
 1344.13 MCCANDLESS CODE  1344.15
C:638
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY
DISTRICT
 1346.01. Purpose. [Ord. 1359, passed 4-28-2008]
In expansion of the general purposes contained in Section 1311.02 of this
Code, it is hereby declared to be the primary purpose of this Section to
establish reasonable standards to permit and regulate compact, pedestrianoriented
commercial and mixed-use developments combining residential,
retail, office and other commercial uses. Specific objectives of the district
are as follows.
 1346.02. Objectives. [Ord. 1359, passed 4-28-2008]
 1346.03. TND Overlay District compliance. [Ord. 1359, passed
4-28-2008]
The Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District ("TND") shall
be an overlay district as shown on the Town of McCandless Zoning Map.
(a) Allow pedestrian-oriented, mixed-use developments, combining
residential, retail, office and other commercial uses. This objective is
maximized where residences, shops, offices, workplaces and civic areas
such as a plaza or square are all within relatively close proximity to
each other.
(b) Promote an efficient compact land use pattern to promote easy access
between and among residences, stores and services by pedestrians, to
shorten trips, to lessen dependence on the automobile, and to promote
utilization of existing public facilities. This objective is maximized by
relatively compact development that has an identifiable center and a
discernible edge.
(c) Encourage developments which produce a desirable relationship
between individual buildings, the circulation systems, and adjacent
areas. This objective is maximized when new residential development is
sited in proximity to existing residential neighborhoods so as to provide
an appropriate transition between residential and commercial uses.
(d) Require sites to be designed in a way that creates a compact, clustered
development pattern with appropriate public spaces. This objective is
maximized by careful attention to the streetscape so that sidewalks,
street trees, street lights, civic art and building architectural elements
combine to foster a sense of place and community.
(e) While allowing for the safe and efficient flow of traffic to, from and
within new developments, minimize the number of access points along
arterial and collector streets, eliminate, where possible, individual curb
cuts to arterial and collector streets and prohibit access to McKnight
Road except at existing signalized intersections.
 1344.15 CHARTER  1346.03
C:639
New land developments within the TND may comply with either the
requirements of this Section or the underlying zoning district.
 1346.04. Uses. [Ord. 1359, passed 4-28-2008; Ord. 1428, passed
3-25-2013]
The uses permitted in the TND shall be those uses allowed in the DDevelopment
District under Article 1326 provided, however, that:
(a) Gross square footage of commercial/entertainment uses (exclusive of
theaters and cinemas) shall not exceed 50% of the total square footage
shown in the Master Development Plan.
(b) Restaurants with drive through windows (unless otherwise permitted
under Section 1346.04(e), below), gasoline stations, convenience stores
and automobile service facilities shall not be permitted in the TND
Overlay District.
(c) Home occupations are permitted provided that parking for home
occupations must be part of the shared parking available for nonresidential
uses.
(d) Any new development in the TND may contain structures or encompass
lots containing more than one principal use.
(e) A restaurant having an exterior building footprint equal to or greater
than 4,400 square feet, that provides interior seating for at least 135
persons and that as originally constructed contains a private meeting
room accommodating at least 10 persons and a customer lounge area of
a minimum of 400 square feet shall be permitted to have a single drive
through window (which may include an outdoor menu/speaker board
system approved by the Town) subject to the following requirements:
(1) The drive through lane for the restaurant shall provide a sufficient
number of queuing spaces so that the queuing of vehicles does not
extend into a parking field drive lane or interfere with pedestrian
traffic.
(2) The queuing spaces shall be located so as to not interfere with the
use of any parking spaces or the free flow of traffic on the site and
shall be adequately marked and indicated with directional signs.
(3) The entrances and exits for vehicles using the drive through
window shall be designed to minimize the disruption of pedestrian
patterns in the TND Overlay District.
(4) A "by-pass" lane shall be included and shall parallel the drivethrough
lane.
(5) The restaurant shall be adjacent to a minor arterial or arterial road
or highway in accordance with the Town's road classification
system listed in the Town of McCandless Comprehensive Plan,
Chapter VIII, Section 800, or as subsequently amended.
 1346.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  1346.04
C:640
 1346.05. Conditional use express criteria. [Ord. 1359, passed
4-28-2008]
(6) No more than one restaurant with a drive through window is
permitted in a TND Overlay District.
(a) All applications for development in the TND shall include a Master
Development Plan. The conditional use shall not be deemed to meet the
purpose and objectives of this Article unless open space, civic art, and
shared parking facilities or parking structures are included in the
Master Development Plan.
(b) Within the TND, unless otherwise specified in this Article, minimum lot
sizes, yard and building setbacks, impervious coverage limits and
building sizes shall be established by the Master Development Plan and
shall be subject to the Design Principles included as Appendix A to this
Article.
(c) The Master Development Plan shall include proposed covenants,
conditions and restrictions (the "Covenants") that would serve to
enforce design standards and the terms of the Master Development
Plan. The covenants must include a provision for private maintenance
of roads, sidewalks and open space, including the public open space.
The covenants are to be in force for perpetuity. The covenants are
subject to review and approval by Town Council in a form approved by
the Town Attorney.
(d) The Master Development Plan shall include a discussion of how
development of contiguous undeveloped parcels might be coordinated
with the Master Development Plan.
(e) As long as building and zoning permits for all of the total square footage
of residential units along Cumberland Road within the Master
Development Plan have been issued and construction has begun on at
least 33% or a minimum 10 of such units, whichever is greater, then
building and zoning permits for nonresidential structures elsewhere in
the TND may be issued.
Occupancy permits for residential units along Cumberland Road will
only be issued if all landscaping or bufferyards associated with these
units is complete. A cash escrow satisfactory to the Town Engineer,
Town Attorney and Town Manager shall be deposited with the Town to
guarantee timely completion of landscaping and/or bufferyards.
(f) Vehicular access along Cumberland Road serving the TND shall be
limited as follows:
(1) One access allowing right turn in-right turn out for all uses within
the TND.
(2) One access allowing right turn in-right turn out for the residential
dwelling units abutting the southern side of Cumberland Road,
 1346.04 CHARTER  1346.05
C:641
 1346.06. Basic development standards. [Ord. 1359, passed
4-28-2008]
All development to be approved under the TND regulations and each Master
Development Plan shall comply with the following standards:
which limits access to the other uses in the TND, through gate or
card access or other means as approved by the Town Council.
(g) The Town Council reserves the right to set any additional conditions it
deems necessary.
(a) Minimum master development plan area: 30 acres.
(b) Maximum permitted individual building footprint:
(1) Any building containing more than one principal use: 80,000
square feet;
(2) One building within the Master Development Plan may be used for
a specialty food store: 65,000 square feet;
(3) Fitness: 50,000 square feet;
(4) Entertainment: 50,000 square feet;
(5) Hotel: 25,000 square feet;
(6) Special residential: 25,000 square feet;
(7) All other single use buildings are limited to 15,000 square feet.
(8) Buildings shall be arranged within blocks as provided for in the
Design Principles, but in no event shall the total perimeter of any
block exceed 2,000 lineal feet.
(c) Maximum permitted building height. Building height shall not exceed
85 feet as measured in accordance with the current edition of the
International Building Code (IBC); architectural or mechanical
appurtenances such as steeples or mechanical penthouses may extend
no more than 20 feet above a building's highest habitable, occupiable or
storage space and shall not be counted in the building height
calculations.
(1) Parking structures shall be limited to 35 feet in height.
(d) Maximum permitted impervious surface ratio. The maximum permitted
impervious surface rate ("ISR") shall be 0.8; for purposes of this Article
only, ISR shall be determined by dividing the total area of all impervious
surfaces proposed on the Master Development Plan by the total, gross
area of all land included within the Master Development Plan.
(e) Residential buffering. Lots along Cumberland Road existing at the time
of adoption of this Article must be developed residentially unless the lot
 1346.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  1346.06
C:642
 1346.07. Loading and service areas. [Ord. 1359, passed
4-28-2008]
also abuts and has frontage along McKnight Road, in which case such a
lot may be used for any use allowed under Section 1346.03.
The residential structures along Cumberland Road are limited to 60
feet in total height.
The residential structures along Cumberland Road are required to have
peaked roof forms.
The residential structures along Cumberland Road are required to front
on Cumberland Road. A forty-five-foot front yard is required. For every
foot that the height of residential buildings is increased over 45 feet, an
additional corresponding per foot setback is required.
A thirty-foot bufferyard "D" is required to be planted and maintained
within the forty-five-foot front yard. When the height of residential
buildings is increased over 35 feet, the plant materials of a twenty-fivefoot
bufferyard "D" are required to be spread throughout the buffer
area.
Parking and driveways are prohibited in any front yard of residential
structures facing Cumberland Road. Direct vehicular access is
prohibited from a residential structure to Cumberland Road.
(f) With the exception of the residential buffer outlined in subsection (e)
hereof, the buffer zone of the perimeter of the TND shall meet the
bufferyard type and spacing requirements of the D-Development
District and the plant material specifications of Parking Lot Perimeter
Screening contained in subsection (b)(7)B.3. of Appendix A, "Design
Principles".
(g) Parking space and drive aisle width shall meet the requirements of
Article 1313 of the Town Zoning Code.
(h) A minimum of 20% gross square footage of the total acreage within the
Master Development Plan shall be open space. Open space may be
wetlands, steep slopes, stormwater detention or retention areas, Town
Square, parks, gardens, fountains or landscaped buffer zones around
the perimeter of the property. Any impervious surface other than a
Town Square shall not be considered open space. At least 50% of the
total open space must be designed for public use. Provisions for
permanent maintenance of the open space areas must be submitted as
part of the conditional use approval.
(a) Loading, trash collection and similar facilities shall be incorporated into
the overall design of the building and landscaping so that the visual and
acoustic impacts of these functions are either fully contained within the
building or otherwise screened so as to be out of the direct view from
adjacent properties and public streets. Screened areas shall be put in
 1346.06 CHARTER  1346.07
C:643
 1346.08. Other development regulations. [Ord. 1359, passed
4-28-2008]
the rear of the property unless Council determines that trash facilities
located in the side of a property will have less impact on abutting
properties than facilities to the rear.
(b) Loading and unloading areas shall be situated so as to not conflict with
pedestrian movement.
(c) No exterior storage of materials or equipment is permitted in the TND.
(a) Sewer and water facilities. All new development in the TND shall be
served by public sewer and public water facilities.
(b) Utilities. All utility lines (electrical, telephone, etc.) serving new
development in the TND shall be placed underground.
(c) Signs and exterior lighting standards. All signs within the TND shall be
subject to the requirements set forth in Section 1313.11(c) except that
the types of permitted signs shall be governed by the classification of
street to which the sign is oriented as shown in the table included in the
Design Principles attached as Appendix "A" to this Article. Exterior
lighting within the TND shall be subject to the requirements set forth in
Section 1314.07(d).
(d) Environmentally sensitive areas. In lieu of compliance with the
requirements of Article 1314, the Master Development Plan shall
identify resource protection land as defined in Article 1314 and
wetlands (hereinafter environmentally sensitive areas) and establish
that the proposed development meets the minimum requirements of
Article 1371 ("Design Standards"), Article 913 ("Stormwater
Management") and Article 1705 ("Grading, Excavation and Fills");
provided, however, that Council may require that special care be taken
to preserve steep slopes, woodlands, wetlands or similar
environmentally sensitive areas in the TND. This may be substituted by
dedicating a conservation easement equal in size to the identified and
disturbed environmentally sensitive areas within the TND or DDevelopment
zoning district. If the conservation easement is
contiguous to an existing conservation easement not within the DDevelopment
District, the replacement area of environmentally
sensitive areas must be done at 1.5:1 ratio.
(e) Stand-alone accessory structures are not permitted in the TND. Parking
facilities are considered a principal use.
(f) Phases and other property. Unless otherwise noted in this Article,
development may occur in phases but shall be in accordance with the
Master Development Plan which shall include a proposed schedule for
development. Property not originally included within the area of a
Master Development Plan may be added to it so long as:
 1346.07 MCCANDLESS CODE  1346.08
C:644
Article 1347
ZONING MAP
 1347.01. Zoning Map original. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
There shall be a Zoning Map indicating the zoning classification applicable
to each property. The Map shall be revised annually to agree with zoning
and other changes authorized by Council. The President of Council and the
Town Secretary shall sign the Map and shall initial the annual revision. If
the zoning of any property as indicated on the Map is found not to conform
with the zoning stated in the ordinance that last rezoned the property, the
zoning stated in the ordinance controls and the Map shall be promptly
revised to conform.
 1347.02. Official copy of Zoning Map. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
The Town Manager shall maintain an official copy of the Zoning Map in the
Town Hall. This copy shall be marked to indicate all authorized changes
within 30 days of authorization. Such changes include rezoning, subdivision
and the taking over of roads. A new copy shall be produced as soon as the
original is updated each year.
 1347.03. Log of Map changes. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
A separate record shall be kept of all ordinances authorizing changes in the
Zoning Map. This log shall include a copy of each ordinance marked to show
when the change was made on the official copy of the Zoning Map and shall
be signed by the Zoning Officer to indicate that he has verified that each
change has been properly made.
 1347.04. District boundaries. [Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994]
(1) It is contiguous to the area shown on the Master Development Plan,
(2) The owner agrees in writing to be bound by and submits the land by
recorded agreement to the Covenants,
(3) The owner agrees in writing to be bound by the manual of written
and graphic design guidelines included within the Master
Development Plan, and
(4) The owner submits a land development plan consistent with the
original Master Development Plan.
(g) Manual of Written and Graphic Design Guidelines. The Master
Development Plan for new development in the TND shall include a
specific and detailed manual of written and graphic design guidelines
as per Section 708-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
The manual shall be consistent with the "Design Principles" set forth in
Appendix "A" to this Article.
 1346.08 CHARTER  1347.04
C:645
Article 1349
ZONING HEARING BOARD
 1349.01. Types of hearings. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991]
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hold hearings on appeals from rulings of
the Zoning Officer, challenges to the validity of the Zoning Code or Zoning
Map, and requests for variances, special exceptions or changes to other
nonconforming uses. The hearing shall be held within 60 days of receipt of
written request for a hearing, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to
an extension of time. Any prescribed fees shall be paid prior to the hearing.
 1349.02. Appeals from the Zoning Officer. [Ord. 741, passed
7-3-1978]
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
that the Zoning Officer has failed to follow prescribed procedures or has
misinterpreted or misapplied any provision of a valid code or map.
 1349.03. Validity challenges. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear challenges to the validity of the
Zoning Code or Zoning Map except challenges based on an alleged defect in
the process of enactment or adoption. The Board shall decide all contested
questions and shall make findings on all relevant issues of fact which shall
become part of the record on appeal to the Court of Common Pleas.
 1349.04. Variances. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide requests for variances
where it is alleged that the provisions of the Zoning Code inflict
unnecessary hardship upon the applicant.
(a) Where uncertainty exists with respect to district boundaries shown on
the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Normally, district boundaries follow street and lot lines. Where the
designation on the Zoning Map indicates a boundary within 25 feet
of a lot or street line, such lot or street line shall be construed as
the district boundary.
(2) Where an apparent boundary is within 25 feet of two lot lines, the
district boundary shall be construed to be the nearest lot line.
(3) Where an apparent boundary line is not within 25 feet of a lot line,
the Zoning Map shall be scaled to determine the location of the
boundary.
(4) Where practical, it is desirable for the zoning district boundaries to
proceed in straight lines, rather than curved or stepped.
 1347.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  1349.04
C:646
The Board may grant a variance provided the following findings are made
where relevant in a given case:
 1349.05. Special exceptions. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord.
1215, passed 5-24-1999]
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide requests for special
exceptions for:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or
exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such
conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by
the provisions of the Zoning Code in the neighborhood or district in
which the property is located;
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no
possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with
the provisions of the Zoning Code and that the authorization of a
variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property;
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the applicant;
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of
the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public
welfare; and
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance
that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible
of the regulation in issue.
In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this Code.
(a) Gas station as a principal use in C-3 Commercial District;
(b) Playground and/or neighborhood park as a principal use in an R-1 or
R-2 Residential District;
(c) Convenience business in apartment buildings; and
(d) Higher fences (up to six feet) on lot lines adjacent to a swimming pool
or to an unsightly commercial facility when the Board deems such a
fence to be of benefit to all parties involved.
(e) Sexually oriented business in the D-Development District.
 1349.04 CHARTER  1349.05
C:647
 1349.06. Change to another nonconforming use. [Ord. 741,
passed 7-3-1978]
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide requests for a change
from an existing nonconforming use to another nonconforming use. The
proposed use may not detract from the character of the neighborhood to a
greater extent than the existing use. The Board shall evaluate any change
in hours of operation, extent of activity, traffic generated, noise and any
other appropriate matters in deciding if the proposed use is or is not more
nonconforming than the existing use. In permitting such a change, the
Board may require appropriate conditions and safeguards.
 1349.07. Notice of hearing. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991]
Time and place of the hearing and nature of the matter to be considered
at a hearing shall be given to the public, the applicant, the Zoning Officer
and any person who has made a timely request for same. The notice shall
be published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Town with the first advertisement not more
than 30 days and the second advertisement not less than seven days prior
to the hearing. Notice shall be posted on the Town bulletin board and
conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one week prior to
the hearing.
 1349.08. Parties to the hearing. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
The parties to the hearing shall be the Town, any person affected by the
application who has made timely appearance of record before the Board
and any other person, including civic or community organization permitted
to appear by the Board. The parties shall have the right to be represented
by counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present
evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
 1349.09. Evidence. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
The Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board shall have the
power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of
witnesses and the productions of relevant documents and papers including
witnesses and documents requested by the parties. Formal rules of evidence
shall not apply but irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence
may be excluded.
The decision shall be based on the standards and criteria stated in
this Code. In granting a special exception, the Board may attach such
reasonable conditions as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and this
Zoning Code.
 1349.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  1349.10
C:648
 1349.10. Communications. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
The Zoning Hearing Board shall not communicate directly or indirectly with
any party or his representative in connection with any issue involved except
upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take
notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda or other materials
unless all parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the materials, and
shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of
hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are given an
opportunity to be present.
 1349.11. Hearing record. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991]
The Zoning Hearing Board shall keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared equally
by the applicant and the Board. The cost of the original transcript shall
be paid by the Board if the transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing
officer, or shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In
other cases the party requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost
thereof. Copies of the graphic or written material received in evidence shall
be made available to any party at cost.
 1349.12. Decision. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991]
 1349.13. Appeals to court. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
Any decision or findings of the Zoning Hearing Board may be appealed
to court by any party to the hearing within 30 days from the date of the
decision or findings.
 1349.14. Special exceptions: conditions governing application
procedure. [Ord. 1216, passed 5-24-1999]
(a) A copy of the final decision and/or findings shall be mailed to the
applicant not later than the day following its date. The Zoning Hearing
Board shall provide a brief notice of the decision or findings to all other
persons who have filed a written request for same. Should more than 60
days elapse between receipt of a written request for a hearing and the
start of the hearing, or more than 45 days elapse between the end of the
last hearing and a written decision, a decision shall be deemed to have
been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed
in writing to an extension of time.
(b) When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of
the failure of the Board to meet or render a decision, the Board shall
give public notice of such decision within 10 days after the last day that
the Board could have met.
(a) The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide requests for special
exceptions as stated in this ordinance. A Special Exception shall not be
granted by the Zoning Hearing Board unless and until:
 1349.10 CHARTER  1349.14
C:649
Article 1351
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
 1351.01. Zoning Officer. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991]
 1351.02. (Reserved)55
(1) A written application for a special exception is submitted stating
the grounds on which it is requested.
A. Written application must be made on a form provided by the
Zoning Officer.
B. A site plan showing conformance with all Special Exception
criteria regarding the site (area, parking, lighting, etc.).
(2) The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct a public hearing in
accordance with the procedures specified in Article 1349.
(3) The Zoning Hearing Board, before it grants a Special Exception,
shall make findings of fact and state its reasons for granting the
Special Exception, said findings of fact to include:
A. That the use will not endanger the public health or safety if
located where proposed and developed and that the use will
not allow conditions which will tend to generate nuisance
conditions including but not limited to noise, dust, glare,
vibration;
B. That the use meets all applicable express standards and
criteria as specified in this ordinance, as well as the
specifications set forth in the district where it is proposed to be
located; and
C. That the location and the character of the use, if developed
according to the plan as submitted and approved, will be in
harmony with the area in which it is to be located and in
general conformity with the Comprehensive Plan for the Town
of McCandless.
(b) To insure the establishment of the above conditions, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall have the authority to require and approve specific
plans and may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it
deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(a) The Zoning Officer shall administer and enforce this Zoning Code and
make any necessary interpretations of the Zoning ivlap.
(b) The Zoning Officer shall maintain adequate records of all zoning
matters brought to the attention of the Town Administration, Council,
Planning Commission or Zoning Hearing Board.
 1349.14 MCCANDLESS CODE  1351.03
C:650
 1351.03. (Reserved)56
 1351.04. Rezoning of property. [Ord. 827, passed 10-26-1981;
Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994]
(a) Rezoning procedure. A request to rezone any property is a request to
change the Zoning Map and to amend the Zoning Code. A rezoning
request can be granted only by enactment of a Class A ordinance. Each
request shall be handled as follows:
(1) Review by the Zoning Officer for adequacy of information
furnished;
(2) Review and recommendation by the Planning Commission;
(3) A public hearing;
(4) Review by the Zoning Committee of Council;
(5) Action by Council (within 60 days but not sooner than six days after
the hearing).
(b) Required information. Any request to rezone property shall include a
location plan, a plot plan and the submission of a concept plan in
conjunction with the rezoning request. The concept plan shall include
the development of all land contained within the rezoning request.
For the purpose of establishing concept plan criteria, the concept plan
shall contain the appropriate information specifically stated under
preliminary plat submission under the Land Development Code with
the exception of drainage, erosion and sedimentation control, signage,
illumination, sidewalks and plans of structures, road profiles, cross
sections and construction details of proposed street and drainage
structures and other improvements that may be required. The concept
plan shall also include a preliminary soils study to establish the general
suitability of the site for the proposed development. The request shall
also provide:
(1) Current zoning and name of property owner;
(2) Current zoning and name and address of owners of all abutting
properties (including those directly across the street);
(3) Legal description of the property (courses and distances);
(4) Existing improvements on the property;
(5) Type and location of existing easements;
55.Editor's Note: Former  1351.02, Building permits, was repealed 4-22-1991 by Ord. No.
1052.
56.Editor's Note: Former  1351.03, Occupancy permit, was repealed 8-22-1994 by Ord. No.
1127.
 1351.03 CHARTER  1351.04
C:651
 1351.05. Fees. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978; Ord. 1073, passed
5-26-1992]
(6) Location of all buildings within 100 feet of the property;
(7) Any other information specifically requested by the Town to aid the
Town in reviewing the rezoning request.
(c) (Reserved)57
(d) Time constraints. Upon approval of the rezoning, the applicant shall
have a maximum of three months to submit a preliminary plat and/or
preliminary site plan whichever is appropriate by ordinance.
Preliminary plat criteria shall adhere to that as stated in the Land
Development Code. The preliminary plat and/or preliminary site plan
shall include all the land and the development of same as was proposed
in the rezoning request, and shall adhere to and be consistent with the
provisions of the concept plan.
Upon approval of the preliminary plat and/or preliminary site plan, the
applicant shall have one year to submit a final plat and/or site plan. The
final plat and/or site plan shall include all land and the development of
same as was proposed in the rezoning request.
If the preliminary plat and/or site plan has not been submitted within
three months of the rezoning approval, or if the final plat and/or site
plan has not been submitted within one year after the approval of
the preliminary plat and/or site plan, all approvals shall be deemed to
have expired and the zoning shall revert back to the previous zoning
classification.
Council shall have the authority to extend any of these time periods.
(a) Fees. The Building Inspector shall collect fees for building permits and
occupancy permits. The Zoning Officer shall collect fees for requests for
rezoning, site plan approvals and all matters that come before the
Zoning Hearing Board. All fees shall be collected in advance and shall
conform to the schedule established from time to time by Council.
(b) Review costs. All costs for the review of the report, TPAD Program
modifications shall be paid for by an applicant prior to the receipt of any
permit or approval. The Town Manager's regulations shall establish
how these fees shall be administered, charged and collected. All other
fees and costs shall be those established by the underlying district
requirements. Any fee disputes shall be resolved in accordance with the
provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S.  10101 et seq.
as now or hereafter amended.
57.Editor's Note: This subsection was repealed 4-22-1991 by Ord. No. 1052.
 1351.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  1351.06
C:652
 1351.06. Severability. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
Should any part of this Zoning Code be declared invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of any other part nor the Code as a whole.
 1351.07. Repeal. [Ord. 741, passed 7-3-1978]
Former Articles 1311 to 1331 inclusive and Article 1709 of the Codified
Ordinances are hereby repealed.
 1351.99. Enforcement remedies. [Ord. 1390, passed 9-27-2010]
Any person, partnership, corporation who or which performs work at their
direction who or which has violated or permitted the violation of this
Zoning Code shall, upon being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Town before, pay a judgment of not more
than $500, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees
incurred by the Town as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or
be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of the
violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, the Town may enforce the judgment pursuant
to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of
the Town are hereby authorized to issue a cease and desist notice and/or to
seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
No Bond will be required if injunctive relief is sought by the Town. Any of
the previously mentioned who or which violates this section shall also be
responsible for the Town's attorney's fees, engineering fees, expert fees and
court costs associated with enforcement.
Article 1361
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
 1361.01. Short title. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
The provisions of this Title Five of the Planning and Zoning Code shall be
known and may be cited as the "Town of McCandless Land Development
and Subdivision Regulations."
 1361.02. Purposes. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975; Ord. 1027,
passed 2-26-1990]
These Land Development and Subdivision Regulations are adopted for the
following purposes:
(a) To assure sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation and
to provide for the harmonious development of the Town;
(b) To assure coordination of existing streets and highways with proposed
streets or other features of the Master Plan of the Town of McCandless;
 1351.06 CHARTER  1361.02
C:653
 1361.03. Compliance. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land
shall be made; no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other
improvements in connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed,
opened or dedicated for public use or travel, or for the common use of
occupants of buildings abutting thereon, except after approval of plats in
accordance with the provisions of these Land Development and Subdivision
Regulations.
 1361.04. Exception. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
Nothing in these Land Development and Subdivision Regulations shall be
deemed to require the approval of the Town Council for the division of land
for agricultural purposes in parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any
new street or easement of access.
 1361.05. Simple subdivision. [Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994]
 1361.06. Modifications. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991; Ord. 1127,
passed 8-22-1994]
(c) To assure adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light and air and
for proper distribution of population, thereby creating conditions
favorable to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens;
(d) To secure equitable treatment of all land development and subdivision
plans by establishing definitions, design standards, plan requirements,
procedures for plan processing, improvements, construction, and
requirements and conditions of acceptance of public improvements by
the Town.
(e) In order to insure adequate recreation areas to serve the future
residents of the Town, all developers submitting residential subdivision
or land development plans after the effective date of this ordinance
shall provide for a suitable and adequate recreation area to serve the
needs of the future occupants of the subdivision or development, or
shall provide funds for the acquisition, development, or improvement of
park areas within the Town.
(a) Council may approve a division of one lot into two lots without requiring
all of the information requested in Article 1367, whenever the plat or
plan shows that both lots are located on a public road, that each lot
conforms to the dimensional requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and
that both lots can be adequately serviced by all necessary public
utilities. The provisions of Article 1375, Stormwater Management, shall
be met prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(a) Council may grant a waiver or modification to the minimum standards
of this Zoning Ordinance if the literal enforcement is shown to the
 1361.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  1361.06
C:654
 1361.07. Interpretation. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991]
In the interpretation and application of these Land Development and
Subdivision Regulations, the provisions shall be held to be minimum
requirements, adopted for the promotion of health, safety, morals and
general welfare.
 1361.08. Amendment procedure. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991;
Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994]
 1361.09. Severability. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
Should any section or provision of these regulations be declared by a court
of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the regulations as a whole, or any part thereof
other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
 1361.10. (Reserved)58
satisfaction of Council to be unreasonable, to cause undue hardship
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question or
when an alternative standard can be demonstrated to provide equal or
better results, and provided that such modification will not be contrary
to the public interest and the purpose and intent of this Zoning
Ordinance.
(b) All requests for modification shall be in writing and shall accompany
and be a part of the application for development. The request shall state
in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based, the provision or provisions of the ordinance
involved and the minimum modification necessary. The request for
modification may be referred to the Planning Commission for advisory
comments. A written record shall be kept of all action on all requests for
modification.
(a) Council may from time to time on its own motion, or on petition, or on
recommendation of the Planning Commission, amend, supplement or
repeal the regulations and provisions of these Land Development and
Subdivision Regulations. Every such proposed amendment or change,
whether initiated by the members of Council or by petition, shall be
referred to the Planning Commission and County Planning Commission
at least 30 days prior to the hearing for review and a report thereon as
required by law, before Council votes on the proposed amendment.
(b) Amendments to the sudivision and land development ordinance shall
become effective only after a public hearing held pursuant to public
notice.
58.Editor's Note: Former  1361.10, Floodplain provisions, was repealed by implication
8-24-1981 by Ord. No. 823, See Article 1342.
 1361.06 CHARTER  1361.99
C:655
 1361.99. Enforcement remedies. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991]
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of these land development and subdivision regulations shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Town, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all
court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the municipality
as a result thereof. In addition to other remedies, the Town may institute
and maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or
abate violations, to prevent unlawful occupancy of a building, structure or
premises. The description of metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer
or other documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from other remedies
at law.
Article 1363
DEFINITIONS
 1363.01. Interpretation. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
As used in these Land Development and Subdivision Regulations, words in
the singular include the plural, and those in the plural include the singular;
the word "may" is permissive; the words "shall" and "will" are mandatory.
 1363.02. Block. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
BLOCK  An area bounded by existing or proposed streets.
 1363.03. (Reserved)59
 1363.04. (Reserved)60
 1363.05. Cartway. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
CARTWAY  The portion of a street intended for vehicular use.
 1363.06. Clear sight triangle. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE  An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines or sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of street center lines.
 1363.07. Completion guarantee. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
COMPLETION GUARANTEE  A deposit of cash, bond, certified check or
negotiable securities and an agreement to the effect that the developer will
install required improvements.
59.Editor's Note: Former  1363.03, Building, was repealed 8-22-1994 by Ord. No. 1127.
60.Editor's Note: Former  1363.04, Building or setback line, was repealed 8-22-1994 by Ord.
No. 1127.
 1361.99 MCCANDLESS CODE  1363.08
C:656
 1363.08. County. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
COUNTY  Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
 1363.09. Cul-de-sac. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
CUL-DE-SAC  A dead-end street terminating in a vehicular turn-around.
 1363.10. Developer. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
DEVELOPER  Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with the
permission permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made
a subdivision of land or a land development.
 1363.11. Drainage easements. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
DRAINAGE EASEMENTS  The lands required for the installation of storm
water sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream or
watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water
therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
 1363.12. Dwelling, multifamily. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING  a single structure intended for occupancy
by three or more families including townhouses, garden apartments, and
highrise apartments.
 1363.13. Dwelling, single family. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING  A separate, detached building designed for,
or occupied, exclusively as a residence of one family.
 1363.14. Dwelling unit. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
DWELLING UNIT  One or more living or sleeping rooms with cooking and
sanitary facilities for one person or one family.
 1363.15. Easement. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
EASEMENT  A grant by the owner of land for the use by others including
the public.
 1363.16. Environmental critical areas. [Ord. 668, passed
1-27-1975]
ENVIRONMENTAL CRITICAL AREAS  Lands that include streams, their
floodplains, steep areas and slopes in excess of 25%, that shall be restricted
to development for their resource values or hazardous nature.
 1363.17. Improvements, public. [Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994]
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT  Any improvement, facility or service, together
with customary improvements and appurtenances thereto, necessary to
provide for public needs, including any or all of the following: grading,
 1363.08 CHARTER  1363.17
C:657
vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, flood control improvements,
water supplies and distribution facilities, sanitary sewage disposal and
treatment, public paving, curbs, curb returns, gutters, sidewalks, drive
entrances within a street right of way, utility and energy services, parking
areas, fire hydrants, storm sewer lines and structures, drainage channels
and structures, guide rails, traffic signals and devices, retaining walls,
recreation facilities, sodding, landscaping and monuments, whether on-site
or off-site.
 1363.18. Land development. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991]
LAND DEVELOPMENT  The improvement of one lot or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
 1363.19. Landowner. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
LANDOWNER  The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other persons having
a proprietary interest in land, shall be deemed to be a landowner for the
purposes of this act.
 1363.20. Lot. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
LOT  A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit
for transfer of ownership or for development or both. In determining the
area of a lot, no part of the right of way of a street shall be included.
 1363.21. Minor revision. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991]
MINOR REVISION  Any revision to a building which entails minor
adjustments to the location of any structure or improvement, but which
does not entail an increase in the number of dwelling units, or a significant
enlargement of any structure; and which is not in conflict with any provision
of the Zoning or Subdivision regulations, and which does not violate any
substantive condition of approval.
A group of two or more buildings, or a single nonresidential building;
or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space between or among two or
more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose
of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups
or other features; or
(b)
(c) A subdivision of land; or
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247).
(d)
 1363.17 MCCANDLESS CODE  1363.22
C:658
 1363.22. Planning Commission. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
PLANNING COMMISSION  The Town of McCandless Planning
Commission.
 1363.23. Plan, Town Master. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991]
TOWN MASTER PLAN  The comprehensive plan for the Town of
McCandless, consisting of maps, charts and textual matter and adopted by
Council in accordance with law.
 1363.24. Plat, final. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
FINAL PLAT  The final map of the land development or subdivision which
is submitted for Town approval and which, if approved, is filed with the
County Recorder of Deeds.
 1363.25. Plat, preliminary. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
PRELIMINARY PLAT  A preliminary map of the proposed land
development or subdivision which is submitted for Town consideration.
 1363.26. Right-of-way. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
RIGHT-OF-WAY  That portion of land dedicated to public use for street or
utility purpose.
 1363.27. Sight distance. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
SIGHT DISTANCE  The distance an object two feet above the pavement
of a street is visible from an eye level 4 1/2 feet above the pavement (the
average height of an automobile operator's eye).
 1363.28. Street. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
STREET  A right of way which affords the principal means of access to
abutting property. A street may be designated as a highway, thoroughfare,
parkway, boulevard, road, avenue, drive or other appropriate name. A street
may also be identified according to type of use as in the following Sections
1363.28 through 1363.31.
 1363.29. Street, arterial. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
ARTERIAL STREET  A street which is used primarily for fast or heavy
traffic of an intercommunity nature.
 1363.30. Street, collector. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
COLLECTOR STREET  A street which carries traffic from minor streets to
the arterial system.
 1363.22 CHARTER  1363.31
C:659
 1363.31. Street, minor. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
MINOR STREET  A street which is used primarily for traffic access to the
abutting properties.
 1363.32. Street, marginal access. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET  A minor street which is parallel to an
arterial street which provides access to abutting properties and protection
from through traffic.
 1363.33. Subdivision. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991]
SUBDIVISION  The division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided,
however, that subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement
of access or residential dwellings shall be exempt. All subdivisions are also
developments.
 1363.34. Watercourse. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
WATERCOURSE  Channel, creek, ditch, drain, dry run, spring or stream.
Article 1365
PROCEDURE FOR SUBMISSION OF PLATS
 1365.01. Compliance. [Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994]
Hereafter, except as provided in these Land Development and Subdivision
Regulations, no plan of any land development shall be approved by Council
except in accordance with the procedures outlined in these Land
Development and Subdivision Regulations. The layout or arrangement of
the land development shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan and to any
regulations or maps adopted in furtherance thereof.
 1365.02. (Reserved)61
 1365.03. Discussion meeting (optional). [Ord. 668, passed
1-27-1975]
(a) Prior to the filing of an application for conditional approval of the
preliminary plat, the developer may meet with the Planning
Commission to discuss his plans. He shall submit to the Planning
Commission four sketch plans and data as specified in Section 1367.01,
61.Editor's Note: Former  1365.02, Responsibilities of developer and Planning Commission,
was repealed 4-22-1991 by Ord. No. 1052.
 1363.31 MCCANDLESS CODE  1365.03
C:660
 1365.04. Starting improvements; land transfer. [Ord. 668, passed
1-27-1975; Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994]
in order to provide a general understanding of his proposal. This step
does not require formal application, fee or filing of plat.
(b) Within 30 days after the meeting at which the sketch plans and data are
reviewed, the Planning Commission may inform the developer that the
plans or data as submitted or modified do or do not meet the objectives
of these regulations.
(c) (Reserved)62
(a) No developer may proceed with any grading or improvement of streets
or installation of public utilities until a preliminary application
(preliminary plat) has been approved by Council.
(b) No applicant shall sell, transfer, lease or otherwise convey any lot,
parcel or tract in a land development or subdivision, or construct or
commence the construction of a structure in a land development or
subdivision until the final plat has been approved by Council and
recorded as required herein.
(c) If a proposed plat requires the granting of a variance as well as plat
approval, the review by the Planning Commission shall precede the
hearing on the variance since changes made as the result of the
Planning Commission review may affect the need for a variance. Action
on the variance by the Zoning Hearing Board shall precede action by
Council on the plat.
(d) If a proposed plat requires the approval of a special exception as well as
plat approval, the hearing on the special exception by the Zoning
Hearing Board shall precede review of the plat by the Planning
Commission.
(e) Any approved plat that has been substantially altered or revised shall
be resubmitted for approval. If a previously approved plat is revised and
the revisions are minor, the Zoning Officer may approve the revised
plat.
(f) If a plan or plat is for a minor revision to an existing structure or lot, the
Zoning Officer may approve the plan. The information requested in
Article 1367 may be reduced to the information considered necessary
by the Town. However, the plat and supplementary materials shall be
forwarded to the Allegheny Planning Commission in accordance with
Section 1365.05(c) or 1365.06(c).
(g) Once all required information has been submitted with an application
for preliminary or final approval, the Planning Commission shall accept
62.Editor's Note: This subsection was repealed by implication 8-24-1981 by Ord. No. 823. See
Article 1342.
 1365.03 CHARTER  1365.04
C:661
 1365.05. Procedure for approval of preliminary plat. [Ord. 668,
passed 1-27-1975, Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991, Ord. 1127, passed
8-22-1994, Ord. 1144, passed 5-22-1995]
the application at its next regularly scheduled meeting, at which
meeting the application shall be considered duly filed.
(a) Whether the developer goes through procedures as described in
Section 1365.03 or not, regarding his general program and objectives,
the developer shall prepare a preliminary plat, together with
improvement plans and other supplementary materials as specified in
Section 1367.02.
(b) Seventeen copies of the preliminary plat, improvement plans and
supplementary materials specified shall be submitted to the Town
Manager with written application for preliminary approval 30 days
prior to the next regularly scheduled business meeting of the Planning
Commission. The Town Manager shall not forward the application to
the Planning Commission unless all material required for preliminary
approval has been submitted. The Planning Commission's acceptance of
the application shall commence their period of review.
(c) Applications for all land development, including required drawings,
studies, reports and supplementary materials shall be forwarded, upon
receipt by the Town, to the Allegheny Planning Commission for review
and report, all in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code,
which allows 30 days from the date of forwarding for the County to
complete its review.
(1) Where applications, as determined by the Town Manager or
designee, requite further review for air and water quality control,
documents may be sent to the Allegheny County Health
Department for review and comments.
(d) The Planning Commission shall forward two copies of the preliminary
application to Council.
(e) (Reserved)63
(f) Council shall not approve the preliminary application until a report
from the Planning Commission has been received and until reports from
the Health Department have been received, or until the expiration of 30
days from the date the copies of the application were filed with such
agencies.
(g) Council shall render its decision and communicate it to the applicant
not later than 90 days after such application is duly filed with the
Planning Commission, but in no event later than 120 days from the
original filing date of the application.
63.Editor's Note: Former subsection (e) was deleted 7-7-2008 by Ord. No. 1355.
 1365.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  1365.05
C:662
 1365.06. Procedure for approval of final plat. [Ord. 668, passed
1-27-1975; Ord. 823, passed 8-24-1981; Ord. 1052, passed
4-22-1991; Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994]
(h) Council may attach such conditions as they deem appropriate to their
approval of a plat. When a plat has been approved with conditions, the
applicant shall, within 15 days, accept or reject the conditions in
writing. Failure of the applicant to accept the conditions as provided
herein shall automatically rescind the approval.
(i) The decision of Council shall be in writing and shall be communicated
to the applicant personally or mailed to him at his last known address
not later than 15 days following the decision.
(j) When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the
provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon.
(k) Failure of Council to render a decision and communicate it to the
applicant within the time and the manner required shall be deemed an
approval of the application in terms as presented unless the applicant
has agreed in writing to an extension of time or change in the
prescribed manner of presentation of communication of the decision, in
which case, failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of
presentation of communication shall have like effect.
(l) The approval of a preliminary plat shall be deemed to have lapsed
unless an application for final approval of at least part of the
preliminary plat is made within one year of the date of preliminary
approval.
(m) For a land development involving a single site, the zoning officer may
accept a site plan submitted for both preliminary and final approval.
The submission shall meet the requirements for both preliminary and
final procedure, as may be applicable. Upon final approval, the
applicant may commence and complete the approval development in
accordance with the terms of such approval within five years from such
approval.
(a) The developer shall prepare a final plat which shall conform to the
preliminary plat as approved, together with improvements, plans and
other materials as specified in Section 1367.03.
The final plat may comprise only that portion of the preliminary plat
which he proposes to record and develop or subdivide at that time.
However, such portion shall conform to all requirements of these Land
Development and Subdivision Regulations.
(b) Sixteen copies of the final plat, improvement plans and supplementary
materials specified shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer with written
application for final approval 30 days prior to the next regularly
 1365.05 CHARTER  1365.06
C:663
scheduled business meeting of the Planning Commission. Once all
required information has been submitted, the Zoning Officer shall
forward same to the Planning Commission who shall accept the
application at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The Planning
Commission's acceptance of the application shall commence its period
of review.
(c) Applications for all land development, including required drawings,
studies, reports and supplementary materials shall be forwarded, upon
receipt by the Town, to the Allegheny Planning Commission for review
and report, all in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code,
which allows 30 days from the date of forwarding for the County to
complete its review.
(d) The Planning Commission shall forward two copies of the final
application to Council.
(e) The Planning Commission shall submit a written report to the Council
within 45 days of receipt of the application stating its recommendations
for approval or disapproval referring to reasons and appropriate
sections of ordinances for the recommendations.
(f) Council shall not approve the final application until a report from the
Planning Commission has been received and until reports from the
Health Department have been received or until the expiration of 30
days from the date the copies of the application were forwarded to such
agencies.
(g) Council shall not approve the final application until the developer files a
completion guarantee.
(h) Council shall render its decision and communicate it to the applicant, as
required by law, no later than 90 days after the application is filed.
(i) When a preliminary application has been duly approved, the applicant
shall be entitled to final approval in accordance with the terms of the
approved preliminary application.
(j) When an application for approval, whether preliminary or final, has
been approved, no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning,
subdivision or other governing ordinance shall be applied to affect
adversely the right of the applicant to commence and to complete any
aspect of the approved development in accordance with the terms of
such approval within five years from such approval.
Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the fiveyear
period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary approval.
Where an applicant has not completed the approved development
within the aforesaid five-year period, the applicant may request in
writing an extension of time for completion of the development. Council
may approve the extension with or without changes or conditions,
which are consistent with the current ordinance.
 1365.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  1365.06
C:664
 1365.07. Submission fees and escrow. [Ord. 1127, passed
8-22-1994]
To cover the costs of receiving and reviewing plans, processing the
application and other expenses, the applicant shall pay a plat submission fee
at the time of application based on the current Town resolution establishing
such fees.
Upon submission of the plat, the applicant shall also be required to make a
cash escrow deposit according to the current Town resolution establishing
such escrow to cover costs incidental to the approval of plat review
entailing a review of detailed construction drawings and inspection of final
construction by Town officials and such qualified consultants they may
employ. A minimum of $1,500 shall be maintained in the escrow account
until final acceptance by the Town of the "as-built" drawings.
All work done by the Town's agents or consultants in connection with the
plat either in the field or office shall be charged to the escrow deposit. If
during the progress of work it appears the costs will reduce the escrow
amount below the minimum required, the Town shall notify the applicant
who shall do no further work in connection with the plat until there shall be
deposited an additional cash escrow amount as may be necessary to cover
the cost of such work and to increase the escrow account to the minimum
required.
Upon completion of the plat, the applicant shall furnish the Town with four
sets of "as-built" drawings indicating all items as constructed. Such as-built
drawings shall include the items as identified in Section 1369.07.
Article 1367
PLANS AND DATA
 1367.01. Sketch plan. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975; Ord. 979,
passed 2-22-1988]
The sketch plan and data requested prior to the submission of a preliminary
plat need not conform to any rigid standards. Sufficient data, as outlined
below, should be included to enable the Planning Commission to interpret
and give advice concerning the sketch plan.
(k) Within 90 days following approval of the final plat, the developer shall
file the final plat and related information with the Recorder of Deeds of
Allegheny County. Approval of the plan shall be null and void if the final
plat is not recorded within such period.
(a) General information describing existing conditions of the site and the
proposed development should be submitted, including data on existing
covenants, land characteristics and available community facilities and
utilities; and information describing the subdivision proposal such as
number of residential lots, typical lot widths and depths, price range,
 1365.06 CHARTER  1367.01
C:665
 1367.02. Application for approval of preliminary plat. [Ord. 668,
passed 1-27-1975; Ord. 709, passed 12-20-1976; Ord. 737, passed
4-3-1978; Ord. 979, passed 2-22-1988; Ord. 1004, passed 3-27-1989;
Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994; Ord. 1144, passed 5-22-1995]
An application for approval of a preliminary plat shall be accompanied by
the following information:
business areas, public areas, proposed protective covenants, utilities
and street improvements and proposed stormwater management
facilities.
(b) A location map may be submitted, showing the relationship of the
proposed subdivision to adjacent developments' existing community
facilities which serve or influence it; main traffic arteries; public
transportation lines; shopping centers; elementary and high schools;
playgrounds; principal places of employment; other community
features such as railroad stations, airports, hospitals and churches;
title, scale, north arrow and date.
(c) A sketch plan on a topographic or other suitable base may show in
simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots and other
features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a
free-hand pencil sketch made directly on a print of the base map.
(a) Preliminary plat (at a scale of 50 feet equals one inch or larger) on 16
clear prints on white paper which shall include all contiguous land
owned by the subdivider and any other contiguous land which the
subdivider proposes to acquire and develop in the foreseeable future.
The plat shall show the following information pertaining to title and
form:
(1) Proposed name of land development or subdivision.
(2) Names and addresses of the owner, developer if other than owner,
and the engineer who prepared the plan.
(3) Scale, north arrow and date.
(4) Certifications: Inscription on the plat for registration of Planning
Commission and Council approval. (See Appendix A for form.)64
(5) Tract boundaries as surveyed and certified by a registered
engineer or surveyor to be closed traverse.
(6) All internal and abutting streets, public and private, including road
access, to include names, paving widths and grades.
(7) Other rights of way or easements in, on or crossing the tract:
location, width and purpose, existing and proposed.
64.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this article.
 1367.01 MCCANDLESS CODE  1367.02
C:666
(8) Existing buildings, water course, sewers, culverts, drains.
(9) Names of all land developments or subdivisions immediately
adjacent, and the names of the owners of record of adjacent
unplatted land.
(10) Location and sizes of any existing storm or sanitary sewers, water
lines, fire hydrants and gas mains and any other available utilities,
on or within 200 feet of the tract.
(11) (Reserved)65
(12) Existing and proposed topography, and where required by the
Town, cross sections of existing and proposed grades.
(13) Existing tree masses and significant topographical features.
(14) Lot lines with dimensions and area of proposed lots and lot
numbers.
(15) Minimum building setback lines and lot width.
(16) Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for playgrounds or other
public use.
(17) Zoning district in which the proposed land development or
subdivision is located and any zoning district boundaries, where
applicable.
(18) If the preliminary application represents a partial or phased
development of a larger project, the total development plan shall be
presented at a suitable scale on the Town's standard sheet size (30
inches by 42 inches or less).
(19) (Reserved)66
(20) Dimensions and placement of proposed structures.
(21) Area of site, actual and required.
(22) Complete details of size, type and location of lighting, showing
details on lighting fixtures and poles and including a photometric
map of proposed lighting.
(23) Slope areas over 25%.
(24) Complete details on type and location of all signs.
(25) Floodplains, 100-year storm and landslide prone areas.
(26) Parking areas, proposed and required, and loading berths.
65.Editor's Note: This subsection was repealed by implication 8-24-1981 by Ord. No. 823. See
Article 1342.
66.Editor's Note: This subsection was repealed 8-24-1981 by implication by Ord. No. 823. See
Article 1342.
 1367.02 CHARTER  1367.02
C:667
(27) Sidewalks.
(28) Any other information specifically requested.
(29) Zoning classification of all contiguous parcels.
(30) All buffer areas and identify buffer designation.
(31) All fences and walls with complete details of design including cross
sections of all walls at intervals of 50 feet.
(b) A location map (one copy only required), at a scale of not less than 600
feet to one inch, showing the relationship of the proposed land
development or subdivision to its general surroundings and including
the following details:
(1) Existing or unopened streets within 1,000 feet of the proposed land
development or subdivision.
(2) Proposed streets with connections to existing streets.
(3) Proposed directions of flow for storm water in relation to natural
drainage channels and a report on the feasibility of connection to
existing storm water sewerage system.
(4) If connection to a public sewerage system is not feasible, a report
on the feasibility of a separate sewerage system, and treatment
works including the design, population, type and location of the
treatment, and receiving stream.
(5) Municipal boundary lines within 1,000 feet of the proposed land
development or subdivision.
(c) Profiles, at a horizontal scale of 100 feet to one inch or larger and a
vertical scale five times the horizontal scale, showing existing and
proposed centerline grades of existing and proposed streets.
(d) Typical cross sections and construction details of proposed streets,
drainage structures and other proposed improvements.
(e) Draft of proposed protective covenants or private deed restrictions
whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision
and otherwise protect the proposed development.
(f) Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the Planning
Commission: location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface
soil, rock and ground water conditions, depth to ground water unless
test pits are dry at a depth of 10 feet.
(g) The Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan shall specifically indicate
all erosion and sedimentation control measures to be utilized on the
site. The plan shall meet the following requirements:
 1367.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  1367.02
C:668
 1367.03. Application for final approval. [Ord. 668, passed
1-27-1975; Ord. 709, passed 12-20-1976; Ord. 979, passed
2-22-1988; Ord. 1144, passed 5-22-1995]
An application for final approval need include only that portion of a property
proposed for immediate development.
(1) The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be prepared by
persons trained and experienced in erosion and sedimentation
control methods and techniques.
(2) The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be designed to
prevent accelerated erosion and sedimentation and shall consider
all factors which contribute to erosion and sedimentation including,
but not limited to the following:
A. The topographic features of the project area;
B. The types, depth, slope and aerial extent of the soils;
C. The proposed alteration to the area;
D. The amount of runoff from the project area and the upstream
watershed area;
E. The staging of earthmoving activities;
F. Temporary control measures and facilities for use during
earthmoving;
G. Permanent control measures and facilities for long-term
protection;
H. A maintenance program for the control facilities including
disposal of materials removed from the control facilities or
project area; and
I. (Reserved)67
(3) All additional requirements specified by the Planning Commission,
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources or the
Allegheny County Health Department.
(h) The developer shall provide an index sheet, on standard sheet size,
indicating drawing or sheet which has all the foregoing requirements.
(i) Stormwater management provisions as set forth in Article 913.
(a) The following copies of the final plat and other maps shall be submitted:
(1) One original drawing in black waterproof ink on new linen tracing
cloth or mylar based material which will be returned to the
67.Editor's Note: This subsection was repealed by implication 8-24-1981 by Ord. No. 823. See
Article 1342.
 1367.02 CHARTER  1367.03
C:669
subdivider after being properly signed and executed upon final
approval and which shall be used for recordation purposes.
(2) Seventeen clear sets of prints on white paper.
(b) The final plat and any other maps shall not be larger than 30 inches by
42 inches. Where necessary, to avoid sheets larger than the maximum,
the final plat shall be shown on two or more sheets of uniform size and
including a key diagram showing the location of each section.
(c) The final plat shall be at a scale of 50 feet to one inch or larger and shall
contain the following data:
(1) Land development or subdivision name or identifying title.
(2) North arrow, scale and date.
(3) Tract boundary lines, rights-of-way lines of streets, easements and
other rights-of-way lines, property and lot lines with accurate
dimensions, bearings, deflection angles and radii, lengths of arcs
and central angles of all curves, satisfactory to the Town and
sufficient to reproduce such lines upon the ground.
(4) Primary control points, approved by the Town, descriptions and ties
to such points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar
data on the plat shall be referred and the location of all existing and
proposed monuments.
(5) The boundary lines of a land development or subdivision shall be
determined by actual ground survey only, such survey to be
traversed, balanced and closed; the total error of closure shall not
exceed a linear ratio of 1:10,000 and the allowable angular error of
closure shall not exceed five seconds per angle.
(6) Names of owners of record of adjoining unplatted land and record
name, date, index, number, road and lot lines of adjacent land
developments or subdivisions to a minimum distance of 100 feet
beyond the proposed land development or subdivision boundary.
(7) Proposed building setback line for each street or the proposed
placement of each building and sight triangle lines.
(8) Names and right-of-way widths of all streets or other rights-of-way
within or adjacent to the land development or subdivision.
(9) All proposed lots shall be numbered and the lot area shown.
(d) The final plat shall include contours thereon or be accompanied by a
separate topographic map at a scale of 50 feet to one inch, and shall
contain the following data:
(1) If a separate topographic map, all items listed in subsection (c)
hereof.
 1367.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  1367.03
C:670
(2) Streets on and adjacent to the tract: name and rights-of-way width
and location; type, width and elevation of surfacing; legally
established center line elevations; curbs, gutters, culverts, etc.
(3) Utilities on and adjacent to the tract; location, size and invert
elevation of sanitary and storm sewers; location and size of water
mains; location of gas lines; fire hydrants, electric and telephone
poles; if water mains and sewers are not in or adjacent to the tract,
indicate the direction, distance to and size of nearest ones, showing
invert elevations of sewers.
(4) Ground elevation on the tract, based on Sandy Hook data: for land
that slopes less than approximately 2% show spot elevations at all
breaks in grade, along all drainage channels or swales, and at
selected points not more than 100 feet apart in all directions; for
land that slopes more than approximately 2% either show contours
at intervals of not more than five feet if ground slope is regular and
such information is sufficient for planning purposes, or show
contours with an interval of not more than two feet if necessary
because of irregular land or need for more detailed data for
preparing plans and construction drawings.
(5) Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the Planning
Commission: location and results of tests made to ascertain
subsurface soil, rock and ground water conditions, depth to ground
water unless test pits are dry at a depth of five feet.
(6) Other conditions on the tract: watercourses, marshes, rock
outcrops, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees, houses, barns
and other significant features.
(7) Other conditions adjacent to the tract extending 100 feet beyond
tract boundaries: approximate direction and gradient of ground
slope, including any embankments or retaining walls, character
and location of buildings, power lines, towers and other nearby
nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent
unplatted land; for adjacent platted land refer to land development
or subdivision plat by name, recordation date and number, and
show approximately percent built-up and typical lot size.
(8) Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.
(9) Key plan showing location of the tract at a legible scale.
(10) Title and certificates: present tract designation according to the
official records in office of appropriate recorder; title under which
proposed land development or subdivision is to be recorded, with
names and addresses of owners, notation stating acreage, scale,
north arrow, datum, benchmarks, certification of registered
professional engineer or surveyor and date of survey.
(11) (Reserved)68
 1367.03 CHARTER  1367.03
C:671
 1367.04. Pre-construction conference. [Ord. 979, passed
2-22-1988]
After final approval has been given by Council, but before construction
is initiated, a preconstruction conference shall be held at the Town Hall.
Those required to be in attendance at this meeting are the Town Zoning
Officer, the Town Engineer(s), the developer, the primary contractor and
construction inspectors.
Article 1369
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
 1369.01. Certification or guarantee of completion. [Ord. 668,
passed 1-27-1975]
Town Council shall grant approval of the final plat only after the following
actions have been taken.
(e) The final plat shall include thereon or be accompanied by the following
construction and improvement data:
(1) Grading plan, which shall be shown on the topography map:
existing and proposed elevations and contours in accordance with
the standards for the topographic map; existing contours shall be
shown as dotted lines, and proposed contours shall be shown as
solid lines.
(2) Location, size and invert elevations of all sewers and drainage
structures, which may be shown on the grading plan.
(3) Profiles and typical cross sections for all streets: profiles shall show
the existing and proposed grades along the center line and ditch
inverts; sewer lines and drainage structures.
(4) A copy of all restrictions and covenants, if any, the developer or
subdivider intends to place in the deeds to the lots in the land
development or subdivision.
(5) Written application for final approval on an approved form.
(6) The developer or subdivider shall file a completion guarantee
before the plat will be approved by Council.
(f) The developer shall provide an index sheet, on standard sheet size,
indicating drawing or sheet which has all the foregoing requirements.
(g) Stormwater management plan as required by Article 913.
68.Editor's Note: This subsection was repealed by implication 8-24-1981 by Ord. No. 823. See
Article 1342.
 1367.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  1369.01
C:672
 1369.02. Required improvements. [Ord. 737, passed 4-3-1978]
The land developer or subdivider shall construct and install all required
improvements at his expense, in strict accordance with the standards
outlined in Article 1371 and as specified by the Town, the McCandless
Township Sanitary Authority, and the West View Water Authority. Required
improvements shall include street grading and paving, storm drainage
facilities, sanitary sewers, water lines and fire hydrants, street signs,
sidewalks and monuments. Prior to the acceptance of all improvements,
it shall be the responsibility of the developer to provide as constructed
drawings.
 1369.03. Inspection. [Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994]
The developer shall post a cash inspection amount in escrow based on the
cost of construction of those facilities anticipated to be accepted by the
Town in accordance with the current Town resolution establishing such
fees.
The inspection amount shall be utilized by the Town for reasonable fees
for the Town's agents, consultants or independent inspectors as required to
assure the Town of proper installation of the various amenities to become
the Town's ultimate responsibility.
All work done by the Town's agents, consultants or independent inspectors
in connection with the site plan either in the field or office shall be charged
to the escrow deposit. If during the progress of work it appears costs
(a) A certificate has been made by the Town to the effect that all streets,
sewers, water and other utilities and facilities as may be required have
been graded, improved, constructed or installed in accordance with
specifications; or
(b) A completion guarantee in the form of a bond, cash deposit, certified
check or negotiable securities, satisfactory to Council has been filed
which shall:
(1) Run to Town of McCandless.
(2) Be in an amount estimated by the Town to be sufficient to complete
the improvements and installations in compliance with these Land
Development and Subdivision Regulations except that, with respect
to installation of water lines, the developer or subdivider shall
submit a certificate from the West View Water Authority to the
effect that suitable guarantees have been made for the installation
of water lines and fire hydrants and, with respect to sanitary
sewers, the subdivider shall submit a certificate from the
McCandless Township Sanitary Authority to the effect that suitable
guarantees have been made for the installation of sanitary sewers
and treatment facilities.
(3) Be acceptable to the Town Attorney.
 1369.01 CHARTER  1369.03
C:673
will reduce the escrow amount below the minimum required, the Town
shall notify the applicant who shall do no further work until there shall be
deposited an additional cash escrow amount as may be necessary to cover
the cost of such work and to increase the escrow account to the minimum
required.
Upon completion of construction, the developer shall furnish the Town with
four sets of "as-built" drawings, indicating all items as constructed. (See
Section 1369.07). The Town shall withhold at all times, a minimum of $1,500
of the escrow deposit, until such time as the "as-built" drawings have been
received, approved and accepted by the Town. If at any time the aforesaid
engineering and inspection charges shall reduce the escrow below $1,500,
the Town shall notify the applicant, who shall do no further work until there
shall be deposited an additional cash escrow amount sufficient to maintain
the minimum amount.
The Town Manager or relevant official of the McCandless Township Sanitary
Authority or West View Water Authority shall be notified by the owner
or contractor at least 72 hours in advance of the commencement of any
construction operation, such as grading, sewer installation or paving in
order that provisions may be made for proper inspection of such
construction operation. Samples of materials and all reasonable information
for ascertaining whether the work is in conformity with the provisions of
these Land Development and Subdivision Regulations shall be furnished to
the proper officials and employees of the Town.
 1369.04. Release of completion guarantee. [Ord. 1127, passed
8-22-1994]
When all public improvements and facilities have been completed, the
developer shall notify the Town in writing, by certified or registered mail,
of the completion of these improvements, and send a copy thereof to the
municipal engineer.
The Town shall within 10 days after receipt of such notice, direct and
authorize the municipal engineer to inspect all such improvements. A report
shall be filed by the municipal engineer in writing with the Town, and
copy mailed to the developer within 30 days after the aforesaid authority
from the Town. The report shall indicate approval or rejection and contain
specific details for rejection if not accepted.
The Town shall notify the developer within 15 days of receipt of this report,
in writing by certified or registered mail, of the Town's action with relation
thereto. On final approval by the municipal engineer, bonds, cash, checks
or securities filed as completion guarantee shall be returned or released
immediately on receipt of final, "as-built" drawings, which have been
certified to be true and correct by the Town.
 1369.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  1369.05
C:674
 1369.05. Default of completion guarantee. [Ord. 668, passed
1-27-1975]
If public improvements are not installed and completed within two years of
the date to recordation of the plat or do not comply with the standards and
specifications of these Land Development and Subdivision Regulations the
Town may proceed to complete the improvements and facilities and may use
whatever proceeds from bonds, cash deposits, checks or securities as are
required to meet the expense of completing such improvements.
 1369.06. Maintenance bond. [Ord. 906, passed 5-28-1985]
Upon acceptance of the required improvements and facilities, the
subdivider shall provide to the Town for a period of 18 months from the
date of acceptance of the improvements and facilities a maintenance bond
in the form of a bond, cash, certified check or negotiable securities in an
amount equal to 15% of the total cost of the improvements and facilities to
guarantee the maintenance and repair of such improvements and facilities
as may be defective in material or installation. The developer shall also
provide the Town with proof of maintenance bonds made payable to and
accepted by the McCandless Township Sanitary Authority for all sanitary
sewer systems and the West View Water Authority for all water line systems.
 1369.07. As built drawings. [Ord. 906, passed 5-28-1985; Ord.
1052, passed 4-22-1991]
Upon completion of construction within a land development the applicant
shall furnish the Town with a mylar drawing and four copies of "as built"
drawings indicating all items as constructed. Such "as built" drawings shall
include the following items:
(a) Owner and zoning district of the site;
(b) Owner, use and zoning districts of all adjacent properties;
(c) Scale, north arrow and date;
(d) Tract boundary and lot lines;
(e) Road access, public and private internal roads, and walks;
(f) Public road rights-of-way and horizontal and vertical profiles;
(g) Topography;
(h) Drainage, including type and profiles, if in a Town right-of-way;
(i) Utility easements, including sanitary sewer;
(j) Floodplain (if applicable);
(k) Parking area and number of spaces;
(l) Signs: type and locations;
 1369.05 CHARTER  1369.07
C:675
Article 1370
EXISTING PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS; PENALTY
 1370.01. Maintenance of existing public improvements. [Ord.
1004, passed 3-27-1989]
Any existing improvements including roads, drainage facilities and the like
damaged or worsened in condition by the land developer or subdivider as
determined by the Town shall be repaired by the developer as required by
the Town. Funds for such repairs shall be held either in escrow, bond or
letter of credit on an estimate determined by the Town after inspection by
the Town of existing conditions of roads, drainage or utilities which may be
affected by the land development or subdivisions and will be released in a
fashion similar to other required improvements. If no repairs are necessary
due to a development's construction all funds earmarked for existing road/
drainage repairs shall be returned to the developer.
 1370.99. Penalty. [Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991]
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of these land development and subdivision regulations shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Town, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all
court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the municipality
as a result thereof.
Article 1371
DESIGN STANDARDS
 1371.01. General standards. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
The layout of any land development or subdivision in the Town shall be in
accordance with the Town Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance. The type
of development shall be appropriate for the location, and the road pattern
shall tie in with the overall road plan of the Town.
 1371.02. Street layout. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975; Ord. 709,
passed 12-20-1976; Ord. 737, passed 4-3-1978; Ord. 906, passed
5-28-1985; passed Ord. 1223, passed 12-20-1999]
(m) Location of all buildings; and
(n) Statement to the effect that all utilities are located within the proper
rights-of-way.
(a) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all
roads shall conform to the Town Master Plan and shall be considered in
their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical
 1369.07 MCCANDLESS CODE  1371.02
C:676
conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate
relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
Where not shown on the Master Plan, the arrangement and other
design standards of streets shall conform to the provisions found
herein.
(b) In general, all streets shall be continuous and in alignment with existing
streets and shall compose a convenient system to insure circulation of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic, with the exception that local streets
shall be so laid out, that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
(c) Where a land development or subdivision abuts or contains an existing
or proposed arterial street, the Planning Commission may require
marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting
contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep
lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be
necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to
afford separation of through and local traffic.
(d) Where a land development or subdivision abuts on or contains a
railroad right of way or limited access highway right of way, the
Planning Commission may require a street approximately parallel to
and on each side of such right of way, at a distance suitable for the
appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in
residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in
appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due
regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade
separations.
(e) New half or partial streets will not be permitted; wherever a tract to be
developed or subdivided borders an existing half or partial street, the
other part of the street shall be platted within such tract.
(f) Center lines of streets opening into opposite sides of another street
shall either intersect or be separated from each other by more than 200
feet.
(g) Dead-end or cul-de-sac streets designed to be so permanently shall be
provided at the closed end with a paved turn around and an outside
cartway diameter of at least 80 feet and a street property line diameter
of at least 100 feet.
In the case of a cul-de-sac street having any portion in excess of 6%
grade, the fifty-foot wide right-of-way shall be at a level horizontal plane
in all portions exceeding that 6% gradient.
(h) Any road temporarily dead-ended because of approved stage
development shall be provided with a paved turn around, having an
outside diameter of at least 80 feet. The use of the turn around shall be
guaranteed to the public until such time as the road is extended.
 1371.02 CHARTER  1371.02
C:677
(i) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at an angle less
than 60.
(j) Edge of right-of-way line radii abutting street intersections shall be
rounded by a tangential arc with a minimum radius of 25 feet for
intersections of minor streets and 30 feet for intersections including
collector or arterial streets.
(k) Minimum pavement edge or curb radii at intersections of minor streets
will be 15 feet and as deemed necessary by the Planning Commission
for intersections involving collector or arterial streets.
(l) Clear sight triangles shall be included in the design of all intersections
based upon the Street Layout Standard presented in the Town
Standards for Construction. No structures or obstructions to vision
shall be permitted within said sight triangles.
(m) A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on collector and arterial streets.
(n) When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than 10, they shall be connected by horizontal curves.
(o) Adequate sight distances shall be provided with respect to both
horizontal and vertical alignment. Measured along the center line, this
shall be 500 feet for arterial streets, 250 feet for collector streets, and
200 feet for minor or marginal access streets.
(p) Vertical curves shall be used in all changes of grades. The minimum
vertical curve shall be 150 feet in length for arterial, 100 feet for
collector streets and 50 feet for minor or marginal access streets.
Vertical curves shall be increased 20 feet for each 1% of grade change
exceeding 3%. Grades across intersections shall not exceed 6% within
25 feet of the center line intersection.
(q) Horizontal curves shall have a minimum radius on the center line of 500
feet for arterial streets, 300 feet for collector streets and 150 feet for
minor and marginal access streets.
(r) Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except
that the Planning Commission may waive this requirement where other
definite and assured provision is made for service access, which is
consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. Where provided,
the right of way of an alley shall be 20 feet.
(s) All streets shall be named. No street names shall be used which will
duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Street
names shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission.
 1371.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  1371.03
C:678
 1371.03. Street design and improvements. [Ord. 668, passed
1-27-1975; Ord. 709, passed 12-20-1976; Ord. 737, passed 4-3-1978;
Ord. 804, passed 10-27-1980]
The width, grade, alignment, construction and improvement for each street
in a land development or subdivision shall conform to the standards listed
in this section:
(a) Minimum improvement standards for public or private streets.
Street Type
Collector Local
Minor or
Marginal
Access
(numbers are in feet unless otherwise
indicated)
Right-of-way
width
60 50 50
Paving width
including
gutters
All Districts 24 24 24
Paving-base and
bitumnous
surface
Shall be in accordance with Town specifications
Curbs Shall be in accordance with Town specifications
Minimum sight
distance
500 250 200
Minimum center
line radius
500 300 150
Maximum grade 10% 12% 12%
Minimum grade 0.5% 0.5% 0.5%
(b) Sidewalks shall be constructed within the street right of way along all
streets. Pedestrian pathways shall be required in all residential districts
exceeding four units per acre. Pathways shall connect major use areas
such as parking, recreation service and building entrances and will not
necessarily be within a street right of way.
Where required, sidewalks and pedestrian pathways shall be a
minimum of four feet wide and constructed of suitable materials as
approved by the Town. The builder or owner shall construct permanent
sidewalks prior to issuance of an occupancy permit. Prior to the
expiration of the two year street maintenance bond, the developer shall
install permanent sidewalks along the frontage of all vacant properties
within the plat.
 1371.03 CHARTER  1371.03
C:679
Sidewalks installed along County or State roads shall meet the
specifications established by the County or State.
(c) The right-of-way of each street in a proposed land development or
subdivision shall be graded and there shall be installed paving,
drainage structures, curbs and gutters, and pedestrian pathways in
accordance with the standards outlined in these Land Development and
Subdivision Regulations and in strict accordance with all Town
specifications.
(1) All streets shall be constructed on a prepared subgrade in
accordance with the Town specifications.
(2) Street cross sections, paving and curbs shall conform to the
specifications shown on the drawing titled, "Standards and
Specifications, Paving, Curbs, and Catch-Basins Situate in Town of
McCandless" (latest edition).
(d) The slope of that portion of the right of way between the outer edge of
the curb and an abutting property line shall not be less than 1/4 inch
plus or minus nor more than one inch plus or minus for every one foot of
horizontal distance between the curb and the property line, measured
from the established elevation of the curb.
(e) All driveways shall be constructed so as not to interfere with surface
drainage along a right of way. Driveway grades within a right of way
shall not exceed those specified in subsection (c) hereof.
(f) Where the grade of the street is above or below the grade of the
adjacent land, walls or slopes shall be constructed in a manner
satisfactory to the Town, and shall be in compliance with the Town
Grading Ordinance, and shall be sufficient to support the street or the
adjacent land, as the case may be.
(g) Where the grade of the street is three feet or more above the grade of
the adjacent land, guard rails shall be built to protect travel and shall be
satisfactory to the Town.
(h) Sidewalks adjacent to streets shall be so located within the street right
of way according to Town specifications.
Sidewalks installed along County or State roads shall meet the
specifications established by the County or State.
(i) Bituminous streets shall crown at the center line to a slope of 1/4 inch
to one foot; concrete streets shall crown at the center line to a slope of
1/8 inch per foot.
(j) (Reserved)69
69.Editor's Note: This subsection was repealed by implication 8-24-1981 by Ord. No. 823. See
Article 1342.
 1371.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  1371.04
C:680
 1371.04. Stormwater drainage. [Ord. 1318, passed 7-18-2005]
Stormwater drainage facilities shall be designed in accordance with Article
913 and the Town of McCandless Standards for Construction (latest
version).
 1371.05. Land and lot requirements. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975;
Ord. 1004, passed 3-27-1989; Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991]
(a) Land shall be suited for the purpose for which it is to be developed, and
all lots shall comply with the minimum area, lot width and other
requirements prescribed by the Zoning Ordinance.
(b) Lots shall be land out and graded to provide positive drainage away
from buildings and water wells.
(c) Every lot shall abut on a public street with the exception of suitably
designed residential courts or other planned developments having
acceptable means of access.
(d) Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except
where essential to provide separation of residential development from
traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation. A planting screen easement of at least 10 feet, and across
which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line
of lots abutting such traffic artery or other disadvantageous use.
(e) Easements for public utilities having a minimum width of 15 feet shall
be provided and shall be satisfactory to the agency providing such
utility service. Whenever possible, utility easements shall extend along
rear property lines and shall be so located to blend into the landscape.
(f) The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
(1) Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of
the type of use contemplated.
(2) Zoning requirements.
(3) Needs for convenient access, circulation and control of traffic.
(g) Block lengths shall not exceed 1,800 feet or be less than 400 feet unless
the developer can demonstrate to the Town how blocks not meeting
those standards are required by topography and would be beneficial to
the Town.
(h) All buildings and residences shall be numbered as assigned by the Town
and be displayed at a location as approved by the Zoning Officer.
(i) All roads, drives and aisles in commercial and multi-family
developments shall contain a minimum of 25 feet turning radii for
vehicular traffic and shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide.
 1371.04 CHARTER  1371.06
C:681
 1371.06. Utilities. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975; Ord. 737, passed
4-3-1978]
(a) Where connection with the McCandless Township Sanitary Authority is
practicable, the subdivider shall install sanitary sewers and sewer
laterals in conformity with the McCandless Township Sanitary
Authority specifications for sanitary sewer construction before roads
shown on the plan are constructed.
(b) Where connection to the public sanitary sewers is not deemed possible
by the McCandless Township Sanitary Authority, the developer may
install a private sewage disposal plant and sanitary sewers connecting
thereto in a manner satisfactory to the McCandless Township Sanitary
Authority and to the Allegheny County Health Department and other
related agencies, and such facilities may be dedicated to the
McCandless Township Sanitary Authority where the McCandless
Township Sanitary Authority agrees to accept them.
(c) All plans and specifications for sanitary sewers, sewage pumping
stations, and sewage treatment plants shall be submitted to and
approved by the McCandless Township Sanitary Authority and other
regulatory agencies prior to the approval of any plat.
(d) A water distribution system shall be installed to furnish an adequate
supply of water to each proposed lot, with adequate main sizes to meet
the specifications of the West View Water Authority. All water
distribution system plans shall be approved by the West View Water
Authority prior to the approval of any plat.
(e) Fire hydrants shall be installed as specified by the Town Manager after
consultation with the West View Water Authority, in order to provide
adequate fire protection to all properties within the land development
or subdivision.
(f) All water mains proposed to be installed in or along rights of way shall
be located three feet away from the edge of the pavement.
(g) Every lot in a land development or subdivision shall be capable of being
served by electric and telephone lines, and easements acceptable to the
electric and telephone companies shall be provided.
(h) Where gas lines are proposed to be installed, easements acceptable to
the gas company shall be provided.
(i) To the fullest extent possible, underground utility lines shall not be
installed beneath existing or proposed paved areas.
(j) All utilities shall be underground.
 1371.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  1371.07
C:682
 1371.07. Street signs. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
A street sign having a name plate shall be installed by the developer
at every street intersection and shall conform to construction standards
approved by the Town.
 1371.08. Monuments. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
 1371.09. Preservable trees. [Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1975]
All trees having a diameter of six inches or greater not interfering with
rights of way or dwellings shall be preserved.
 1371.10. Commercial, industrial and institutional development.
[Ord. 1052, passed 4-22-1991]
In commercial, industrial and institutional developments all improvements
shall comply with the design standards as specified in these Land
Development and Subdivision Regulations and the Zoning and Grading
Ordinances of the Town.
 1371.11. (Reserved)70
 1371.12. Recreational areas and open space. [Ord. 1027, passed
2-26-1990]
(a) The monuments as required shall be shown on the final plat with the
distance between them and with sufficient curve data plainly marked. If
such monuments have not been set at the time the final plat is
submitted to the Town, a certified check, payable to the Town of
McCandless, shall be deposited with the Town Manager. The amount of
the check shall be sufficient to cover the cost of setting the required
monuments as estimated by the Town Manager. If the monuments have
not been set within 30 days after the expiration of the street
maintenance bond, they will be set by the Town and the check forfeited.
(b) Permanent reference monuments shall be located at the corners of tract
and shall be of concrete or durable stone at least four inches square at
the top and six inches square at the bottom and at least 24 inches in
length. All monuments shall be set so that the top of the monument is
level with the surface of the surrounding ground as finally graded.
(c) All lot corners shall be located with metal pins of at least 3/4 inch
diameter with a minimum length of 30 inches. Prior to the issuance of
an occupancy permit, it shall be the responsibility of the builder to
install the metal property pins.
(a) Offer of dedication to the Town.
70.Editor's Note: Former  1371.11, Designated floodplain districts, was repealed by
implication 8-24-1981 by Ord. No. 823. See Article 1342.
 1371.07 CHARTER  1371.12
C:683
(1) An applicant or developer shall offer the public dedication of land
required by the Zoning Code for open space, park and recreational
use to the Town. Council is authorized to enter into agreements
with the applicant or developer, for the construction of recreational
facilities on such land by such applicant or developer.
(2) The applicant or developer shall cause the preparation of a legal
description with metes and bounds of the land being offered for
dedication, which dedication the Town may accept by vote of
Council.
(3) The plan for recording shall set forth the location of any open
space, park or recreational land and shall reflect either the
dedication and acceptance by the Town or the method by which the
perpetual administration and maintenance under subsection (a)(3)
hereof is to be achieved.
(b) Fee in lieu of open space.
(1) Should the developer or applicant not offer to dedicate land for
recreation purposes or where Council, after review and comment
by the Planning Commission, determines that, as a result of the
size, shape, location, access, topography or other physical features
of the land, that the setting aside of land for open space, park or
recreational use as required by this section is impractical or
infeasible, the developer or applicant may elect to pay a fee in lieu
of setting aside such land in order to finance the provision of open
space, park or recreational land for the use of Town park or
recreational facilities by future inhabitants of the development or
subdivision. Such fee is determined to be in the amount of $400 per
dwelling unit after careful review of Section 503, Subsection (11),
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, the North
Pittsburgh Community Development Corporation Recreation Plan,
the Town Master Plan and the 1990 Town municipal budget and five
year capital program which includes the establishment and
expansion of recreational facilities, with such fee being payable at
the time of the signing of a land development or subdivision
agreement.
(2) The fee authorized under this subsection shall, upon its receipt by
the Town, be deposited in the Capital Reserve Fund under an
interest-bearing account, any fee received shall, unless the person
paying such fee agrees otherwise, be clearly identified to a specific
recreational facility or facilities of the Town accessible to the
subdivision or land development for which the fee was received.
Interest earned on such accounts shall become funds of that
account. Funds from such accounts shall be expended only in
properly allocable portions of the cost incurred to construct the
specific recreational facilities for which the funds were collected.
 1371.12 MCCANDLESS CODE  1371.12
C:684
Article 1373
DEDICATION OF STREETS
 1373.01. Dedication of roads and other public improvements.
[Ord. 668, passed 1-27-1965]
When any street or other public improvement outlined in the construction
permit has been completed in accordance with the terms of these Land
Development and Subdivision Regulations and in strict accordance with the
Town specifications now in effect or hereafter adopted, as the case may
be, such street or improvement shall be deemed private until such time as
the same shall have been offered for dedication to the Town of McCandless
and accepted, by separate ordinance or resolution, or until it has been
condemned for use as a public street or other improvement.
Part 15 - Fire Prevention Code
Article 1501
FIRE PREVENTION PERMITS
 1501.01. Fire prevention permits. [Ord. 891, passed 9-24-1984;
Ord. 1301, passed 5-24-2004]
(3) The fees in lieu of the provision of park and recreational areas shall
be used, unless the person paying such fee shall agree otherwise,
only for the purpose of providing park or recreational facilities
accessible to the subdivision or land development for which such
fees are paid.
(4) Upon the written request of any developer or applicant who paid
any fee, the Town shall refund such fee, plus interest accumulated
thereon from the date of payment, if the Town fails to utilize the fee
paid for the purpose set forth in this section within three years from
the date such fee was paid.
(a) Fire prevention permit requirements shall adhere to the International
Fire Code requirements. Request for a fire prevention permit shall
include either an approved set of building plans or a description of the
activity to be undertaken.
(b) A fire prevention permit is required for any fire alarm detection system
installation or modification to same; any fire suppression system
installation or modification to same; installation of fire substation; any
public display of fireworks; storage and handling of combustible and/or
flammable liquids (including temporary and permanent storage tanks)
and hazardous materials; storage and handling of liquified petroleum
gases; storage and handling of explosives, ammunition and blasting
agents; and bonfires.
 1371.12 CHARTER  1501.01
C:685
 1501.99. Penalties. [Ord. 1301, passed 5-24-2004]
Article 1509
FIRE CONTROL MEASURES AND REGULATIONS
 1509.01. Adoption. [Ord. 905, passed 4-22-1985]
There is hereby adopted by the Town of McCandless the fire control
measures and regulations as herein set forth for the purposes of controlling
conditions which could impede or interfere with fire suppression forces.
 1509.02. Hydrant use approval. [Ord. 905, passed 4-22-1985]
A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of
the Fire Department for fire suppression purposes unless such person first
secures a permit for such use from the water company having jurisdiction.
This section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants by a person
employed by, and authorized to make such use by, the water company
having jurisdiction.
(c) Where applicable, a valid permit shall be displayed at all times on the
site until such time as construction is completed and final inspection
approved.
(d) If a properly completed application for a fire prevention permit is
neither approved nor disapproved within 90 days, it shall be deemed
approved and the permit shall be executed. A permit may be voided by
notifying the holder if:
(1) The application contained false information;
(2) Applicable construction did not start within 180 days;
(3) The construction is not substantially completed within one year
from the date of issuance;
(4) The construction is found to be in violation of the Fire Prevention
Code.
(a) Violation of article.
(1) Any individual, firm or corporation that violates any provision of
this article commits a summary offense and shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs.
(2) Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be
considered a separate violation.
(b) Disposition of penalties. The amount of the penalty shall be forwarded
to the entity with enforcement jurisdiction.
 1501.01 MCCANDLESS CODE  1509.03
C:686
 1509.03. Public water supply. [Ord. 905, passed 4-22-1985]
The Fire Official shall recommend to the chief administrative official of
the Municipality the location or relocation of new or existing fire hydrants
and the place or replacement of inadequate water mains located upon
public property and deemed necessary to provide an adequate fire flow and
distribution pattern. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or removed from
service until approved by the Fire Official.
 1509.04. False fire alarms. [Ord. 1032, passed 5-29-1990;
amended 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 1489]
 1509.99. Penalties. [Ord. 1301, passed 5-24-2004]
(a) When an automatic fire alarm from a multifamily (three or more units),
commercial, industrial, or institutional property is received by the Town
Fire, Police and Emergency Services Dispatch Center, whether by
direct line into the Town alarm-receiving center or by telephone from
an outside receiving center, and results in a false alarm, a service fee
adopted by a resolution of Council shall be charged. Failure to pay the
service fee to the Town within 30 days of the receipt of the notice of the
payment of the required service charge shall constitute a summary
offense, for which the building owner (or the tenant, in the event that
the Fire Marshal determines in the Fire Marshal's reasonable
discretion that the false alarm was the result of an act or omission of the
tenant) will be subject to a fine of up to $300 per day. Each day after 30
days that the service fee remains unpaid constitutes a separate offense.
(b) A "false alarm" is defined as an alarm triggered at a multifamily,
commercial, industrial or institutional property as a result of any of the
following as determined by the Town Fire Marshal or the Fire Marshal's
designee:
(1) A malfunction due to the failure to properly test and maintain the
alarm system.
(2) Smoking in a no-smoking area where an automatic alarm system is
installed.
(3) Malicious false alarms.
(4) Failure to notify the dispatch center to which the system is
connected when testing or maintaining the alarm system.
(5) Failure to take all necessary precautions to eliminate false alarms
during construction work in the vicinity of the system.
(c) The service fee assessed in Subsection (a) of this section shall not be
charged for the first instance of a false alarm at a property during each
calendar year.
(a) Violation of article.
 1509.03 CHARTER  1509.99
C:687
Article 1513
DESIGNATION OF FIRE LANES
 1513.01. Intent. [Ord. 1005, passed 4-24-1989]
This article provides for the designation of fire lanes wherever Council
deems that parking congestion may create a hazard by impeding the free
movement of fire fighting equipment and other emergency vehicles
anywhere within the boundaries of the Town on public or private property.
 1513.02. Designation of fire lanes. [Ord. 1032, passed 5-29-1990;
Ord. 1186, passed 7-28-1997]
The Fire Marshal shall have the responsibility to designate fire lanes
anywhere within the boundaries of the Town on public or private property
where he/she deems parking and congestion may create a hazard by
impeding the free movement of fire fighting equipment and other
emergency vehicles. The Fire Marshal may consult the fire chiefs or any
other Town agency or consultant in making such decisions. Such
designation of fire lanes by Fire Marshal shall be subject to approval by
Council. When a fire lane is required by the Town Fire Marshal's office, a
fire lane shall be properly posted. The requirements for the individual signs
shall be as follows:
(1) Any individual, firm or corporation that violates any provision of
this article, except Section 1509.04(a), commits a summary offense
and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 and costs.
(2) Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be
considered a separate violation.
(b) Disposition of penalties. The amount of the penalty shall be forwarded
to the entity with enforcement jurisdiction.
(a) The signs shall be 12 inches wide by 18 inches high with a highly
reflective surface.
(b) The background shall be white; the printing on the sign shall be red.
The printing shall state the following: NO PARKING FIRE LANE. The
printing shall be below the international symbol for no parking, a black
"P" within a red circle with a slash mark across the "P".
(c) The signs shall be double-faced on a 30 to 45 angle perpendicular to
the flow of traffic.
(d) Sign(s) shall be mounted at a minimum height of seven feet from the
bottom of the sign.
 1509.99 MCCANDLESS CODE  1513.02
C:688
 1513.03. Paving requirements of a fire lane.71
 1513.99. Penalties. [Ord. 1301, passed 5-24-2004]
Article 1517
FIRE INSURANCE ESCROW ACT
 1517.01. Responsibilities and duties of Manager. [Ord. 1098,
passed 4-26-1993]
The Town Manager or such official's designee is hereby appointed as the
designated officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and
duties stated in this article.
 1517.02. Fire damage claim payment prerequisites. [Ord. 1098,
passed 4-26-1993]
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a building or other structure
located within the Town (hereinafter the "Municipality") where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the building or other structure under all
policies exceeds $5,000 unless the insuring agent is furnished by the
(e) One sign will be placed at the beginning of the fire lane and one sign
will be placed at the end of the fire lane. The signs shall be placed a
minimum of 50 feet apart along the entire length of the fire lane.
(f) The Fire Lane shall be marked in yellow with the words FIRE LANE a
minimum of 18 inches high at fifty-foot intervals from its beginning to
its end.
(g) Fire lane(s) shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide and consist of a paved
surface. The base of the surface shall be constructed in such a manner
to support the weight of Fire Department apparatus and other
emergency vehicles as approved by the Town.
(a) Violation of article.
(1) Any individual, firm or corporation that violates any provision of
this article commits a summary offense and shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs.
(2) Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be
considered a separate violation.
(b) Disposition of penalties. The amount of the penalty shall be forwarded
to the entity with enforcement jurisdiction.
71.Editor's Note: This section was repealed by Ordinance 1032, passed May 29, 1990.
 1513.02 CHARTER  1517.02
C:689
Municipal Treasurer with a Municipal certificate pursuant to Section 508(B)
of Act 98 of 1992 and unless there is compliance with Section 508(C) and
(D) of Act 98 of 1992 and the provisions of this article.
 1517.03. Payment procedure. [Ord. 1098, passed 4-26-1993]
(a) Where, pursuant to (B)(1)(I) of Act 98 of 1992, the Municipal Treasurer
issues a certificate indicating there are no delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties or user charges against real property, the
insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named insured, provided
however, that if the loss agreed upon by the named insured and the
insuring agent equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability
on all fire policies covering building restructure, the following
procedures shall be followed:
(1) The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to
the designated officer of the Municipality in the aggregate of
$1,000 for each $20,000 of a claim and for each fraction of the
amount of a claim. This section is to be applied, such that if the
claim is $20,000 or less, the amount transferred to the Municipality
shall be $1,000; or
(2) If at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named
insured and the insuring agent, the named insured has submitted a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure, the insuring agent shall
transfer to the Municipality from the insurance proceeds the
amount specified in the estimate.
(3) The transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all
companies, associations or exchanges insuring the building or
other structure.
(4) After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's
signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure, and the designated officer shall return
the amount of the funds transferred to the Municipality in excess of
the estimate to the named insured, if the Municipality has not
commenced to remove, repair or secure the building or other
structure.
(5) Upon receipt of the proceeds under this section, the Municipality
shall do the following:
A. The designated officer shall place the proceeds in a separate
fund to be used solely as security against the total costs of
removing, repairing or securing the building or structure
which are incurred by the Municipality. Such costs shall
include without limitation, any engineering, legal or
administrative costs incurred by the Municipality in connection
 1517.02 MCCANDLESS CODE  1517.03
C:690
 1517.04. Procedures, regulations and fees by resolution. [Ord.
1098, passed 4-26-1993]
Council may by resolution adopt procedures and regulations to implement
Act 98 of 1992 and this article and may by resolution fix reasonable fees to
be charged for municipal activities or services provided pursuant to Act 98
of 1992 and this article; including but not limited to issuance of certificates
and bills, performance of inspections and opening separate fund accounts.
with such removal, repair or securing of the building or other
structure or any proceedings related thereto; and
B. It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the Municipality with the name and
address of the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred
funds and the name and address of the named insured, the
designated officer shall contact the named insured, certify the
proceeds have been received by the Municipality and notify the
named insured the procedures under this section must be
followed; and
C. When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all
applicable regulations and orders of the Municipality and the
required proof of such completion received by the designated
officer, and if the Municipality has not incurred any costs for
repairs, removal or securing, the fund shall be returned to the
named insured. If the Municipality has incurred costs for
repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure,
the costs shall be paid from the fund and if excess funds
remain, the Municipality shall transfer the remaining funds to
the named insured; and
D. To the extent interest is earned on proceeds held by the
Municipality pursuant to this section and not returned to the
named insured, such interest shall belong to the Municipality.
To the extent the proceeds are returned to the named insured,
interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the
named insured at the time the proceeds are returned.
(6) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Municipality to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prohibit the Municipality and the
named insured from entering into an agreement permitting the
transfer of funds to the named insured if some other reasonable
disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
 1517.03 CHARTER  1517.05
C:691
 1517.05. Severability. [Ord. 1098, passed 4-26-1993]
The provisions of this article shall be severable and, if any of the provisions
hereof shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the remaining provisions
of this article shall remain in effect.
 1517.99. Penalty. [Ord. 1098, passed 4-26-1993]
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who
violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a penalty of up to
$1,000 per violation.
Article 1521
INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE
 1521.01. Adoption; revisions. [Ord. 1395, passed 4-25-2011]
The International Fire Code, except where referenced by the International
Building Code, 2009 Edition, is hereby adopted as the official Fire
Prevention Code of the Town of McCandless with revisions to the following
sections:
(a) Section 101.1, "Title" shall read: These regulations shall be known as
the Fire Code of "the Town of McCandless", hereinafter referred to as
"this Code."
(b) Sections 103.2, 103.3, and 103.4 are hereby deleted in their entirety.
(c) Section 109.3, 1st sentence shall read - ". . . . shall be guilty of a
summary offense, punishable by a fine of $1,000 and/or 30 days
imprisonment for each violation, except to the extent to which the
imposition of greater penalties shall be authorized by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania applicable to any class of
municipalities from time to time hereafter. . . .".
(d) Section 111.4 shall read: ". . . . shall be liable to a fine not to exceed
$1,000, except to the extent to which the imposition of greater penalties
shall be authorized by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
applicable to any class of municipalities from time to time hereafter".
(e) Section 3404.2.9.6.1, "Locations where above-ground tanks are
prohibited", shall be amended by replacing the sentence with the
following: - Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks
outside of buildings is permitted in locations approved by the Fire
Marshal.
(f) Section 3406.2.4.4, "Locations where above-ground tanks are
prohibited", shall be amended by replacing the sentence with the
following:  The storage of Class I and II liquids in above-ground tanks
is permitted only in locations approved by the Fire Marshal.
 1517.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  1521.01
C:692
 1521.02. Successor codes. [Ord. 1395, passed 4-25-2011]
Successor codes to the 2009 edition of the International Fire Prevention
Code shall become effective on June 1 following the date of publication,
subject to any amendments adopted by Town Council.
 1521.03. Severability. [Ord. 1395, passed 4-25-2011]
If any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be held invalid for any
reason whatsoever, then, unless such provision or term is material to this
article as to render this article impracticable to perform, such provision or
term shall be deemed severable from the remaining provisions or terms of
this article and shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of any
other provisions hereof.
Part 17 - Building Code
Article 1701
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
 1701.01. Fire suppression system; fire hydrants. [Ord. 1301,
passed 5-24-2004]
(g) Section 3506.2, "Limitations", shall be amended by replacing the
sentence with the following:  Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in
stationary containers is permitted only in locations as approved by the
Fire Marshal.
(h) Section 3804.2, "Maximum capacity within established limits", shall be
amended by replacing the sentence with the following:  Within limits
established by law restricting the storage of liquefied petroleum gas for
the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, the aggregate
capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of
2,000 gallons (7,270 L) only in locations approved by the Fire Marshal.
(a) A fire suppression system installed in accordance with the Uniform
Construction Code, shall be installed in all areas in all buildings of the
following Uniform Construction Code use and occupancy classifications
exceeding the noted square feet.
Uniform Construction Code use and
occupancy classifications, B, M, I-1, I-2,
& I-3 including day care & health care
facilities
5,000 square feet per floor
or any building exceeding
40 feet in height.
Use and occupancy classifications, A-2,
R-1 & R-2
All areas regardless of size.
(b) In Uniform Construction Code use and occupancy classifications B, M,
I-1, I-2 and I-3 including day care and health care facilities, if an
 1521.01 CHARTER  1701.01
C:693
 1701.02. Fire equipment substation. [Ord. 891, passed 9-24-1984;
Ord. 1301, passed 5-24-2004]
 1701.03. Self-closing doors. [Ord. 1032, passed 5-29-1990]
Self-closing hinges or automatic closures shall be placed on all doors
between the garage and living area of all dwelling units, including all single
family and multi-family dwelling units.
 1701.04. Notice for building inspections. [Ord. 1032, passed
5-29-1990]
It shall be the responsibility of the recipient of a building permit to give
twenty-four-hour notice for all inspections which are required by the Office
of the Building Inspector.
 1701.05. Supporting beams. [Ord. 1032, passed 5-29-1990]
All supporting beams shall have their post plates attached by bolts and/or
welding.
addition is added to an existing building and that building then exceeds
5,000 square feet per floor or exceeds 40 feet in height, the total
building shall be required to be suppressed.
(c) All uses within the Town zoning classification C-6 shall be suppressed in
all areas regardless of size.
(d) A fire hydrant will be required within 50 feet of all Fire Department
standpipe and sprinkler system connections installed pursuant to this
subsection, as approved by the Town Fire Marshal.
(a) Fire equipment substations shall be provided in all new buildings
exceeding 60 feet in height providing the following fire equipment:
(1) One spanner wrench.
(2) Two pic-headed fire axes.
(3) Three self-contained 45 minute breathing apparatus to be approved
by the Fire Official.
(4) One select-a-flow nozzle, 1 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Two hundred feet of three inch diameter double jacket fire hose
equipped with 2 1/2 inch couplings.
(6) One, 2 1/2 inch gated "wye" reduced to two, 1 1/2 inch couplings.
(b) Fire equipment substation storage areas shall be provided at every
third floor. All fire equipment substations shall be located so as to give
access to stairway doors, and shall be approved by the Fire Official.
 1701.01 MCCANDLESS CODE  1701.06
C:694
 1701.06. Site plan. [Ord. 1083, passed 9-28-1992]
The Building Official has the authority to require that a survey be made on
the ground by a registered surveyor or licensed engineer of the building
or structure, authorized by a permit, at any time prior to or during
construction as a condition to processing the permit application or
continuing work. In the event that the holder of a permit is directed to
secure and produce such survey, and neglects or refuses to do so, such
permit shall be revoked.
 1701.07. Audio visual devices. [Ord. 1083, passed 9-28-1992]
In order to indicate, upon the arrival of the Fire Department/emergency
services, which building an alarm is being activated, audio visual devices
will be installed on the exterior of the building, in a location approved
by the Fire Marshal's office, in all occupancies, excluding single-family
dwellings, that have an automatic fire detection/protection system and/or
fire suppression system installed on the premises. Such device shall be
installed so that it can be viewed by approaching fire apparatus.
 1701.08. Health care facilities. [Ord. 1083, passed 9-28-1992]
All health care facilities shall now be required to have annunciated patient
room smoke detectors which shall be connected to a monitoring device
located at a point on the premises that has personnel on duty 24 hours a
day.
 1701.99. Penalties. [Ord. 1301, passed 5-24-2004]
Article 1705
GRADING, EXCAVATION AND FILLS
 1705.01. Title and purpose. [Ord. 625, passed 4-23-1973]
(a) Violation of articles.
(1) Any individual, firm or corporation that violates any provision of
this article commits a summary offense and shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs.
(2) Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be
considered a separate violation.
(b) Disposition of penalties. The amount of the penalty shall be forwarded
to the entity with enforcement jurisdiction.
(a) This article shall be known and may be cited as "The McCandless
Grading Ordinance".
(b) The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards to
safeguard persons and property, to protect and to promote the public
 1701.06 CHARTER  1705.01
C:695
 1705.02. Definitions. [Ord. 625, passed 4-23-1973; Ord. 1127,
passed 8-22-1994]
Wherever used in this article the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATOR  The person qualified and officially appointed by the
governing body to manage this article.
BEDROCK  Natural rock layer, hard or soft, in place at ground surface or
beneath unconsolidated surficial deposits.
ENGINEERING GEOLOGIST  A person who holds a degree in geology
from an accredited college or university and who has training and
experience in the field of engineering geology.
EROSION  The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity, including such processes as gravitational creep.
EXCAVATION  Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed and includes the conditions resulting therefrom.
FILL  Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new
location and includes the condition resulting.
GOVERNING BODY  Council.
GRADING  Excavation of fill or any combination thereof and shall include
the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
GRADING PERMIT  Any permit required under this article.
HAZARD  A danger or potential danger to life, limb or health, or an
adverse effect or potentially adverse effect to the safety, use or stability
of property, waterways, public ways, structures, utilities and storm sewers;
"hazard" includes stream pollution.
PERSON  A natural person but shall also include a partnership,
corporation, trust or association.
PROFESSIONAL  A person (engineer, surveyor or architect) licensed by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SITE  A lot, tract, parcel of land, or a series of lots, tracts or parcels of
land which are adjoining where grading work is continuous and performed
at the same time.
SLOPE  Any ground area having an inclination from the horizontal. Slopes
are measured either in degrees from the horizontal or as the ratio of a
welfare, by preventing excess erosion, hazardous rock and soil
slippage, sediment production and other soil and water management
problems, and by regulating and controlling the design, construction,
quality of materials, use, location and maintenance of grading,
excavation and fill.
 1705.01 MCCANDLESS CODE  1705.02
C:696
horizontal distance to the vertical height (or drop) to the surface of the
slope. Each change in inclination from horizontal in a cut or fill represents
a different slope. The slope of a cut or fill is represented by the maximum
slope of a cut or fill.
SOIL ENGINEER  A person registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as a professional engineer and who has training and
experience in the branch of soils engineering.
SOIL SURVEY  The unpublished and operational soil survey for Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania and the accompanying text "Soil Survey
Interpretations of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania", as prepared by the
USDA Soil Conservation Services et al. When applicable, "Soil Survey"
means "Soil Survey, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania" when this publication
is completed.
SOLID WASTE  All parts of combinations of ashes, garbage, refuse,
radioactive material, combustible demolition materials and industrial
wastes such as food-processing wastes, wood, plastic, metal scrap, etc.
 1705.03. Permit requirement. [Ord. 625, passed 4-23-1973; Ord.
1167, passed 6-24-1996]
 1705.04. Exceptions to permit requirement. [Ord. 625, passed
4-23-1973; Ord. 1167, passed 6-24-1996]
A grading permit will not be required for any of the following situations:
 1705.05. Standards for grading. [Ord. 625, passed 4-23-1973; Ord.
1004, passed 3-27-1989; Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-1994]
(a) A grading permit must be obtained from the Administrator for new
grading, excavations and fills. Changes, additions or alterations made
to existing excavation or fills shall conform to the provisions of this
article. A separate grading permit shall be required for each site. One
permit may cover the grading, excavation and any fills made on the
same site.
(b) Only one permit is required for a continuous parcel to be graded for a
proposed major planned development, such as residential planned unit
development or a planned industrial park when adequate standards or
requirements for grading the parcel are approved by the Administrator.
(c) When grading is to be performed for and executed concurrently with
the construction of a new building, a separate grading plan will be
required.
(a) Grading limited to reasonable, regular, normal maintenance and
landscaping improvements by individual homeowners, where standards
in this article are not violated.
(b) Stockpiling of rock, sand and aggregate in area properly zoned for such
use.
 1705.02 CHARTER  1705.05
C:697
(a) The maximum slope of cut shall not exceed 2:1 and the maximum slope
for fill shall not exceed 3:1. Retaining walls and grading shall meet the
following requirements:
(1) Any wall in excess of four feet above grade shall be designed by a
registered engineer experienced in structural design and be
constructed in compliance with the Building Code. A single,
engineered retaining wall, not in excess of four feet, may be used in
the cut or fill area.
(2) Where a wall is used at the toe of a cut or fill, a buffer area,
measured from the base of the wall, shall be a minimum distance of
twice the height of the wall. This buffer area shall not be used for
placement of structures, parking, vehicular circulation, sales area,
pedestrian traffic or for other uses which may endanger public
safety if the wall should fall.
(3) Any wall in excess of five feet in height shall be protected with a six
foot chain link fence.
(4) Cuts or fills in excess of 12 feet in height and within 30 feet of the
property line shall include bufferyard D, Section 1314.04, at the top
of a cut (or the bottom of a fill), whichever provides greater
buffering to the adjacent property.
(5) Cuts or fills in excess of 30 feet in height shall include a six-foot
chain link fence at the top of the slope.
(6) Where a cut or fill exceeds 15 feet in height, the top of cut or the
toe of fill shall not be closer to the lot line than 20 feet.
(b) Adequate provisions shall be incorporated to prevent erosion due to
storm drainage. All provisions shall be properly engineered and may be
paved or planted swales and/or gutters and/or piped storm sewers. All
of this shall be reviewed and subject to the approval of the Town
Engineer.
(c) Existing storm drainage shall not be diverted to adjacent property
owners.
(d) Adequate engineered provisions shall be incorporated to prevent
sediment infiltration into existing streams.
(e) All fills shall be compacted to provide stability of fill materials and to
prevent settlement of slippage.
(f) Immediately upon completion of grading, all areas not designated for
building or paving shall be mulched and planted. Planting shall be
appropriate to maintain slopes from erosion and subject to approval of
the Town. In general, planting may be rye grass, crown vetch or honeysuckle.
(g) (Reserved)72
 1705.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  1705.05
C:698
 1705.06. Application for permit; submission of plans. [Ord. 625,
passed 4-23-1973]
(h) Any slope which exceeds 50 feet in vertical height shall be properly
benched.
(i) In addition to the above, all fill and cut operations shall follow the
"Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook" for Allegheny County.
(j) In the event that the cut and fill operation affects any natural
watercourse under the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources, Division of Dams and Encroachments, by
change in direction, cut and fill along the banks, culverts or bridges, or
construction adjacent to, the applicant must present with his
application the permit and the letter of comments from the Department
of Environmental Resources, Division of Dams and Encroachments.
(k) An exception may be requested to one or more requirements of these
standards for grading when the location, shape or topography of the
particular parcel of land is such that strict conformance to the
requirements would cause undue hardship, serve no useful purpose, or
be a detriment to the overall quality of the project. Such an exception
shall not be contrary to the requirement or spirit of the Town's
Comprehensive Plan. At least four, affirmative votes of Council shall be
required for approval. Such request shall come before the Planning
Commission, Zoning Committee of Council and voted on at a regular
business meeting. The request for exception along with plans shall be
submitted 30 days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which
the submittal will be discussed.
(a) Every applicant for a grading permit shall file a written application with
the Administrator on a prescribed form. The application shall:
(1) Describe the land, on which the proposed work is to be done by lot,
block, tract or street address.
(2) Be accompanied by the plans and specifications prepared and
sealed by a professional (engineer, surveyor, or architect) giving a
reasonable picture of the site and proposed soil erosion controls, if
any. The plans must be complete with north arrow, scale, distance
to road intersections, adjacent structures, roads, utilities,
waterways, existing contours, finished proposed contours (all
contours minimum five-foot intervals). All necessary existing and
finished spot elevations are required to show drainage details of all
constructed measures to prevent soil erosion, and planting.
(b) The Administrator may waive the preparation of the plans by a
professional when it is self-evident that the proposed work is simple,
72.Editor's Note: This subsection was repealed 3-27-1989 by Ord. No. 1004.
 1705.05 CHARTER  1705.06
C:699
 1705.07. Hazardous conditions. [Ord. 625, passed 4-23-1973; Ord.
1004, passed 3-27-1989]
 1705.08. Completion and performance guarantee. [Ord. 625,
passed 4-23-1973]
clearly shown on the plans submittal, and creates no potential nuisance
or hazard to adjacent property.
(c) Plans and specifications above shall be submitted to Allegheny County
Conservation District for approval before submission to the
Administrator, and such approval must be submitted for permit when:
(1) Excavation or fill exceeds five feet in vertical depth, and results in a
cut or fill slope steeper than four horizontal to one vertical, and
exceeds an area of 1,000 square feet for areas recognized by the
Allegheny County Soil Survey as containing landslide-prone soils.
(2) Excavation or fill exceeds 10 feet in vertical depth, and results in a
cut or fill slope steeper than three horizontal to one vertical and
exceeds an area of 5,000 square feet in area for areas not
recognized by the Allegheny County Soil Survey as landslide-prone.
(3) In the event the applicant deems it necessary to exceed the slopes
of cut and fill as recommended in the Soil Survey, or by the
Allegheny County Conservation District, the applicant may do so
only when the design is certified by a soils engineer or geologist.
However, in no case shall the slopes be greater than specified in
Section 1705.05(a).
(a) Whenever the governing body, upon the recommendation of it's
Administrator, determines that any existing excavation, embankment or
fill has become a hazard as defined in Section 1705.02, the owner of the
property upon which the excavation, embankment or fill is located, or
other persons or agent in control of the property, upon receipt of notice
in writing from the Administrator shall, within the reasonable period
specified therein, repair, reconstruct or remove such excavation,
embankment or fill so as to eliminate the hazard.
(b) If, after such notification, the property owner has not made the
necessary repairs within the time adopted, then the governing body
may direct government employees to make the required repairs and the
cost thereof shall be borne by the property owner by a lien filed as
provided by law.
(c) Whenever the governing body, upon the recommendation of its
Administrator, determines that any proposed excavation or fill may
present a hazard as defined in Section 1705.02, the governing body
reserves the right to require the applicant to have the proposed work
certified by a soils engineer or geologist.
(d) The use of solid waste as fill material is prohibited.
 1705.06 MCCANDLESS CODE  1705.08
C:700
 1705.09. Expiration of permit. [Ord. 1004, passed 3-27-1989]
Every grading permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void if
the work authorized by such permit has not commenced within 180 days or
it is not completed within one year from the date of issue, provided that the
governing body, acting upon the recommendation of the Administrator, may,
if the permit holder presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties
have prevented work being started or completed within the specified time
limits, grant an extension of up to one year, and provided further, that the
application for the extension of time is made before the date of expiration of
the permit. Any physical changes in the site such as surface water drainage,
soil and bedrock dislocations, alteration of groundwater discharge or any
other natural or man-made modification which would cause a doubt to be
cast upon the feasibility of the contents of the original permit approval,
must be reported to the Administrator in the intervening period between
approval of permit and completion of the project.
 1705.10. Denial of permit; appeal. [Ord. 625, passed 4-23-1973]
(a) Before issuance of a grading permit, the applicant shall post a bond
Pennsylvania approved corporate surety, or other approved security in
the amount of 10% of the estimated cost of the grading work and
erosion control facilities proposed for the permit to guarantee the work
and facilities in a satisfactory manner and meeting the requirements of
this article. No bond shall be required if another bond or other
approved security is posted for construction and/or site improvements.
When all requirements of this permit have been met and the work has
been completed in a satisfactory manner, the full amount of security
shall be returned to the person posting the security.
(b) Alternate surety for construction of an individual residence, in lieu of
the above may be as follows:
(1) Cash deposit in the amount of $75 for each residence, refundable
upon compliance with this article, or the deposit may remain
deposited with the Town to be applied to the next permit.
(2) Cash deposit or surety as outlined in subsection (a) hereof in the
amount of $1,000, to remain in effect for grading all individual
residences, for a one-year period.
(a) When the requirements of this article for obtaining a permit have been
met, the Administrator shall approve the proposed plan and grant a
grading permit to the applicant. Approved work may then start.
However, when, in the opinion of the Administrator, work proposed by
the applicant is likely to endanger any property or person, or any street
or alley, or create hazardous conditions, the grading permit shall be
denied. In determining whether the proposed work is likely to endanger
property of streets or alleys, or create hazardous conditions, the
Administrator shall give due consideration to: possible saturation by
rains, earth movements, run-off surface waters and subsurface
 1705.08 CHARTER  1705.10
C:701
 1705.11. Supervision of grading. [Ord. 625, passed 4-23-1973]
 1705.12. Maintenance. [Ord. 625, passed 4-23-1973]
 1705.13. Liability. [Ord. 625, passed 4-23-1973]
Neither the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this article, nor the
compliance with the provisions hereto or with any condition imposed by the
Administrator hereunder, shall relieve any person from any responsibility
for damage to persons or property resulting therefrom, or as otherwise
conditions such as the stratification and faulting of rock, acquifers,
springs and the nature and type of the soil or rock.
(b) The governing body shall within 15 days consider appeals from the
provisions of this article or from the denial by the Administrator, and
the governing body within 15 days shall consider alternate methods,
standards or materials proposed by the developer when, in his opinion,
strict compliance with the provisions of this article is unnecessary. Any
applicant or permit holder shall have the right to appeal to any court of
competent jurisdiction from any decisions of the governing body.
(a) The permittee or his agent shall notify the Administrator in writing of
the start and completion of each continous grading operation. Notice
shall be received by the Administrator or at his office at least two
working days before start of completion of grading operations.
(b) Grading work at these stages or at any other time will be subject to spot
inspections at the discretion of the Administrator to determine that the
work is being performed in compliance with these regulations.
(c) In special cases, when grading occurs in areas of landslide-prone soil as
recognized by the Soil Survey or better, the Administrator may require
special precautions from the grader. The results of all soil tests and core
borings made relating to the site graded shall be submitted to the
Administrator.
(a) The owner of any property on which an excavation or fill has been made
shall maintain in good condition and repair the excavation or fill
permitted, and also all retaining walls, cribbing, drainage structures,
fences, ground cover and any other protective devices as may be a part
of the permit requirements.
(b) If, at any time subsequent to the completion of the grading work, the
cut face or fill slope shall evidence signs of deterioration, erosion or
other evidence which might be detrimental to the properties above and
below the grading site, Council, upon recommendation of the
Administrator, may direct the property owner to take necessary
remedial steps in accordance with sound engineering practice to
restore the grading to a safe condition, and to do so in a reasonable
period of time.
 1705.10 MCCANDLESS CODE  1705.13
C:702
imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the Town for damages to
persons or property.
 1705.14. Schedule of fees. [Ord. 625, passed 4-23-1973]
A fee in the amount of $5 per acre or each portion thereof, will be charged
for each grading permit.
 1705.15. Remedies. [Ord. 625, passed 4-23-1973]
In case any work is performed by any person in violation of any of the
provisions of this article, the proper office of the Town, in addition to other
remedies, may institute in the name of the Town any appropriate action or
proceeding whether by legal process or otherwise, to prevent such unlawful
work and to restrain or abate such violation.
 1705.16. Compliance; effect of noncompliance. [Ord. 625, passed
4-23-1973]
 1705.99. Penalty. [Ord. 625, passed 4-23-1973]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined not more
than $100 per day for each offense. Whenever such person has been notified
by the Administrator by service of summons in a prosecution or in any
other way that he is committing a violation of this article each day that
he continues such violation after notification shall constitute a separate
offense. Fines shall be collected as like fines or penalties are now by law
collected.
Article 1709
(RESERVED)
[Editor's Note: Former Article 1709, Swimming Pools, was repealed
7-3-1978 by Ord. No. 741. See Section 1313.12 of the Zoning Code.]
Article 1713
SMOKE DETECTORS
(a) No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any
grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done contrary to or
in violation of any provision of this article.
(b) When written notice of any violation of any provision of this article has
been served by the Administrator on any person, such violation shall be
discontinued immediately or within a reasonable time limit specified in
such notice. If violation is not discontinued, or extends beyond the
specified time limit, the Administrator shall revoke the grading permit
and the violator shall be subject to the penalty provided in Section
1705.99.
 1705.13 CHARTER  1713.01
C:703
 1713.01. Installation required in multi-family buildings. [Ord.
726, passed 8-22-1977; Ord. 798, passed 6-30-1980]
 1713.02. Installation rate. [Ord. 726, passed 8-22-1977]
The owners of existing multi-family residential buildings affected by this
article shall install the necessary smoke detectors as follows:
 1713.99. Penalty. [Ord. 726, passed 8-22-1977]
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall constitute a
summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 for
each failure to install the required smoke detectors.
Article 1715
TIMBER HARVESTING
(a) The owners of all existing multi-family buildings including apartments,
townhouses and condominiums shall, within five years of the effective
date of Ordinance 726, install in each dwelling unit a minimum of one
approved ionization type smoke detector sensing visible and invisible
particles of combustion. Such detector shall be electrically operated
and wired into the hall or bedroom light circuit, and installed in a
manner and location approved by the authority having jurisdiction.
There shall be no exposed electric cord plugged into a wall outlet. No
detector shall be battery operated.
(b) The owners of all new multi-family buildings including apartments,
townhouses and condominiums shall install in each dwelling unit a
minimum of one approved ionization type smoke detector sensing
visible and invisible particles of combustion. Such detector shall work
on electric and battery power and have the capacity to be connected to
both sources of power simultaneously. Such detector shall be installed
in a manner and location approved by the authority having jurisdiction.
When actuated, the detector shall provide an alarm suitable to warn the
occupants within the dwelling unit.
(a) In 20% of their dwelling units within one year of the effective date of
Ordinance 726.
(b) In an additional 20% of their dwelling units within two years of the
effective date of Ordinance 726.
(c) In an additional 20% of their dwelling units within three years of the
effective date of Ordinance 726.
(d) In an additional 20% of their dwelling units within four years of the
effective date of Ordinance 726.
(e) In the final 20% of their dwelling units within five years of the effective
date of Ordinance 726.
 1713.01 MCCANDLESS CODE  1715.01
C:704
 1715.01. Policy; purpose. [Ord. 1251, passed 7-23-2001]
In order to preserve forests and the environmental and economic benefits
they provide, it is the policy of the Town of McCandless to encourage the
owners of forest land to continue to use their land for forestry purposes,
including the long-term production of timber, recreation, wildlife, and
amenity values. The timber harvesting regulations contained in Sections
1715.01 through 1715.09 are intended to further this policy by: (1)
promoting good forest stewardship; (2) protecting the rights of adjoining
property owners; (3) minimizing the potential for adverse environmental
impacts; and (4) avoiding unreasonable and unnecessary restrictions on the
right to practice forestry. Because proper cutting practices vary depending
on the site and on landowner objectives, it is not the intent of this article to
prescribe specific practices.
 1715.02. Scope; applicability. [Ord. 1251, passed 7-23-2001]
Sections under this article shall apply to all timber harvesting within the
Town where a lot or lots to be harvested equals or exceeds one acre and the
value of the trees, logs or other timber products exceeds $200 and a permit
shall be obtained.
 1715.03. Definitions. [Ord. 1251, passed 7-23-2001]
As used in Sections 1715.01 through 1715.09, the following terms shall
have the meanings given them in this section:
FELLING  The act of cutting a standing tree so that it falls to the ground.
FORESTRY  Managing and using for human benefit forest lands and
natural resources that occur on and in association with forest lands,
including trees, other plants, animals, soil, water, related air, and climate.
It includes, but is not limited to, the planting, cultivating, harvesting,
transporting, and selling of trees for commercial purposes.
LANDING  A place where logs, pulpwood, or firewood are assembled for
transportation to processing facilities.
LANDOWNER  An individual, partnership, company, firm, association, or
corporation that is in actual control of forest land, whether such control
is based on legal or equitable title, or on any other interest entitling the
holder to sell or otherwise dispose of, any or all of the timber on such land in
any manner, and any agents thereof acting on their behalf, such as forestry
consultants, who set up and administer timber harvesting. This definition
shall include Federal, State and County governments, school districts and
authorities.
LITTER  Discarded items not naturally occurring on the site such as tires,
oil cans, equipment parts, and other rubbish.
LOP  To cut tops and slash into smaller pieces to allow the material to
settle close to the ground.
 1715.01 CHARTER  1715.03
C:705
OPERATOR  An individual, partnership, company, firm, association, or
corporation engaged in timber harvesting, including the agents,
subcontractors, and employees thereof.
PRECOMMERCIAL TIMBER STAND IMPROVEMENT  A forest practice,
such as thinning or pruning, which results in better growth, structure,
species composition, or health for the residual stand but which does not
yield a net income to the landowner, usually because any trees cut are of
poor quality, too small or otherwise of limited marketability or value.
SKIDDING  Dragging trees on the ground from the stump to the landing
by any means.
SLASH  Woody debris left in the woods after logging, including logs,
chunks, bark, branches, uprooted stumps, and broken or uprooted trees or
shrubs.
STAND  Any area of forest vegetation whose site conditions, past history
and current species composition are sufficiently uniform to be managed as
a unit.
STREAM  Any natural or artificial channel of conveyance for surface
water with an annual or intermittent flow within a defined bed and banks.
TIMBER HARVESTING, TREE HARVESTING, or LOGGING  The process
of cutting down trees and removing logs from the forest for the primary
purpose of sale or commercial processing into wood products and the
preparation of the site, exclusive of tree marking, for such harvesting.
TOP  The upper portion of a felled tree that is unmerchantable because of
small size, taper, or defect.
WETLAND  Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, or that under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions including swamps, marshes,
bogs, and similar areas.
WOODLAND, MATURE  An area of plant material covering one acre or
more and consisting of 30% or more canopy trees having a sixteen-inch or
greater caliper, or any grove consisting of eight or more trees having an
eighteen-inch or greater caliper. The caliper is measured 4 1/2 feet above
the ground.
 1715.04. Notification; preparation of a logging plan. [Ord. 1251,
passed 7-23-2001]
(a) Notification of commencement or completion. For all timber harvesting
operations under the jurisdiction of these regulations, the landowner
shall notify the Town enforcement officer with the required information
at least 20 business days before operation commences and within five
business days after the operation is complete. Notification shall be in
writing and shall specify the land on which the harvesting will occur,
the expected size of the harvest area, and, as applicable, the anticipated
 1715.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  1715.04
C:706
 1715.05. Contents of the logging plan. [Ord. 1251, passed
7-23-2001]
starting or completion date of the operation. A permit shall be obtained
from the Town prior to commencement of timber harvesting. The cost
of the permit, including review and inspection fees, shall be set by
resolution.
(b) Logging plan. Every landowner on whose land timber harvesting is to
occur and every operator proposing to log a plot shall be jointly and
severably responsible for preparing a written logging plan in the form
specified by this article. No timber harvesting shall occur until the plan
has been prepared and approved by the Town. The provisions of the
plan shall be followed throughout the operation. The plan shall be
available at the harvest site at all times during the operation and shall
be provided to the Town Land Use Administrator upon request.
(c) Responsibility for compliance. The landowner and the operator shall be
jointly and severally responsible for complying with the terms of the
logging plan.
(d) Permit validity. A permit shall be valid for six months from the date it is
issued.
(a) Minimum requirements. As a minimum, the logging plan shall include
the following:
(1) Design, construction, maintenance, and retirement of the access
system, including haul roads, skid roads, skid trails, and landings;
retirement shall include replanting and regrading of the access
system so that it is replaced to its original condition;
(2) An estimate of the location and total number of mature trees on the
plot and the total number and location of trees to be cut.
(3) Design, construction, and maintenance of water control measures
and structures such as culverts, broad-based dips, filter strips, and
water bars;
(4) Design, construction, and maintenance of stream and wetland
crossings;
(5) If forest activities occur on, or may affect landslide prone soils as
identified on the logging plan map, a soils engineer registered to
practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania must certify that
the forestry activities will not impact the landslide prone soils or, if
the soils will be impacted, the steps necessary to mitigate or
prevent impaction must be specified.
(b) Map. Each logging plan shall include a site map containing the
following information:
 1715.04 CHARTER  1715.05
C:707
 1715.06. Forest practices.
The following requirements shall apply to all timber harvesting operations
in the Town:
(1) Site location and boundaries, including both the boundaries of the
property on which the timber harvest will take place and the
boundaries of the proposed harvest area within that property;
(2) Significant topographic features related to potential environmental
problems;
(3) Floodways and floodplains as defined by the National Flood
Insurance Study maps;
(4) All landslide prone soils and slopes exceeding 25%.
(5) Location of all earth disturbance activities such as roads, landings,
and water control measures and structures;
(6) Location of all crossings of waters of the Commonwealth; and;
(7) The general location of the proposed operation to municipal,
county, and state highways, including any accesses to, and weight
limits of, those highways.
(c) Compliance with state law. The logging plan shall address and comply
with the requirements of all applicable state laws and regulations
including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Erosion and sedimentation control regulations contained in 25
Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102, promulgated pursuant to the
Clean Streams Law (35 P.S.  691.1 et seq.);
(2) Stream crossing and wetlands protection regulations issued
pursuant to the Stormwater Management Act (32 P.S.  693.1 et
seq.); and
(3) Stormwater management plans and regulations issued pursuant to
the Stormwater Management Act (32 P.S.  680.1 et seq.)
(d) Relationship of state laws, regulations, and permits to the logging plan.
Any permits required by state laws and regulations shall be attached to
and become part of the logging plan. An erosion and sedimentation
pollution control plan that satisfies the requirements of 25 Pennsylvania
Code, Chapter 102, shall also satisfy the minimum requirements for the
logging plan and associated map specified in paragraphs (a) and (b) of
this section, provided that all information required by these paragraphs
is included or attached.
(a) Felling or skidding on or across any public thoroughfare is prohibited
without the express written consent of the Town, Allegheny County or
 1715.05 MCCANDLESS CODE  1715.06
C:708
 1715.07. Responsibility for road maintenance and repair; road
bonding. [Ord. 1251, passed 7-23-2001]
The landowner and the operator shall be responsible for repairing any
damage to Town roads caused by traffic associated with the timber
harvesting operation to the extent the damage is in excess of that caused
by normal traffic. Pursuant to 67 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 189, the Town
may require the landowner or operator to furnish a bond to guarantee the
repair of such damages.
 1715.08. Enforcement. [Ord. 1251, passed 7-23-2001]
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, whichever is
responsible for maintenance of the thoroughfare.
(b) No tops or slash shall be left within 25 feet of any public thoroughfare
or private roadway providing access to adjoining residential property or
within 25 feet of any property line.
(c) All tops and slash shall be lopped to a maximum height of four feet
above the surface of the ground.
(d) Litter resulting from a timber harvesting operation shall be removed
from the site before the operator vacates it.
(e) Care shall be exercised in harvesting operations so that 60% of mature
woodlands or 50% of any woodlands in the harvested area shall remain
after completion of logging. After issuance of a logging permit for an
area delineated on the logging plan, another permit shall not be issued
for that area or any overlapping area for 10 years from the date of
issuance of the preceding permit.
(f) No tops or slash shall be left in a floodway or floodplain.
(g) A soils engineer registered to practice in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania shall monitor all forest activities occurring on or affecting
landslide prone soils or steep slopes.
(h) Any person, firm, corporation, operator or landowner engaged in
logging shall take all possible steps to avoid carrying or depositing
mud, dirt, debris, or any other foreign substance which might
inadvertently or otherwise be carried on to or deposited on to any street
or road. A final cleanup shall be accomplished no later than 5:00 p.m.,
prevailing time each workday. All sections of Article 509 of the Codified
Ordinances of the Town of McCandless are applicable.
(i) Each tree to be removed shall be marked with paint or other distinctive
means at two points so as to be visible on the stump after the tree is
removed. The marked trees shall correspond to the trees designated on
the map.
 1715.06 CHARTER  1715.08
C:709
 1715.09. Surety bond. [Ord. 1251, passed 7-23-2001]
A bond or surety of a type approved by the Town Solicitor in an amount
agreed to by the Town Engineer to guarantee compliance with the logging
plan shall be submitted prior to commencement of timber harvesting.
Article 1717
PROPERTY ADDRESS NUMBERING
(a) Town enforcement officer. The Land Use Administrator or his designate
shall be the enforcement officer for Sections 1715.01 through 1715.09.
(b) Inspections. The Town enforcement officer or his designate may go
upon the site of any timber harvesting operation before, during, or after
active logging to: (1) Review the logging plan or any other required
documents for compliance with Sections 1715.01 through 1715.09 and
(2) Inspect the operation for compliance with the logging plan and
other on-site requirements of these regulations.
(c) Violation notices; suspensions. Upon finding that a timber harvesting
operation is in violation of any provision of Sections 1715.01 through
1715.09, the Town enforcement officer shall issue the operator and the
landowner a written notice of violation describing each violation and
specifying a date by which corrective action must be taken. The Town
enforcement officer may order the immediate suspension of any
operation upon finding that: (1) Corrective action has not been taken by
the date specified in a notice of violation; (2) The operation is
proceeding without a logging plan; or (3) The operation is causing an
immediate environmental risk. Suspension orders shall be in writing,
shall be issued to the operator and the landowner, and shall remain in
effect until, as determined by the Town enforcement officer, the
operation is brought into compliance with Sections 1715.01 through
1715.09 or other applicable statutes or regulations. The landowner or
the operator may appeal an order or decision of an enforcement officer
with 30 days of issuance to the governing body of the Town.
(d) Penalties. Any landowner or operator who (1) Violates any provision of
Sections 1715.01 through 1715.09; (2) Refuses to allow the Town
enforcement officer access to a harvest site pursuant to paragraph (b)
of this section or who fails to comply with a notice of violation or
suspension order issued under paragraph (c) of this section is guilty of a
summary offense and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $500, plus costs, for each separate
offense. Each day of continued violation of any provision of Sections
1715.01 through 1715.09 shall constitute a separate offense.
 1715.08 MCCANDLESS CODE  1717.01
C:710
 1717.01. Street number regulations. [Ord. 1209, passed
12-21-1998]
The owners of all buildings or property within the Town to which street
numbers have been assigned in accordance with the Allegheny County 911
System shall have the street number prominently displayed at all times in
accordance with the following standards. For the purpose of this article,
a "street number" is an address number established in accordance with
the countywide 911 system with reference to the adjacent road or street
assigned and given to a particular building or property:
 1717.02. Prohibited activity. [Ord. 1209, passed 12-21-1998]
It shall be unlawful to cover, conceal, obstruct, destroy, remove, deface or
vandalize any street number or road/street name sign installed or displayed
pursuant to and in accordance with the requirements of this article.
(a) Each building or house to which a street number has been assigned
shall have a street number displayed in a clearly visible manner on the
property, building or house except for buildings or houses which are
located a distance greater than 50 feet from the nearest public or
properly marked private roadway or upon which signage cannot be
attached or would not be readable from the nearest public or properly
marked private roadway by reason of natural or manmade obstructions.
The owner of said property shall be required to provide posted signage
within 20 feet of the public or properly marked private roadway, which
post shall have affixed thereon the street number which has been
assigned to the building or house. A tree may substitute for a post
where appropriate in the same manner as stated above.
(1) The signage on the building or house shall be within the proximity
of the front door.
(2) Numbers of signage within 20 feet of the roadway shall be placed
on a post in a vertical position four to five feet in height.
(b) If, for any reason, the street number of a particular building is not
readily identifiable by posted signage along the public or properly
marked private roadway whether due to the proximity of multiple
buildings with different street numbers or some other reason, then the
street number should be affixed to the building as well as posted by the
road. Similarly, if a single building has multiple street numbers or
apartment numbers, such as a professional building or apartment, a
building directory should be posted at the main entrance of the
building. The building itself must have an exterior street number.
(c) This article shall take effect on the date of adoption, insofar as notices
to property owners relating to this section of the article are concerned,
and shall not become effective as to enforcement under Section
1717.99 hereof, until the first day of June, 1999.
 1717.01 CHARTER  1717.03
C:711
 1717.03. Enforcement. [Ord. 1209, passed 12-21-1998]
Upon determining that a building or property owner has not complied
with the street or road name signage regulations of this article, the Town
of McCandless, or its designated representative, may pursue any of the
following enforcement remedies:
 1717.99. Penalty. [Ord. 1209, passed 12-21-1998]
Any person who shall be found to have engaged in the prohibited unlawful
conduct as set forth in Sections 1717.02 and 1717.03 or who shall willfully
fail to comply with any order to comply with the street numbering
regulations, shall upon conviction be sentenced to pay a fine of $100
together with court costs.
Article 1719
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE
 1719.01. Adoption. [Ord. 1300, passed 5-24-2004]
(a) Provide written notice to the owners, occupants and other persons in
possession of buildings or property which has not been numbered in
accordance with these regulations, of the violation and need to comply.
(b) In the event that persons persist in refusing to comply with these
regulations despite notices to do so, the Town or its representatives
may issue a written order directing the owners, occupants or others in
possession of the buildings or property in violation of this article to
comply with the applicable requirements of this article.
(c) In the event the property owners or occupants or possessors fail or
refuse to take action in accordance with the notices and an order issued
pursuant to this article, the Town or its representatives may provide the
signage, as necessary, in order to bring the property owner into
compliance with the standards promulgated in this article. The Town
may recover the cost of material and labor for the purchase and
installation of signage from the property owners, occupants or
possessors as well as reasonable administrative fees, interest or other
charges allowed by law.
In the event the owners, occupants or possessors of the subject
property fail to pay the cost of such installation as determined and
approved the Town or its representatives may institute proceedings at
law to collect the full costs together with all penalties, interest, fees,
and other charges which are authorized by applicable law, or may take
action to assess these costs and charges against the premises and the
owners thereof and collect same as a municipal lien or may take other
action to collect these sums as may be permitted by law.
 1717.03 MCCANDLESS CODE  1719.01
C:712
 1719.02. Administration and enforcement. [Ord. 1300, passed
5-24-2004]
Administration and enforcement of the Code within the Town shall be
undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the Town Council
from time to time by resolution:
 1719.03. Board of Appeals. [Ord. 1300, passed 5-24-2004]
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Town Council
in conformity with the requirements of the relevant provisions of the Code,
as amended from time to time, and for the purposes set forth therein. If
at any time enforcement and administration is undertaken jointly with one
or more other municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall be established by
joint action of the participating municipalities.
 1719.04. Conflict; scope. [Ord. 1300, passed 5-24-2004]
(a) The Town of McCandless (hereinafter "Town") hereby elects to
administer and enforce the provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction
Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.  7210.101-7210.1103, as amended
from time to time, and its regulations.
(b) The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401-405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of the
Town.
(a) By the designation of an employee of the Town to serve as the municipal
code official to act on behalf of the Town;
(b) By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Town;
(c) By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of Act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
(d) By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of the Town;
(e) By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
(a) All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by the Town on or before July 1, 1999, which equal or exceed
the requirements of the Code shall continue in full force and effect until
such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the minimum
requirements of the Code, as amended from time to time.
 1719.01 CHARTER  1719.04
C:713
 1719.05. Fees. [Ord. 1300, passed 5-24-2004]
Fees assessable by the Town for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this article and the Code shall be established by the
governing body by resolution from time to time.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
Source material for the Codified Ordinances of the Town of McCandless
was either ordinances or resolutions enacted by the Town Council, or
new matter ordained by the Adopting Ordinance. Sections of the Codified
Ordinances without any history indicate that such sections contain new
matter ordained by the Adopting Ordinance. In the following table, the
disposition of all source material in the Town of McCandless Codified
Ordinances is indicated.
 DL-1. Original codification.
Ord. No. Date C.O. Section
3 11-1-1946 705.05 to 705.10
31 3-7-1952 509.01(a), 509.02, 509.99(a), (b)
84 12-3-1954 305.01 to 305.03, 305.04(b) to (d), 305.05, 305.06, 305.99
92 4-7-1955 305.04(e)
93 5-13-1955 305.04(a)
100 6-17-1955 905.01 to 905.06, 905.99
Res. 11-1955 9-9-1955 505.02
106 10-14-1955 501.01 to 501.03, 501.99(a), 505.01(a), 505.03, 505.04(a),
505.99(b), 513.01
108 11-11-1955 505.01(b), 505.99(a)
121 4-19-1956 925.01, 925.02, 925.99
Res. 9-1956 4-19-1956 505.02(b)(3)
133 11-14-1956 329.01 to 329.03, 329.04(a) to (g), 329.05 to 329.10,
329.99(a), (c) to (e)
(b) All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this article and whose requirements are
less than the minimum requirements of the Code are hereby amended
to conform with the comparable provisions of the Code.
(c) All relevant Town ordinances, regulations and policies of the Town not
governed by the Code shall remain in full force and effect.
 1719.04 MCCANDLESS CODE  DL-1
C:714
Ord. No. Date C.O. Section
143 3-13-1957 333.04 to 333.09, 333.99
144 3-13-1957 325.01(a) to (c), (e), (f), 325.02 to 325.09(a), 325.11, 325.99
176 6-23-1958 329.03
Res. 15-1958 6-23-1958 505.02(b)(1)
Res. 19-1958 7-28-1958 505.02(b)(6), (b)(8), (b)(11)
229 6-29-1959 917.01 to 917.03, 917.99(a)
Res. 20-1959 10-26-1959 505.02
Res. 21-1959 10-26-1959 505.02
Res. 10-1960 4-25-1960 505.04(b)(10)
Res. 14-1960 5-23-1960 505.02(b)(5)
285 8-1-1960 917.04 to 917.09, 917.99(b)
303 1-23-1961 913.01 to 913.05, 913.99
315 5-22-1961 701.07(b), 701.99(b)
316 5-22-1961 709.01 to 709.03, 709.99
Res. 2-1962 1-22-1962 505.04(b)(7)
Res. 3-1962 1-22-1962 505.04(b)(12)
335 2-26-1962 513.02, 513.99
356 11-26-1962 705.99(b)
367 6-24-1963 509.01(b), (h), (i), 509.99(c)
369 8-26-1963 509.01(c), (h), (i), 509.99(c)
370 8-26-1963 509.01(d), (h), (i), 509.99(c)
Res. 4-1964 3-23-1964 505.02(b)(9)
Res. 5-1964 3-23-1964 505.07(a)
Res. 9-1964 7-27-1964 505.02(b)(7), (10)
395 8-24-1964 325.01(d)
Res. 10-1964 8-24-1964 505.02(b)(12)
401 10-26-1964 333.01 to 333.03
Res. 5-1965 6-21-1965 505.04(b)(5)
Res. 6-1965 6-21-1965 505.02
Res. 8-1965 8-23-1965 505.04(b)(8)
427 11-22-1965 321.01 to 321.11, 321.12(a), 321.13, 321.99
439 2-28-1966 509.01(e), (h), (i), 509.99(c)
Res. 3-1966 3-28-1966 505.07(b)
Res. 4-1966 3-28-1966 505.07(c)
 DL-1 CHARTER  DL-1
C:715
Ord. No. Date C.O. Section
Res. 7-1966 7-25-1966 505.02
Res. 8-1967 10-23-1967 505.04(b)(18)
Res. 9-1967 10-23-1967 505.04(b)(3)
481 11-27-1967 325.09(b)
482 11-27-1967 333.10
483 11-27-1967 321.12(b)
511 11-25-1968 329.06
519 3-24-1969 1301.01, 1301.02
Res. 2-1969 3-24-1969 505.04(b)(1)
526 5-26-1969 509.03, 509.99(d)
Res. 3-1969 5-26-1969 505.04(b)(6)
529 7-28-1969 505.05(a), 505.05 last para., 505.99(c)
Res. 9-1969 10-27-1969 505.01(c)
Res. 10-1969 10-27-1969 505.04(b)(14), (b)(15), (b)(16)
Res. 11-1969 11-3-1969 509.01(f)
553 4-27-1970 705.01(a) to (d), 705.02 to 705.04, 705.99(a)
Res. 3-1970 4-27-1970 505.04(b)(4)
Res. 4-1970 4-27-1970 505.04(b)(13)
560 8-24-1970 305.06
563 10-26-1970 505.05(b), 505.05 last para., 505.99 (c)
573 1-25-1971 505.05(c), 505.05 last para., 505.99 (c)
Res. 10-1971 8-23-1971 505.02(b)(4)
586 10-25-1971 505.06, 505.99(d)
587 10-25-1971 1311.01 to 1311.08, 1313.01 to 1313.27, 1313.29 to 1313.67,
1315.01 to 1315.03, 1317.01 to 1317.02(b)(10)E., (10)G. to J.,
1317.02(c) to 1317.04(a), (b)(1), (b)(3), (b)(4) to (d), 1319.01
to 1319.05(b)(5), (c)(1) to D., 1st para., E. to H. mid. para.,
(c)(2) to (d)(3), (d)(3)A., (d)(3), B.2., to (d)(6), (e) to (e)(6),
(e)(8) (e)(9) 1st para., (e)(10) to (f)(9), (g)(1) to (h)(1),
(h)(3)A., (h)(3)C., (h)(4), (i), (j), 1321.01 to 1321.04(b)(6), (c),
1323.01 to 1323.05(a), (c), 1323.06(b) to (f), 1323.07 to
1323.14, 1325.01 to 1325.07, 1327.01 to 1327.09(a), (c) to
(e), 1327.10 to 1327.14, 1329.02, 1329.03(a) to (c)(3) 1329.04
to 1329.11, 1329.99, 1331.01, 1331.02
593 1-3-1972 105.01, 105.02
599 3-6-1972 329.04(h), 329.99(b)
Res. 7-1972 3-27-1972 505.04(b)(11)
 DL-1 MCCANDLESS CODE  DL-1
C:716
Ord. No. Date C.O. Section
Res. 11-1972 5-22-1972 505.04(b)(2)
604 6-24-1972 517.01, 517.99
Res. 12-1972 6-26-1972 505.04(b)(17)
Res. 13-1972 6-26-1972 505.04(b)(9)
620 1-22-1973 505.05(d), 505.05 last para., 505.99(c)
625 4-23-1973 1705.01 to 1705.16, 1705.99
626 4-23-1973 505.05(e), 505.05 last para., 505.99(c)
637 11-26-1973 701.01 to 701.07(a), 701.99(a)
638 11-26-1973 1323.05(b)
639 11-26-1973 1709.01 to 1709.04
Res. 11-1974 6-17-1974 505.02(b)(2)
652 6-17-1974 505.02(a)
Res. 13-1974 6-17-1974 509.01(g)
653 7-22-1974 1313.28, 1317.02(b)(10)F., 1317.04 (b)(1), (3), (4),
1319.03(b), 1323.06(a), 1327.01, 1327.09 (b), 1329.01(a), (b),
1329.03(c)(4)
659 9-23-1974 901.01 to 901.10, 901.99
660 10-28-1974 1701.01 to 1701.03, 1701.99
661 10-28-1974 1501.01, 1501.02, 1501.99
662 10-28-1974 301.01, 301.02, 301.99
668 1-27-1975 1361.01 to 1361.09, 1361.99, 1363.01 to 1363.33, 1365.01 to
1365.07, 1367.01 to 1367.03, 1369.01 to 1369.06, 1371.01 to
1371.10, 1373.01
Res. 9-1965 4-28-1975 137.01 to 137.04
678 6-23-1975 113.01, 113.02, 115.01 to 115.07, 117.01 to 117.12, 119.01 to
119.05, 121.01 to 121.14, 123.01 to 123.09, 125.01 to 125.10
682 8-25-1975 501.04, 501.99(b)
686 10-6-1975 1317.04(b)(1), 1321.04(b)(7), 1329.01(c), 1319.02(g),
1319.03(b), 1319.04(b), 1319.05(b)(6), (c)(1)D. 2nd para., H.
2nd para., (d)(3)B., (d)(7), (e)(7), (e)(9) 2nd para., (f)(10),
(h)(3)B.
Res. 14-1975 11-24-1975 137.05
Res. 16-1975 11-24-1975 909.01, 909.02
Adopting
Ordinance 704
10-4-1976 101.01 to 101.10, 101.99
 DL-1 CHARTER  DL-2
C:717
 DL-2. Supplemental legislation.
This Disposition List provides a list of the ordinances used in the
preparation of Code supplements. The word NCM in the Disposition column
indicates material that is non-Code material and has not been included in
the Code.
Ord. No. Date C.O. Section
694 7-6-1976 1501.01 to 1501.03
695 7-6-1976 1701.01 to 1701.03, 1701.99
698 8-23-1976 1709.99
699 9-7-1976 333.01 to 333.08, 333.99
701 9-13-1976 139.01 to 139.45
702 9-27-1976 505.02(b)(13)
703 9-27-1976 505.04(b)(19)
705 10-25-1976 117.06, 121.01, 121.03, 121.05, 121.14, 123.06, 125.02;
Repeals 123.07
706 10-25-1976 1317.04(c)
709 12-20-1976 1361.05, 1365.05(b), 1365.06(b), 1367.02(a)(18), (h), 1367.03
(b), (f), 1369.02, 1371.02(g), (o), (p), 1371.03(a), (c), (h)
713 2-7-1977 1701.04(a) to (e)
717 3-7-1977 337.02
718 3-28-1977 505.05(d)
719 3-28-1977 505.08, 505.99(b)
721 6-20-1977 1323.03(b)(1)
724 7-25-1977 713.01 to 713.10
725 7-25-1977 505.05(f)
726 8-22-1977 1713.01, 1713.02, 1713.99
728 11-28-1977 505.02(b)(14)
730 12-19-1977 337.01
731 12-19-1977 1701.04(f) to (h)
733 2-28-1978 505.05(d)
734 3-6-1978 137.04, 137.05, (Rules 103, 202, 203.5, 205, 209, 303);
Repeals 123.06
736 3-27-1978 1501.01, 1701.01
737 4-3-1978 1361.06, 1365.05 (h), 1365.07, 1367.02(a)(11), 1369.02,
1369.06, 1371.02(e), 1371.03(a), (c), (c)(1), (h), 1371.04(d),
(f)(3), 1371.06(a) to (e)
738 5-22-1978 505.04(b)(20)
 DL-2 MCCANDLESS CODE  DL-2
C:718
Ord. No. Date C.O. Section
740 6-26-1978 717.01 to 717.04, 717.99
741 7-3-1978 1311.01 to 1311.05, 1313.01 to 1313.14, 1315.01 to 1315.06,
1317.01 to 1317.07, 1319.01 to 1319.06, 1321.01 to 1321.06,
1323.01 to 1323.18, 1325.01, 1325.02, 1327.01 to 1327.04,
1329.01 to 1329.03, 1331.01 to 1331.03, 1333.01 to 1333.03,
1335.01 to 1335.04, 1337.01 to 1337.03 (Art. 1337 repealed
by Ord. No. 1485), 1339.01 to 1339.03, 1341.01 to 1341.07,
1343.01 to 1343.05, 1345.01 to 1345.07 1347.01 to 1347.03,
1349.01 to 1349.13, 1351.01 to 1351.07, 1351.99; Repeals
1709.01 to 1709.04, 1709.99
743 8-28-1978 911.01 to 911.05, 911.99
746 10-23-1978 505.02(b)(15)
747 10-23-1978 505.02(b)(16)
748 10-23-1978 505.05(g) to (j)
749 10-23-1978 Article 123 Editor's Note
752 12-4-1978 709.02(e)
756 1-22-1979 1313.15
757 2-5-1979 307.01 to 307.06, 307.99, 333.02(a); Repeals 321.01 to
321.13, 321.99
759 2-26-1979 505.04(b)(22)
761 3-26-1979 1361.06
763 3-26-1979 505.05(k)
765 5-21-1979 505.03
767 6-4-1979 505.05(1)
768 7-2-1979 505.04(b)(21)
770 7-23-1979 1313.11(b)(6), 1313.16, 1315.04 (a), 1317.04(a), 1319.02(h),
1323.10 (m), 1323.13(a), 1329.01, 1329.02 (h), 1341.02,
1341.04, 1341.07, 1345.01(m), 1351.02, 1371.04 (i); Repeals
1329.02(g)
773 7-23-1979 721.01, 721.02, 721.99
774 8-27-1979 505.05(m)
775 9-24-1979 505.03
777 11-26-1979 1313.17, 1341.01, 1345.01(x), (y)
778 11-26-1979 505.02(b)(17)
779 11-26-1979 505.09, 505.99(f)
783 12-17-1979 505.10, 505.99(g)
785 1-28-1980 505.10, 505.99(g)
 DL-2 CHARTER  DL-2
C:719
Ord. No. Date C.O. Section
621 1-22-1973 305.06
786 2-25-1980 509.03(d)
792 4-28-1980 1313.11(b)(11)
793 4-28-1980 505.02(b)(18)
794 6-9-1980 1311.04(t) to (bb), 1342.01 to 1342.12, 1361.10, 1363.34 to
1363.40, 1365.03(c), 1365.06 (a), 1367.02(a)(11), (19),
(g)(2)I, 1367.03(d)(11), 1371.03(j), 1371.11, 1701.05
798 6-30-1980 1501.02, 1701.04(f), (i), (j), 1713.01(b); Repeals 1701.04(d)
799 7-28-1980 917.03(b)
802 8-25-1980 505.02(b)(19)
804 10-27-1980 911.05(b), 1371.03 (b), (h)
807 12-22-1980 337.01
811 1-26-1981 137.05 ( 202)
813 1-26-1981 1311.04(s), 1341.01
814 1-26-1981 505.05(n)
816 3-23-1981 325.01(d)
818 5-18-1981 1319.02(b) to (e), 1321.02(b), 1323.04 (e), 1327.02(c), (d),
1329.02(c), (d), 1331.02(c), (d), 1333.02(b), (c), 1335.02(b),
(c), 1337.02(c), (d) (Art. 1337 repealed by Ord. No. 1485),
1339.02(c), (d)
819 5-18-1981 1351.02(a), 1351.03, 1501.01 to 1501.03, 1501.99, 1701.01 to
1701.04, 1701.99
820 6-22-1981 Ch. 123 Editor's Note (e), 139.08, 139.25, 139.29, 139.40,
139.41, 139.44, 305.06, 701.04, 901.05, 901.06
822 7-27-1981 1311.05(b), 1340.01 to 1340.06
823 8-24-1981 1342.01 to 1342.12, 1342.99; Repeals 1311.04(t) to (bb),
1361.10, 1363.34 to 1363.40, 1365.03 (c), 1365.06(a) 2nd
par., 1367.02(a)(11), (19), (g)(2)I., 1367.03 (d)(11),
1371.03(j), 1371.11, 1701.05
827 10-26-1981 1311.04(cc), 1345.02, 1351.02(b), 1351.04 (b), (d)
829 11-23-1981 505.03
830 12-21-1981 341.01 to 341.11, 341.99
831 12-21-1981 337.01
833 1-25-1982 725.01, 725.02, 725.99
834 1-25-1982 501.06
835 2-22-1982 1313.03, 1313.07
836 2-22-1982 505.05(o) to (q)
 DL-2 MCCANDLESS CODE  DL-2
C:720
Ord. No. Date C.O. Section
837 3-22-1982 306.01 to 306.05, 306.99
839 4-26-1982 505.05(r)
842 5-24-1982 505.04(b)(23)
843 6-28-1982 505.03
844 7-19-1982 1311.05(b), 1324.01 to 1324.05
846 7-19-1982 505.02(b)(20)
847 7-19-1982 121.14(b)
848 8-23-1982 105.01 to 105.03
849 8-23-1982 341.05
850 8-23-1982 505.02(b)(21)
851 9-27-1982 725.02
852 9-27-1982 505.05(s), (t)
855 11-22-1982 1505.01 to 1505.03, 1505.99
856 12-20-1982 337.01
858 1-24-1983 105.04
861 3-28-1983 505.03
863 5-23-1983 505.05(u), (v)
865 7-25-1983 505.02(b)(22)
866 7-25-1983 505.04(b)(24)
868 7-25-1983 509.01(a)(10) to (13)
870 8-22-1983 513.02(b)
871 8-22-1983 705.091
873 9-26-1983 1701.04(i), (j)
874 10-24-1983 1365.07(c)
878 1-23-1984 325.01(d)
879 4-23-1984 1715.01 to 1715.04, 1715.99
883 6-18-1984 505.03
884 7-23-1984 505.04(b)(9)
885 7-23-1984 505.02(b)(23)
889 8-27-1984 919.01 to 919.06, 919.99
890 9-24-1984 505.03
891 9-24-1984 1501.01 to 1501.03, 1501.99, 1701.01 to 1701.04, 1701.99
901 3-25-1985 509.01(a)(14), (15), (h), (i), 509.99(a)
905 4-22-1985 1509.01 to 1509.08, 1509.99
 DL-2 CHARTER  DL-2
C:721
Ord. No. Date C.O. Section
906 5-28-1985 1311.04, 1311.05, 1313.07, 1313.08, 1313.10, 1313.16,
1313.18, 1313.19, 1315.02(b), 1319.04, 1321.04, 1323.06,
1323.09, 1323.10, 1323.13, 1341.01, 1342.071, 1345.01 to
1345.11, 1351.02, 1361.05 (b), 1365.06(j), 1369.03, 1369.04,
1369.06, 1369.07, 1371.02(g), (h)
907 5-28-1985 505.03
908 5-28-1985 505.04(b)(25)
909 6-24-1985 505.03
911 8-26-1985 505.03
913 9-23-1985 505.05(b)(26)
915 10-28-1985 505.02(b)(24)
916 11-25-1985 505.03
920 12-16-1985 505.03
921 12-16-1985 505.02(b)(25)
926 3-24-1986 1342.071(c), 1342.11(c)
927 3-24-1986 505.05(b)(27)
928 3-24-1986 505.03
929 3-24-1986 505.10(a)(3)
930 6-16-1986 505.03
932 7-28-1986 509.01(a)(16), (h), (i)
933 7-28-1986 505.03
940 10-27-1986 509.04
941 11-24-1986 505.03
948 2-23-1987 1315.01, 1315.07, 1317.01, 1317.08
949 2-23-1987 1701.04(j)
950 3-23-1987 505.03
951 3-23-1987 505.02(b)(26)
955 6-22-1987 1701.01
956 6-22-1987 505.02(b)(27)
957 7-27-1987 1501.01
960 9-28-1987 137.04(c), 137.05 (305)
961 9-28-1987 1331.02(h)
963 9-28-1987 505.02(a)(28)
964 10-26-1987 1311.04, 1314.01 to 1314.10, 1326.01, 1326.02
966 10-26-1987 505.02(a)(29)
 DL-2 MCCANDLESS CODE  DL-2
C:722
Ord. No. Date C.O. Section
967 11-23-1987 325.01 to 325.19, 325.99
969 11-23-1987 505.02(a)(30)
974 12-21-1987 1319.02(a)
977 1-25-1988 505.05(f), (h), (p), (s)
979 2-22-1988 1311.03(i), 1311.06, 1311.07, 1313.16, 1345.03(i), 1351.02
(d), 1361.05(a), 1367.01(a), 1367.02 (i), 1367.03(g), 1367.04,
1375.01 to 1375.14, 1375.99
983 4-25-1988 505.05(w), (x), (y)
984 4-25-1988 729.01, 729.02, 729.99
985 5-23-1988 505.04(b)(28)
986 6-27-1988 1341.08
990 9-26-1988 127.01 to 127.04
1004 3-27-1989 1311.04(13), (64.5), (67), (91.5), (96.5), 1313.02, 1313.03,
1313.06(a) warehouse, (b), (c), 1313.10, 1313.14, 1313.19,
1315.02(c), (f), 1315.04(a), 1317.02 (a), (b), (c), (f),
1317.04(a), 1319.02 (h), 1321.02(c), 1323.04(h), 1324.02 (g),
1325.02(c), 1327.02(e), 1329.02 (e), 1331.02(e), 1333.02(d),
1335.02 (d), 1337.01, 1337.02(e), 1337.03, 1337.04 (Art.
1337 repealed by Ord. No. 1485), 1339.02(e), 1340.02(d),
1341.01, 1345.09, 1361.05 (a), 1365.05(b), 1365.06(b),
1367.02 (a), 1367.03(a)(2), 1370.01, 1370.99, 1371.05(h),
1705.05 (a), (k), 1705.07(d), 1705.09; Repeals 1341.06,
1365.05 (m), 1705.05(g)
1005 4-24-1989 1513.01 to 1513.03, 1513.99, 1701.04(e)
1006 6-19-1989 505.05(z), (aa), (bb)
1007 6-19-1989 509.01(h)
1010 7-25-1989 505.05(cc)
1011 7-25-1989 1701.04(j)
1017 11-27-1989 927.01 to 927.08, 927.99
1018 11-27-1989 929.01 to 929.12, 929.99
1019 11-27-1989 505.04(b)(29), (30)
1027 2-26-1990 1315.08, 1317.09, 1319.06, 1321.06, 1323.08, 1324.05,
1361.02(e), 1371.12; Repeals 1315.07, 1317.08
1029 2-26-1990 701.08, 701.99(c)
1031 5-29-1990 341.03(c)(6)
1032 5-29-1990 1501.01, 1509.09, 1513.02, 1701.01, 1701.04(o) to (s);
Repeals 1513.03
1033 5-29-1990 730.01 to 730.07, 730.99
 DL-2 CHARTER  DL-2
C:723
Ord. No. Date C.O. Section
1037 9-24-1990 Repeals 509.04
1038 11-26-1990 505.04(b)(31)
1039 11-26-1990 509.01
1043 1-28-1991 Repeals 505.05(dd)
1044 1-28-1991 505.04(b)(32)
1045 2-25-1991 505.05(dd)
1046 2-25-1991 505.03
1047 2-25-1991 927.04(h)(1)
1049 3-4-1991 915.01 to 915.07, 915.99
1050 3-25-1991 505.04(b)(33)
1051 3-25-1991 505.05(ee)
1052 4-22-1991 1311.02, 1311.04 (73), (117), (133), (134), 1311.05, 1311.08
to 1311.11, 1313.02, 1313.03, 1313.06(a) to (c), (e) to (g),
1313.11(a), (b)(11), 1313.12, 1314.02, 1314.04, 1315.04(b),
1317.02, 1317.04(b), 1319.02(a), 1319.03, 1321.03, 1342.10,
1342.99, 1343.01, 1343.02(b), 1343.05, 1345.04, 1345.07,
1347.08, 1349.01, 1349.07, 1349.11, 1349.12, 1351.01,
1351.99, 1361.06 to 1361.08, 1361.99, 1363.18, 1363.21,
1363.23, 1363.33, 1365.05(f), (i), 1365.06(b), (f), 1369.07,
1370.99, 1371.05(i), 1371.10, Art. 1375 App. A.2(j), 3(d), (e),
(f), 4(p), 1375.99; Repeals 1311.03, 1311.04(39), 1351.02,
1351.04(c), 1365.02, 1365.05(h), 1365.07(a), (b)
1055 4-22-1991 305.02(b), 305.04(a)(2), (b)(5)
1057 5-28-1991 505.10(a)(4)
1058 6-24-1991 305.02(a), 305.99
1063 9-23-1991 505.04(b)(32)
1064 9-23-1991 915.03(b)
1065 12-9-1991 1313.11(b)(12)
1069 4-27-1992 505.05(ff)
1070 4-27-1992 915.01(b), 915.02, 915.03 (1st sentence), 915.04(a)(3rd and
4th sentence), (b)(2) (1st sentence)
1073 5-26-1992 1311.05(a), (b), (c), 1344.01 to 1344.15, 1351.05(b)
1076 7-20-1992 343.01 to 343.18
1080 8-24-1992 927.99
1083 9-28-1992 1701.04(g), (j), (t) to (v)
1093 12-21-1992 725.02
1094 12-21-1992 105.01 to 105.03
 DL-2 MCCANDLESS CODE  DL-2
C:724
Ord. No. Date C.O. Section
1098 4-26-1993 1517.01 to 1517.05, 1517.99
1099 6-28-1993 505.02(b)(31)
1100 6-28-1993 1501.01(a), (b), 1701.01
1101 8-23-1993 505.05(gg)
1102 8-23-1993 Repeals 505.10(a)(3)
1103 8-23-1993 505.03
1104 9-27-1993 1313.12(b)
1105 9-27-1993 309.01 to 309.10
1106 9-27-1993 505.03
1110 12-20-1993 1340.01, 1340.02, 1340.06, 1340.07
1112 12-20-1993 505.03
1114 1-24-1994 1328.01 to 1328.11
1118 4-25-1994 505.03
1119 4-25-1994 505.02(b)(32)
1120 5-23-1994 1311.04(a)(65), 1315.02(f), 1317.02(f)
1121 5-23-1994 1701.04(j), (w), (x), (y)
1123 6-27-1994 301.02
1126 8-22-1994 125.11
1127 8-22-1994 117.06, 1311.04 (a)(3.5), (9), (17), (19), (28.1), (28.2), (31),
(63), (76), (77), (79), (81), (104), (105), (129) to (132),
1311.05(a), 1311.09(a)(1) to (3), (b), (d), 1313.02, 1313.03
(a), (c), 1313.11 (a), (b)(7), (13), (14), 1313.14, 1319.02(h),
1321.02(c), 1323.04(h), 1324.02(g), 1325.02(c), 1327.02(e),
1328.09(c)(1)A., (c)(2)A.8., 1329.02(e), 1331.02(e),
1333.02(d), 1335.02(d), 1337.02(e) (Art. 1337 repealed by
Ord. No. 1485), 1339.02(e), 1340.02(d), 1341.01, 1341.09 to
1341.14, 1345.01, 1347.04, 1351.04(b), (d), 1361.05(a),
1361.06(a), 1361.08(b), 1363.17, 1365.01, 1365.04(b) to (g),
1365.05(b), (c), (g), (h), (m), 1365.06(c), (j), 1367.02(a)(20) to
(29), 1369.03, 1369.04, 1705.02 (m-1), 1705.05 (a); Repeals
1311.01(a)(25), (72), 1315.04(b), 1317.04(b), 1345.02 to
1345.11, 1351.03, 1361.05(b), 1363.03, 1363.04
1128 8-22-1994 505.02(b)(33)
1129 8-22-1994 505.03
1130 8-22-1994 725.02
1134 12-19-1994 345.01 to 345.05
1135 12-19-1994 1342.02
1137 1-23-1995 137.05 (Rules 301 to 304)
 DL-2 CHARTER  DL-2
C:725
Ord. No. Date C.O. Section
1138 1-23-1995 913.04(e)
1139 2-27-1995 505.04(b)(34)
1140 2-27-1995 505.05(hh)
1141 3-27-1995 505.05(ii)
1142 3-27-1995 505.05(jj)
1143 4-24-1995 919.01 to 919.06, 919.99
1144 5-22-1995 1311.09(a)(1), 1313.04, 1313.06 (a), (b), (c)(1)C., (6),
1313.17, 1313.21, 1340.01, 1340.02(j), (k), 1340.06(b),
1341.01, 1365.05 (b), (c)(1), 1367.02, 1367.03 (a)(2)
1149 11-27-1995 505.04(b)(35)
1150 11-27-1995 505.03
1151 11-27-1995 505.02(b)(34)
1152 12-4-1995 1342.03(a)
1157 12-18-1995 505.03
1163 4-22-1996 1311.04(a)(7.5), (91.7), (96.3), 1314.09(b)(7)J., 1324.01,
1324.02, 1324.05(g), 1326.02(b)(1), 1328.10, 1341.01
1165 5-28-1996 505.03
1166 5-28-1996 705.03
1167 6-24-1996 1501.01, 1701.01, 1701.04(z), 1705.03(c); Repeals 1705.04(c)
1171 7-22-1996 505.02(b)(35)
1172 9-23-1996 505.03
1173 9-23-1996 905.03
1176 12-16-1996 333.01 to 333.08, 333.99
1177 12-16-1996 1315.03, 1317.03, 1324.02(b), 1327.01, 1341.15
1181 2-24-1997 913.04(e)
1183 5-19-1997 915.01(b)
1186 7-28-1997 1513.02(b), (f)
1188 8-25-1997 709.02(e)
1191 10-27-1997 115.08
1192 11-24-1997 1325.01, 1325.02 (a), (f) to (h), 1325.03, 1313.06 (a),
1324(j)(1) repealed
1196 12-15-1997 137.05
1197 12-15-1997 505.05(h), (l), (p), (r) to (t), (y), (kk) to (uu)
1200 3-9-1998 1342.02(l), 1342.03 to 1342.05, 1342.06 (b), 1342.071(c),
1342.09(a), (g)(3), (4), 1342.10, 1342.11, 1342.13, 1342.99
 DL-2 MCCANDLESS CODE  DL-2
C:726
Ord. No. Date C.O. Section
1203 5-26-1998 917.04(e), 917.10, 917.99(c)
1204 7-28-1998 505.04
1206 11-23-1998 139.01 to 139.31
1210 1-25-1999 137.05
1211 2-22-1999 329.99
1215 5-24-1999 1326.03, 1341.16, 1349.05(e)
1216 5-24-1999 1349.14
1217 5-24-1999 505.10
1220 9-27-1999 505.02
1221 12-20-1999 337.01
1223 12-20-1999 1371.02, 1371.04
1224 12-20-1999 505.04
1230 3-27-2000 505.02
1231 3-27-2000 505.03
1233 4-24-2000 505.02
1234 5-22-2000 505.02
1235 7-17-2000 1311.04, 1315.04, 1315.09, 1315.10, 1317.04, 1317.10,
1317.11, 1341.01, 1341.03, 1341.031
1236 12-18-2000 337.01
1239 2-26-2001 1311.04, 1341.13(c)
1240 3-26-2001 903.01 to 903.17, 903.99
1241 4-23-2001 345.01 to 345.05
1243 4-23-2001 927.99
1244 4-23-2001 505.10(a)(6)
1245 4-23-2001 505.03
1246 5-21-2001 329.04(d)
1248 5-21-2001 505.02
1250 6-18-2001 337.01
1251 7-23-2001 1715.01 to 1715.09
1252 8-27-2001 1313.06, 1341.01, 1351.99
1253 8-27-2001 505.02
1255 12-17-2001 337.01
1258 12-17-2001 1324.01 to 1324.06, 1341.17, 1341.18
1260 12-17-2001 505.03
 DL-2 CHARTER  DL-2
C:727
Ord. No. Date C.O. Section
1261 1-28-2002 505.04
1262 1-28-2002 702.01 to 702.03, 702.99
1264 3-25-2002 1311.04(88.5), 1313.22
1267 5-20-2002 505.03
1268 5-20-2002 505.02
1270 6-17-2002 337.01
1271 6-17-2002 505.02
1272 7-15-2002 137.01, 137.02, 137.05
1273 7-15-2002 705.091, 705.99
1274 8-26-2002 505.02
1275 9-23-2002 105.01 to 105.03
1276 9-23-2002 505.03
1278 10-28-2002 505.10
1281 12-16-2002 505.03
1283 3-24-2003 902.01, 902.02, 902.99
1285 5-19-2003 1313.11(c)
1286 7-28-2003 505.02
1287 8-25-2003 505.04(b)(38)
1288 8-25-2003 505.02
1290 11-24-2003 329.11 Repealed
1291 11-24-2003 915.01 to 915.05, 915.08, 915.99, 917.10, 917.99
1292 12-15-2003 337.01
1294 12-15-2003 329.02(e), (g)
1296 3-22-2004 1341.01
1298 3-22-2004 725.02
1299 5-24-2004 137.05(e)
1300 5-24-2004 1719.01
1301 5-24-2004 1501.01 to 1501.03, 1501.99, 1701.01 to 1701.08, 1701.99
1302 5-24-2004 505.09
1303 6-28-2004 345.02(b)
1306 8-23-2004 505.04(b)(40)
1307 8-23-2004 505.02(b)(47)
1309 10-25-2004 305.02(b), 305.04, 305.06
1310 10-25-2004 705.03
 DL-2 MCCANDLESS CODE  DL-2
C:728
Ord. No. Date C.O. Section
1311 12-20-2004 325.04
1312 12-20-2004 337.01
1316 3-28-2005 907.01, 907.99 (repealed by Ord. No. 1486); 1311.04,
1313.09, 1341.12
1317 5-23-2005 337.03
1318 7-18-2005 705.091 (Repealed) 913.01 to 913.90, 1311.06, 1311.07,
1313.16, 1367.02 (i), 1367.03(g); Ch. 1375 (Repealed)
1319 8-22-2005 505.02(b)(10), (19), (48)
1322 11-28-2005 505.02(b)(49)
1323 12-19-2005 337.01
1325 12-19-2005 347.01 to 347.04
1328 3-27-2006 505.03
1329 3-27-2006 911.03, 911.04, 911.06
1330 4-24-2006 927.06
1331 5-22-2006 505.03
1332 7-24-2006 901.001 to 901.08, 901.99
1333 8-28-2006 505.02(b)(50)
1334 9-25-2006 1311.04, 1313.13, 1313.23, 1339.14
1339 12-18-2006 1313.02, 1343.02
1340 2-26-2007 325.04(d), (e)
1343 4-23-2007 505.03
1345 7-2-2007 337.04
1350 10-22-2007 505.03
1351 12-3-2007 347.01 to 347.13
1352 12-17-2007 337.01
1355 1-7-2008 1365.05
1356 1-28-2008 505.03
1359 4-28-2008 1311.04 to 1311.06, 1346.01 to 1346.08, Appendix A
1360 4-28-2008 1311.04, 1314.03, 1326.02, 1326.04
1361 5-19-2008 1313.02
1363 10-27-2008 913.100 to 913.1100; repealed by Ord. No. 1481
1369 1-26-2009 505.03
1373 6-15-2009 1314.04, 1314.05, 1314.07
1374 6-15-2009 1313.11
 DL-2 CHARTER  DL-2
C:729
Ord. No. Date C.O. Section
1379 12-21-2009 337.01
1382 12-21-2009 505.02
1384 2-22-2010 505.03, 505.10
1385 2-22-2010 505.02
1390 9-27-2010 1341.19, 1351.99
1392 11-22-2010 505.02(b)(53)
1393 12-20-2010 337.01
1395 4-25-2011 1521.01 to 1521.03
1397 8-22-2011 1326.04
1398 8-22-2011 927.01 to 927.05, 929.01
1401 10-24-2011 513.02 (repealed), 705.03(d)
1402 12-19-2011 329.03
1403 11-28-2011 329.06, 329.99
1406 12-19-2011 337.01
1408 12-19-2011 1311.04, 1341.20, 1341.21
1410 12-19-2011 137.04, 137.05
1412 5-21-2012 505.02
1413 6-25-2012 927.04(g), (h)
1418 7-23-2012 715.01 to 715.42
1420 8-27-2012 905.01 to 905.03, 905.99
1421 11-26-2012 505.02
1422 11-26-2012 105.01 to 105.03
1423 12-21-2012 337.01
1426 12-17-2012 1313.06
1428 3-25-2013 1346.04
1429 6-10-2013 337.01
1431 8-26-2013 505.02
1433 12-16-2013 1313.06, 1335.01, 1335.02, 1335.05, 1335.06
1437 2-24-2014 341.04
1439 7-28-2014 505.02
1440 8-25-2014 912.01 to 912.10
1441 8-25-2014 505.10
1446 1-26-2015 509.01
1449 5-18-2015 1311.04, 1341.13
 DL-2 MCCANDLESS CODE  DL-2
C:730
Ord. No. Date C.O. Section
1450 4-27-2015 305.01 to 305.15; Repeals Art. 306
1455 12-21-2015 505.04
1456 2-22-2016 1329.04, 1341.01
1459 7-25-2016 505.03
1462 2-27-2017 505.03
1464 5-22-2017 731.01, 731.99
1465 6-26-2017 505.03
1466 10-9-2017 349.01 to 349.05
1468 10-23-2017 505.04
1469 10-23-2017 505.04
1471 12-18-2017 337.01
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1472 2-26-2018 Approval of Codification
Update
NCM
1473 3-26-2018 Traffic Regulations
Amendment
Art. 505
1474 5-21-2018 Agreement NCM
1475 5-21-2018 Traffic Regulations
Amendment
Art. 505
1476 6-25-2018 Zoning Amendment Art. 1311; Art.
1314; Art.
1326; Art. 1341
1477 7-23-2018 Traffic Regulations
Amendment
Art. 505
1478 7-23-2018 Traffic Regulations
Amendment
Art. 505
1479 10-22-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
1480 10-22-2018 Weapons Amendment Art. 709
1481 11-26-2018 Stormwater Management Art. 913
1482 12-17-2018 Tax Rate and Budget 2019 NCM
1483 11-26-2018 Appropriation NCM
1484 2-25-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
1485 2-25-2019 Zoning Amendment Art. 1311; Art.
1337; Art. 1341
1486 4-22-2019 Objects and Signs in Right-of-
Way
Art. 907
 DL-2 CHARTER  DL-2
C:731
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1487 4-22-2019 Zoning Amendment Art. 1335; Art.
1341
1488 6-24-2019 Traffic Regulations
Amendment
Art. 505
1489 6-24-2019 Fire Control Measures and
Regulations Amendment
Art. 1509
1490 6-24-2019 Street Vacation NCM
1491 8-26-2019 Animals Amendment Art. 701
1492 11-25-2019 Traffic Regulations
Amendment
Art. 505
1493 12-16-2019 Tax Rate and Budget 2020 NCM
1494 12-16-2019 Appropriation NCM
 DL-2 MCCANDLESS CODE  DL-2
C:732